S/PV.8412

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8412th meeting

Tuesday, 4 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Gebru
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 15 November 2018 from the Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/1031)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-41307 (E)
*1841307*

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay sincere tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Ma Zhaoxu,
Permanent Representative of China, for his service as
President of the Council for the month of November. I
am sure that I speak for all the members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Ma and
his team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 15 November 2018 from the
Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/1031)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2379 (2017), to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1031, which contains a letter dated
15 November 2018 from the Special Adviser and Head
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I now give the floor to Mr. Khan.
Mr. Khan: It is indeed a singular honour and a
privilege to present the first report of the United Nations
investigative team to promote accountability for crimes
2/21

04/12/2018

allegedly committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), also known as Da’esh (see S/2018/1031).
We intend to outline today our initial strategic vision,
the progress made to date in its realization and our key
priorities as we now continue our preparatory work in
Iraq ahead of the commencement of more meaningful
and substantive investigative work early next year.
I would like, however, to begin with the obvious,
but something that requires us all, in my respectful
submission, to have pause for thought. It is to applaud
the indefatigable courage and perseverance and
recognize the tremendous suffering of the survivors
of Da’esh crimes. Their fortitude in standing firm and
continuing is an aspect that must be recognized and
be at the forefront of our minds. In that endeavour, of
course, the unity and united perseverance of the people
of Iraq in defeating ISIL territorially are an aspect that
must be mentioned.
As ISIL has been driven from its strongholds, the
scope and magnitude of its heinous acts have become
tragically ever more clear. Witness testimony after
witness testimony has revealed unimaginable abuses
and acts of depravity. Thousands of our fellow human
beings — men and thousands upon thousands of women
and children — have become victims at the hands of ISIL
and witnesses to its deeds. By dint of resolution 2379
(2017), the Security Council responded unanimously
with one clear voice to the call of assistance, which had
been raised by the Government of the Republic of Iraq
in support of its efforts to hold ISIL accountable.
Noting that the terrorist acts of ISIL constituted a
threat to international peace and security, the Council
requested the establishment of the Investigative Team
in order to support domestic efforts to establish
accountability, requiring us to collect, gather, analyse
and store evidence in Iraq of crimes that may constitute
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes.
In addition, the Council underlined that, as Special
Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team, I would be
required to promote throughout the world accountability
for the crimes of Da’esh and work with survivors in a
manner consistent with now well-established human
rights norms and best United Nations practices. That
was for one imperative and one purpose —to ensure
that those crimes are recognized within the disciplined
environment of the law. That aspect is discussed in
further detail in our report (see S/2018/1031), dated
16 November.
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

Turning to the next topic of this briefing, I take this
opportunity to express gratitude to the Council and the
Government of Iraq for the significant trust that they
have reposed in the Investigative Team in that important
mandate and to reiterate what should be obvious, which
is our absolute commitment to showing fidelity to the
mandate and resolution 2379 (2017) in a bid to ensure
that those have committed those acts are investigated
and pursued in accordance with best United Nations
practices and international law so that we can deliver
on our mandate.
Since the formal commencement of its activities on
20 August, the Investigative Team has undertaken key
preparatory work, pursuant to the mandate provided
by the Council, in order to provide what we hope will
prove to be a solid platform for the commencement of
investigative activities early next year. As a result of
those efforts and based on the support of key partners
within the United Nations system, including — it must
be recognized — the Executive Office of the SecretaryGeneral, the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department of Field Support, as well as the unstinting
support of the Office of Legal Affairs, the Investigative
Team successfully deployed to Iraq on 29 October.
In conducting the preparatory activities outlined in
our first report, we have been guided at all times by
two key imperatives. First, the Team must operate as
an independent, impartial and credible accountability
mechanism capable of conducting all its work to the
highest possible standards. Secondly, there is a need
to ensure that our work is carried out collaboratively
and cooperatively with the Government of Iraq, with
full respect at all times for national sovereignty and
in a manner that effectively harnesses the talents and
engenders the support of all elements of Iraqi society.
As reflected in resolution 2379 (2017) and the
terms of reference for the activities of the Investigative
Team (S/2018/118, annex), approved by the Council in
February, those imperatives are not paradoxical, nor
do they represent opposing weights of a scale to be
delicately balanced. On the contrary, the establishment
of the Team as an independent, impartial entity, and
successful and meaningful engagement with the
Government of Iraq and the broader populace of Iraq
in its work represent, in our view, mutually reinforcing
principles that, if harnessed effectively, will allow the
Team to overcome the many challenges, it will face
and deliver effectively on the mandate set down by the
Council.

S/PV. 8412

With a view to ensuring that the Investigative Team
can conduct its work in an independent and impartial
manner, in line with the international standards to
which I alluded a moment ago, we have sought, during
the first three months of our activities, to prioritize
the development of core logistical, substantive and
administrative frameworks, which have been reflected
in the proposed budget of the Investigative Team
currently under the consideration of the General
Assembly.
With respect to the first aspect — our logistical
arrangements — we have identified former United
Nations facilities for refurbishment that will serve as our
headquarters and permanent premises in Baghdad, and
plans have also been developed regarding the physical
and technological infrastructure that will be needed to
support the material and evidence that we will receive
and gather, as well. That will, we hope, ensure the
effective storage of documentary, forensic and digital
information, which would be the foundation of any
proper investigation in accordance with international
standards.
Secondly, with regard to the substantive framework,
progress has also been made. Work has commenced
on the development of various standing operating
procedures of key activities, including the collection,
preservation and storing of evidence and material, as
well as information management and chains of custody.
Those issues will be critical to witness protection.
Initial mapping activities have already been undertaken,
assisting us in identifying where key sources of existing
evidentiary material may be located.
We have also spent a significant amount of time
in ensuring that the admonition and injunction of the
Council to avoid duplication are fully observed, and
that has taken the form of reaching out to other parts
of the United Nations, whether in the counter-terrorism
sphere or other areas, such as the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide, to ensure that we harness the
capacities, the experience and the centres of excellence
that are already present. All of that is to ensure that the
Team operates as effectively and efficiently as possible
and discharges its mandate.
Thirdly, with regard to the composition of the
Investigative Team, requirements have been identified
with respect to both international staff and national
personnel, and the initial recruitment is progressing. In
that regard, I wish to emphasize to the Council that I

18-413073/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

am firmly of the view that the successful integration
of Iraqi national professional personnel into the Team
will be essential. It will enrich our capacities, allow
us to operate more effectively in Iraq and, we hope,
more fully and completely fulfil the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Council.
At all times, Organizationur objective will be
to foster a mutually supportive relationship between
international and national staff and mould it into one
coherent, cohesive and unified entity, united by a
common principle to investigate, in accordance with
the best United Nations standards and international
practices, acts that may have been committed by
ISIL. In doing so, it is our fervent hope that we will
also strengthen the capacity of the Team, assist in
generating capacities in Iraq and deliver the mandate in
an independent manner, which will, hopefully, support
the long-term, sustainable efforts that Iraq is focusing
on to achieve accountability.
Throughout the formative period of our work over
the past three months, I have consistently underlined the
fundamental imperative and the absolute commitment
of the Investigative Team to ensuring that its actions are
aligned with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations that remain the foundation of this organ, and
also that we abide by United Nations policies and best
practices, including with respect to the transmission of
evidentiary material for use in domestic proceedings.
As I have emphasized, our adherence to those principles
is not only required by dint of the resolution itself, or
indeed by the terms of reference that have been approved
by the Council, but is also essential to ensuring the
continued support of the international community and
the credibility of this work.
It is a remarkable achievement, and both a sign of
the unity of the Council on this issue and revealing of
the criminality of the many acts carried out by Da’esh,
that the Council was unanimous and the international
community is in consensus that the rule of law and
judicial accountability have an important and critical
part to play in properly confronting the phenomena that
we have unfortunately witnessed.
In pursuit of the second imperative of fostering
collective support for our work in Iraq, the Investigative
Team has prioritized the development of cooperative
relationships with the Government of Iraq itself,
as well as with the multitude of religious and ethnic
groups and regional entities in Iraq. We have reached
4/21

04/12/2018

out to non-governmental bodies and other key national
stakeholders and, as emphasized in our written report,
we consider that that work will be crucial to the
successful fulfilment of our mandate.
Reflecting this during my initial mission to Iraq
in August, I met with senior Government officials,
many survivors, civil society groups and members
of Christian, Shia, Sunni, Turkmen Shia, Kakai and
Yazidi communities. In those discussions, I emphasized
to all, whoever my audience was at any given time,
that there is no hierarchy of victims. The Investigative
Team, in seeking to fulfil the mandate of the Council,
will ensure that we focus on crimes committed against
any human being — irrespective of ethnic group or
religious denomination — who has suffered from those
crimes within our jurisdiction at the hands of Da’esh.
Since our arrival in Iraq in October, the Investigative
Team has continued to engage with the Government
of Iraq with a view to establishing clear operational
frameworks with our national counterparts. In that
regard, productive discussions have already been held
with the Steering Committee that has been designated
under the terms of reference. We are also working
on and clarifying the procedures that will form the
bedrock of our activities. We have liaised productively
and continuously with the relevant national security
sectors in Iraq to ensure that the Team can undertake
activities in a secure and safe manner.
Last week, I had the singular honour and
opportunity to have a meeting with the Prime Minister
of Iraq, during which I underlined the commitment of
the Investigative Team to working in support of the
domestic authorities of Iraq to ensure that members
of ISIL are held accountable for their crimes. I was
grateful to the Prime Minister that in that meeting, and
afterwards in his public statements, he expressed in
very solid terms, if I may say so, his continued support
for the resolution, the Investigative Team and our focus
on genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
which is to be applauded.
Our presence in Iraq has provided the Investigative
Team with the opportunity to continue to engage
with various survivor groups, tribal leaders and other
non-governmental bodies. In that regard, I recently
held in-depth discussions with tribal leaders from the
Sinjar region and have put in place plans to visit that
region later this month, in addition to other key sites of
ISIL crimes. Since its arrival in Iraq, the Team has also
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

continued to build relationships with a broad range of
Member States, many of which were initiated here in
New York. We look forward to further strengthening
those ties in support of our mandated activities over the
coming months.
The Investigative Team now looks forward
to continuing preparations in Iraq with a view to
commencing investigative activities in early 2019.
Based on our preparatory activities to date, and
reflecting the consultations held with the Government
of Iraq and other key national stakeholders, I wish to
highlight to the Council the following key priorities for
action, which are outlined, of course, in much greater
detail in the report.
The first priority is the completion of key
infrastructural elements, including the premises of the
Investigative Team and the physical and technological
equipment that I have referred to, which is necessary
for the storage and preservation of evidence.
Secondly, we must finalize the core substantive
work, including our standard operating practices and
the recruitment process, which we hope to be able to
kick off once the budget is approved by the General
Assembly.
Thirdly, we must collect, gather and analyse
the evidence within Iraq, and by that I mean that the
central Government, the regional authorities, third
States, non-governmental organizations, international
actors and neighbouring States must bring all of that
information together so that it can be subjected to
analysis, so that patterns can be discerned and so that
it can lead to the fourth stage, which relates to the
activities of the Investigative Team to fill the gaps that
have been identified. I look forward to presenting my
next report in May 2019, which will provide a fuller
update on those activities.
However, I wish to be candid with the Council in
one additional respect. The delivery of this mandate and
the successful completion of these activities require not
just the historic, united and unanimous support of the
Council, but collegiality and solidarity going forward.
Without the political will and political support of
Member States that have been fortunately evidenced
to date, the significant challenges that are obvious on
the face of the mandate will not be overcome. By the
same token, with that solidarity the challenges and the
scale of the evidence will not be insurmountable by
the application of our collective will and the resources

S/PV. 8412

available in the international community and within the
Team.
On a related topic, I take this opportunity to
mention that the proposed budget of the Investigative
Team has been submitted to the General Assembly
for consideration. It is my sincere belief that we have
presented a very streamlined organizational structure
with a limited objective to meet our mandate. There is
no fat in that budget. We have specifically designed a
substantive capacity that will allow us to conduct our
work in accordance with international standards and
thereby ensure the broadest possible use of evidence
within Iraq and, domestically, within States elsewhere.
That plan, strategy and organizational structure are
complemented by a very lightweight mission support
mechanism that draws on existing United Nations
in-country assets to ensure the maximum focus of
resources where it is needed, which is in the substantive
work of investigating the crimes themselves. It is my
hope that the commitment to efficiency demonstrated
in our proposed budget will be reflected on positively
by Member States in the coming weeks as it is finalized
and approved.
In addition, I would emphasize paragraph 14 of
resolution 2379 (2017), which created a trust fund. I
request that States also consider making supplementary
contributions to the trust fund for key activities. Those
activities are not just for the security and the staff costs
of the team, but include exhumations, DNA analysis
and witness support activities. I take this opportunity
to state and underscore my appreciation for the very
generous and absolutely vital contributions made
thus far by the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Government of Qatar. I also know
that various other States are working towards pledging
further support.
In conclusion, I wish to underline to the
Council that the preparatory work completed by the
Team has reinforced my view that our dual initial
imperatives — ensuring independence and seeking
cooperation, and demonstrating impartiality and
pursuing national engagement — do not present a
dichotomy. There is no contradiction in upholding
independence while supporting national accountability.
Indeed, the opposite is true. It is only by establishing
the Investigative Team as an independent, objective
and trusted source of evidentiary material capable of
conducting its work to the highest possible standards
that we can best support the Government of Iraq and

18-413075/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

04/12/2018

other Member States in our common and necessary
pursuit of accountability and justice. Simultaneous,
the completion of our investigative activities will be
dependent on securing the cooperation, support and
trust of all elements of Iraqi society.

Team to Baghdad. It is important that all efforts on the
ground be complementary and avoid duplication, and
we are very pleased that the Team’s budget proposal
reflects the importance of all efforts complementing
each other.

It is by harnessing those dual elements, both
international and national, that we will be able to
successfully fulfil the mandate the Council has provided
and deliver justice for the victims of ISIL. As we look
forward to the commencement of our investigative
activities in Iraq, it is ultimately them and the cause of
justice that we seek to serve.

We are encouraged to see the work of the team so far
and welcome the fact that there have been contributions
from the Government of Iraq, from UNAMI, from allied
nations and other United Nations bodies in supporting
the Investigative Team.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Khan
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by repeating in the Chamber what I said in the
consultations room — we offer you and your mission
our congratulations, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency. We very much look forward to working
with you and supporting you. We also congratulate
our Chinese colleagues for the way they conducted the
presidency last month.
I would also like to reiterate my condolences here
in the Chamber to the United States of America on the
death of George H. W. Bush, who I had the honour of
meeting in the United Nations some 10 years ago.
Turning to today, I would like to thank the Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant for
his first briefing to the Council since the Team’s
deployment on 29 October. I think the Team has made a
very good start and we look forward to its future work
and briefings.
The Special Adviser said that we really ought
to pay tribute to the suffering and the indefatigable
courage of the survivors of Da’esh violence. I think that
is absolutely right. Justice and accountability for the
victims need to be at the centre of our approach, and I
want to commend the new Government of Iraq for its
commitment to supporting the work of the Investigative
Team. We also welcome the continued support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
for the Team, and I would like to recognize UNAMI’s
efforts to facilitate the deployment of the Investigative
6/21

I think it is crucial that we get these early stages
right, including by establishing a mechanism for
cooperation between the Investigative Team and the
Government of Iraq. That is important for swift and
thorough evidence collection, but it will also help
ensure that evidence is suitable to be used before the
courts. It will, of course, rely on a cooperative and
mutually respectful relationship, which we are sure will
be present.
The United Kingdom very much agrees with the
strategic vision in the guiding principles regarding the
Team’s immediate priorities. We were pleased to see a
very strong focus on engagement with the Government
of Iraq. That will obviously be crucial to the success
of the Team’s work, and we encourage the Steering
Committee designated by the Government of Iraq to
meet on a regular basis with the Investigative Team,
particularly during these early stages of implementation.
The Special Adviser mentioned the importance of
voluntary contributions to the trust fund established
pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017). I want to echo that
sentiment. We think that should also cover voluntary
contributions to the Investigative Team in the form of
expertise and skills. I would like to pay tribute to Qatar
and the Netherlands for their generous contributions.
We ourselves have already donated to the trust fund and
we remain committed to supporting the Investigative
Team as it fulfils its mandate.
Going back to where I started, justice for victims
remains at the heart of the resolution. It is vital that the
Investigative Team help to secure accountability for the
victims of the terrible crimes of Da’esh in order to bring
closure to those who still suffer — including women,
children and minority communities.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me
too reiterate in the open Chamber our congratulations
to Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

Council and our thanks and congratulations to China
for its excellent presidency in November.
I also congratulate Special Adviser Khan on his
appointment. I thank him for being here in person
today to brief the Security Council for the first time.
The United States looks forward to working closely
with him to fulfil the critical mandate of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant.
Last year, the Government of Iraq asked for
assistance in its efforts to hold members of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) accountable for
atrocities. Knowing how pivotal a period it was in Iraq’s
rich history, Council members quickly responded by
unanimously adopting resolution 2379 (2017). History
has shown that swift and effective evidence collection
after atrocities are perpetrated is critical to the ability
to recover and move forward. The recent discovery in
Iraq of more than 200 mass graves containing as many
as 12,000 bodies makes today’s discussions in the
Council all the more important.
I am pleased to announce today that the United
States intends to commit $2 million to support the
efforts of the Investigative Team. We thank those
who have already contributed, including the United
Kingdom, Qatar and the Netherlands, and call on other
countries to quickly lend their support as it begins to
carry out its mandate. Of course, money alone will not
guarantee the effective collection of evidence. We urge
Iraq’s new Government to continue working closely
with the Team as well. Mr. Khan’s meeting with Prime
Minister Adil Abdul-Mahdi of Iraq is an important step
in beginning that conversation.
No segment of Iraqi society has escaped the terror
of ISIS, and it is important to develop a balanced and
accurate account of events. That will give all Iraqis a
voice, including members of every religious and ethnic
group in Iraq that has been subjected to unspeakable
crimes. The appointment of Iraqi experts to the
Investigative Team, working alongside international
experts, will be critical to its success. At the same time,
the Government of Iraq must give the Team the space
to operate effectively. Independence and impartiality
are essential to its credibility going forward. In keeping
with the Secretary-General’s efforts to enhance
coherence and collaboration across the United Nations
system, it will also be essential for the Team to work

S/PV. 8412

closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq and other relevant United Nations offices, as well
as civil-society groups, in order to coordinate efforts on
the ground. Its efforts must be matched with measures
to protect and support the families of victims and the
survivors of atrocious crimes, who are still living with
trauma from their appalling experiences.
There is much to be optimistic about in Iraq today.
We see Iraq’s future in people like Nadia Murad, whose
foundation, Nadia’s Initiative, is dedicated to helping
women and children who are victimized by genocide,
mass atrocities and human trafficking. Through her
efforts, Nadia has helped hundreds of Iraqi women
and children heal and rebuild their lives, and has set
an example to many Iraqis who are following her lead.
She has had an immeasurable impact on the global
conversation about ending the use of sexual violence as
a weapon of war. The United States congratulates her
on being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 2018. Nadia
is one of many Iraqis who bravely called on Council
members to come together and adopt resolution 2379
(2017) unanimously. Special Adviser Khan’s attendance
at Nadia’s Nobel award ceremony is an important
illustration of the new role of the United Nations in
seeking justice for Nadia and the many Iraqis like her.
We want to once again thank the Government of Iraq
and the Investigative Team for taking important steps
towards demonstrating that justice is never beyond
reach. ISIS will be held accountable for its many crimes
against the Iraqi people once and for all.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to join others in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of December,
and the Permanent Representative of China on his
successful stewardship of the Council last month. We
thank Mr. Khan for his first report to the Council
(see S/2018/1031) on the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.
Resolution 2379 (2017) stresses the global nature
of the threats posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). It is therefore important that Council
members form a united front in counteracting that evil.
There can be no double standards in that fight, including
with regard to seeing justice done. We are firmly of
the view that the crimes of ISIL terrorists must not go
unpunished, wherever they were committed. However,

18-413077/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

it is the Governments of the States affected by those
crimes that play the leading role in holding them to
account. Resolution 2379 (2017), which represents the
basis for the establishment of the Investigative Team,
emphasizes in that regard that it must operate with
full respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and its jurisdiction
over crimes committed on Iraqi territory. We hope
those provisos will be an indisputable basis for the
Investigative Team’s operations.
We should point out that the fact that the Team
was established at the request of the affected State is a
bold kind of innovation for the Security Council with
many new aspects. First, as a body it is neither judicial
nor prosecutorial, but merely documents evidence.
Furthermore, the evidence it collects has to be kept in
Iraq and used by the Iraqi judicial system and other
national judicial bodies exclusively upon the agreement
with Baghdad. Unfortunately, it is very seldom that
the views of the States concerned are so carefully
taken into account. To take the example of the entity
in Syria with similar functions — the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, which was the result of the General Assembly’s
illegitimate decision — it did not even occur to its socalled architects to talk to Damascus and they utterly
disregarded the prerogatives of the Security Council.
We want to caution the Investigative Team’s leadership
against any contact with that illegitimate entity.
We note Mr. Khan’s willingness to work
constructively to carry out the mandate entrusted to
him, which we view first and foremost as in a context
of criminal rather than international humanitarian law.
We concluded from his report that his mission has
support within Iraqi society, and we truly hope that
approach will be maintained and welcome all steps in
that direction.
We expect the Investigative Team’s operations
to be conducted impartially, transparently and in
full compliance with international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, and that it will make
a meaningful contribution to the efforts to bring ISIL
terrorists to justice for the crimes they have committed
on Iraqi territory. That is important with regard to
further counter-terrorism activities in Iraq. ISIL’s socalled caliphate has been dealt a crushing blow, partly
thanks to the uncompromising war against terrorism
8/21

04/12/2018

that the authorities in Iraq’s neighbour Syria have been
waging, with Russia’s help. Despite that, however, ISIL
still remains active in a number of Iraqi provinces and
is still carrying out terrorist and asymmetrical attacks
there.
For our part, we will continue to assist the Iraqi
authorities on the security front both politically and
practically, as well as in the work of establishing
long-term normalization. We will continue to help
strengthen the Iraqi army, including by coordinating
on regional security issues through the quadripartite
centre in Baghdad, and we intend to broaden our
bilateral cooperation on other fronts as well.
In conclusion, I would like to say that we want
to see Iraq become a strong, whole, independent and
prosperous State where all of its various ethnic and
religious groups can live in peace and harmony. We
believe that all international assistance, including from
the Investigative Team, must be part of the effort to
achieve that goal, and the shortest road to that runs
through robust national reconciliation processes.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me start by congratulating you, Mr. President, and
your team on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of December. You can count on my full
support and that of my entire delegation. I would also
like to thank the Chinese delegation for its professional
steering of the work of the Council during the month of
November.
I would also like to echo the delegation of the
United Kingdom in offering our condolences for the
passing of the former President of the United States
George H.W. Bush.
I would like to thank Special Adviser Khan for
his very informative briefing and welcome him as he
addresses the Council for the first time.
Please allow me to focus on three aspects today:
first, supporting the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant; secondly, protecting and supporting
survivors and victims; and thirdly, accountability.
First, we welcome the commencement of the work
by Mr. Khan and his team and we have looked forward to
this discussion and support the priorities as formulated
in his first report (S/2018/1031). My Government feels
strongly about the need for accountability for atrocity
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

crimes committed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS). These are crimes that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, as
mentioned by Mr. Khan in his briefing. We recognize
that his investigations are starting in 2019 and that the
task that lies ahead of him and the Iraqi Government
is a vast one. Its continued support and cooperation
are of course paramount, especially in a challenging
security context. We expect that the Investigative Team
will establish an effective working relationship with
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq that is
characterized by complementarity.
The Council adopted resolution 2379 (2017)
unanimously, which is worth noting. Let me reiterate
that Mr. Khan has the continued and full support of the
Kingdom of Netherlands to end impunity for atrocity
crimes committed by ISIS. That is why my Government
announced that it would contribute financially to
support the Investigative Team. We call on others that
have not yet done so to follow suit.
Secondly, I want to speak about protecting and
supporting survivors and victims. A week from today,
Nadia Murad will receive her Nobel Peace Prize in
Oslo — a recognition of her activism, which has shed
light on some of the most terrible crimes imaginable.
She has given a voice to survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence, the Yazidi community and other
Iraqi victims.
Mr. Khan has written that survivors and victims
should be at the centre of the work of the Investigative
Team. We could not agree more and are happy to
see our pledge be used for specialized psychological
support and assistance to witnesses and victims. As
the Investigative Team becomes fully operational in
2019, its ability to build relationships with affected
communities — especially women — will be crucial.
Inclusive communication with and towards communities
is an important aspect of its work.
We count on the Team to secure, collect and
preserve evidence in line with international standards;
to protect witnesses brave enough to speak up and
ensure the broadest use of the evidence collected; to
give information to families that are missing loved
ones; and, finally, to help demonstrate the extent of the
atrocities committed by ISIS and its vile ideology so
that it does not create new victims.
Thirdly, I have spoken about the need for
accountability for individuals and communities alike.

S/PV. 8412

The work of the Investigative Team and the Iraqi
Government is crucial to documenting and laying bare
the despicable ideology and practice of ISIS and give
it its rightful place in history going forward, and to
helping to further reduce its appeal across the world.
After all, the actions of ISIS in Iraq led to the gravest
kind of crimes. In this light, we look forward to Iraq’s
implementation of international crimes into national
legislation. This would be a significant and very
positive development. In order to achieve justice and
eventually reconciliation, it is our understanding that
evidence gathered by the Investigative Team should be
used only in prosecutions that comply with the highest
international legal standards, and that no capital
punishment will be applied.
In closing, I want to wish Special Adviser Khan
and his team the best of luck with the valuable and
substantial tasks that lie ahead of them.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for this month
and wishing you every success. At the same time, we
thank the Chinese delegation for its presidency of the
Council for last month.
I join previous speakers in expressing my deepest
condolences to the United States Administration
and the American people following the passing of
former President George H.W. Bush who served as
the permanent representative of his country to the
United Nations and presided over the Security Council
in May 1972. Our condolences also go to his family.
President George H.W. Bush holds a special place in
the Administration, the leadership and the hearts of the
people of Kuwait, thanks to the leading and historical
role he played in mobilizing political and military
support for the formation of the great international
coalition, led by the United States of America. That
contributed to liberating the State of Kuwait from
the 1991 occupation, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the embodiment of
the concept of collective security. The principled and
courageous attitudes by the President George H.W.
Bush and his support for justice and rights will not
be forgotten by the people of Kuwait, and will remain
entrenched in their memory.
I would like to thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for

18-413079/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant for his valuable briefing on the important
issue before us today. We also welcome his first report
(S/2018/1031) as a road map for the Investigative
Team. We wish Mr. Khan and his team every success
in carrying out the difficult and sensitive task ahead.
We hope that the Investigative Team will be able to
discharge its mission to ensure that the perpetrators of
the most atrocious crimes against the brotherly Iraqi
people are held accountable. That would represent a
fundamental part of the comprehensive systematic
approach to eliminating terrorism.
Resolution 2379 (2017) established a mechanism
that represented a victory for humanitarian justice
and for reparation to victims. That mechanism was
formed in response to the Iraqi Government’s request
to guarantee that the perpetrators of the most heinous
crimes — which could constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide — would not enjoy
impunity, while fully respecting the sovereignty of
Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes committed on
its territories. We believe that the mechanism is an
important deterrent to terrorists. We are hopeful that
the priorities identified by the Investigative Team in
its first report, as well as the commitments undertaken
by the Iraqi Government to support and facilitate
the mission of the Investigative Team, will bring the
perpetrators to justice under Iraqi law.
In that respect, we greatly appreciate the sacrifices
and the heroic actions undertaken by the brotherly
Iraqi people. Allow me therefore to congratulate the
daughter of Iraq, Ms. Nadia Murad, on winning the
Nobel Peace Prize and wish her every success. Her
humanitarian message encompasses a true sense of
heroism and serves to heal the wounds caused by the
so-called Da’esh terrorist organization in Iraq. It is
indeed a source of hope and optimism.
Kuwait has stood alongside Iraq throughout the
difficult circumstances it has endured, including within
the framework of the international coalition against
Da’esh. We have provided logistical support and hosted
a number of international coalition meetings. Aware
of the serious challenges that brotherly Iraq is facing
after defeating the so-called Da’esh, His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Emir of
Kuwait, took the initiative in calling for the convening
in Kuwait the International Kuwait Conference for
the Reconstruction of Iraq in February, which was
co-chaired by Iraq, the United Nations, the European
10/21

04/12/2018

Union and the World Bank. The Conference raised
$30 billion, which was donated by participating
countries as well as representatives of the private sector
and civil society organizations. Those contributions
took the form of development loans, subsidized loans
and investments. They will help to improve living
conditions, develop infrastructure, provide basic
services and create a safe environment in the areas
freed from the terrorists in Iraq.
In conclusion, it is high time for Iraq to recover
following the tragic events it has experienced in recent
years while fighting against Da’esh. Once again,
Kuwait expresses its solidarity with the Government
and the people of Iraq in any measures they undertake
to roll back terrorism, prevent the expansion of
terrorist activities and prosecute the perpetrators of
those atrocious crimes by bringing them to justice.
We will support such measures in order to consolidate
Iraqi national unity and preserve the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate the Republic
of Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December and to
assure you, Mr. President, of our support. I would also
like to express our great appreciation to the delegation
of China for its able, constructive and productive
presidency in November.
My delegation thanks the United Kingdom for
calling for this meeting to re-confirm the readiness
of the members of the Security to fight terrorism and
support the people and the Government of Iraq. We
believe such efforts will move Iraqis along the path
to peace, stability and unity. I also welcome Special
Adviser Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, appointed on
13 July as Head of the Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), established
by resolution 2379 (2017) to collect, preserve and
ensure the storage of evidence from that terrorist group
in Iraq. I thank him for his most informative briefing.
We believe that resolution 2379 (2017), adopted
unanimously in September last year, was a testament
to the full support of the international community to
combat the common evil of terrorism, which threatens
the entire world. The resolution, which requested the
establishment of an investigative team to bring ISIL
(Da’esh) to justice, was an important milestone in
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

ensuring the prosecution of that terrorist group for all
the atrocities it committed in and outside Iraq. We are
convinced that those criminals are equally guilty for
also destroying cultural heritage sites. Our delegation
has high hopes for Special Adviser Khan and his team.
We welcome the intensive preparatory work
conducted by the Investigative Team in such a short
period, and support its vision for investigating and
gathering of evidence of crimes committed by ISIL.
That should include cooperation with all organizations,
agencies of the United Nations, the private sector,
academia, media and non-governmental agencies.
It is important that the documentary evidence be
preserved in accordance with international standards.
We will also need outreach research activities from
relevant non-governmental and civic organizations,
including groups of victims, as our partners, to ensure
the Investigative Team’s credibility and effective
operations.
We note the importance of ensuring adequate
protection and support for the victims of ISIL in order
for their voices to be heard and become a decisive factor
for investigative activities and future courts. In that
regard, we welcome the intention to create a specialized
group for the protection of victims and witnesses, which
will be responsible for providing advice and assistance
to the investigative team to ensure maximum protection
for witnesses and victims.
We note with satisfaction the holding, on 17 October
2018 in the framework of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), of a briefing by Mr. Khan
on the implementation of resolution 2379 (2017).
According to its mandate, the Investigative Team can
interact with all structures of the United Nations and
subsidiary bodies connected with suppressing ISIL
activities and investigating its crimes. In that regard,
we welcome the support expressed by the members of
the 1267 Committee for the provision of comprehensive
assistance to the work of the Investigative Team under
the leadership of the Special Adviser. Kazakhstan
firmly believes that solving the complex problem of
international terrorism would entail greater coordination
and a holistic, systemic and innovative approach by
the entire international community, represented by
Member States and international organizations.
Kazakhstan, which deeply believes in human
dignity, justice and freedom, joins other Member States
in upholding and fully implementing resolution 2379

S/PV. 8412

(2017), in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We are sure that the elimination
of socioeconomic factors that give rise to terrorism will
prevent the return of chaos, suffering and irreparable
loss for the civilian population and give them new
hope for a better future. In conclusion, I would like
to reassure the Council of Kazakhstan’s commitment
to combat international terrorism, including by
implementing relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly resolution 2379 (2017).
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to join other delegations in
expressing our sincerest condolences on the passing
away of a great statesman, on both the national and
international stage, former United States President
George Herbert Walker Bush. We convey our sympathy
to his family and to the American people for this loss.
Let me also express our sincere congratulations
to Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. We wish it every success. We also
pay tribute to China for its excellent presidency during
the month of November.
First of all, we would like to express our sincere
congratulations to the Secretariat and Special Adviser
Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and his team for their great
efforts since the Council adopted resolution 2379
(2017), on 21 September 2017, which required the
Secretary-General to appoint an investigative team to
support the efforts of the Iraqi Government to establish
responsibility for the crimes committed in Iraq by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh).
Our delegation is very pleased that, following a very
complicated, arduous and difficult process, Mr. Khan
has presented us with the first report on his work (see
S/2018/1031), following his appointment on 13 July.
The report of the Investigative Team, which we
consider preliminary given the recent start of the
Team’s activities and the complexity of the work it
must carry out, basically illustrates the details of the
strategic vision for the activities that the Investigative
Team will carry out as an independent and impartial
mechanism pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017). There
is no doubt as to the great and eager expectations for
future reports to be presented to the Council on the
crimes of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, given
the monumental and terrifying details that have been
emerging about crimes committed by Da’esh during the
period between June 2014 and December 2017, during

18-4130711/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

which Da’esh occupied, controlled and operated with
impunity in large areas of Iraq, committing all kinds of
crimes that involve serious violations of international
law, human rights law, international criminal law and
international humanitarian law, and which constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
Several witness accounts confirm that during its
occupation Da’esh carried out serious crimes against the
civilian population in the territories under its control.
More than 200 mass graves have been discovered that
hold the remains of many thousands of men, women
and children — atrocious loss of human life, with the
attendant terrible, horrendous suffering.
In view of the devastating magnitude of those
crimes, which are being discovered and will continue
to be in future, and with the aim of clearly establishing
responsibility so as to ensure proper accountability
for those responsible for such acts, it is necessary that
the international community and the United Nations
provide the Investigative Team all the necessary support,
including basic infrastructure, funding, logistical
means, other resources and, even more important, as
Mr. Khan states in his report, solidarity and unanimous
support from the Council, its members and the States
Members of the United Nations. That support should
include clear political will so that that the Team can
successfully carry out its work and eventually expose
to the light of day all of the crimes that have been
committed, including identifying the perpetrators.
That work — which should always be carried out while
observing impartiality and independence, offering
collective support to Iraq and adhering to optimal
international standards and practices, with focus on
those with greater responsibility in the commission
of the crimes and in close collaboration with other
international agencies in the region with competence
on the issues — will allow the international community
not only to know the magnitude of the crimes and
their perpetrators and ensure accountability, but will
inevitably awaken awareness of the need to stop and
prevent the repetition of such acts in other armed
conflict settings.
In conclusion, our delegation wishes great courage,
determination and success to Mr. Khan and his entire
team in the formidable and complex mission that has
been entrusted to them by the United Nations. At
the same time, we assure him of the support of the
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in
his duties.
12/21

04/12/2018

Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): We would
like to join others in wishing Côte d’Ivoire every
success during its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December, and we congratulate China
on its presidency in November.
I also wish to reiterate the condolences offered by
President Emmanuel Macron to the American people
following the death of former President Bush.
We would like to congratulate Mr. Karim Khan,
Special Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
2379 (2017), on his appointment and progress report
(see S/2018/1031). We hope to see him appear regularly
before the Security Council to report on the progress of
the work of the Investigative Team.
The international community, including France,
has stood alongside the Iraqi authorities in the fight
against terrorism. We are now also standing with
them in their reconstruction and reconciliation efforts,
without which there can be no lasting peace in Iraq.
A few days ago, President Macron made a pledge to
the fund launched by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Nadia
Murad, who embodies hope for the Iraqi people and for
all the victims of Da’esh regardless of their ethnicity,
religion or gender. France’s contribution to the fund
will go towards the reconstruction of Sinjar, a region
particularly scarred by the abuses of Da’esh, as pointed
out by Mr. Khan earlier.
Furthermore, in 2019 France will host the next
follow-up conference of the Paris action plan in support
of victims of ethnic and religious violence in the Middle
East. The plan includes an important component
on the fight against impunity in terms of technical
assistance, training personnel and identifying victims
and providing them psychological support. A fund for
victims of ethnic and religious violence was also set
up. We believe that the operationalization of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant will fully contribute to that goal.
Solid foundations have been put in place over the
past three months for the Investigative Team to fulfil
the mandate set by the Security Council in resolution
2379 (2017) and its terms of reference, in keeping with
United Nations policies and best practices. In that regard,
we take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/253) that outlines the policy of non-sharing by
international accountability mechanisms of evidence
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

for use in the context of criminal proceedings in which
the death penalty could be imposed or carried out.
Three points seem essential to support the Special
Adviser and his Investigative Team.
The first point is that the Investigative Team must
have the resources it needs, starting with financial
resources. That has been said several times before
me. We also call on the Special Adviser to ensure
that staff members are recruited in such a way as to
ensure diversity in terms of gender, language and legal
tradition.
The second element is cooperation — first with
Iraq. We welcome the commitment of the newly elected
Iraqi Government and the establishment of a steering
committee to set the terms for that cooperation. We
also note the concern of the Investigative Team with
respect to involving all the relevant actors in Iraq,
including non-governmental organizations, religious
minorities and victims’ representatives. Cooperation
with United Nations mechanisms is also important.
We particularly welcome cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, which has a
broad mandate to protect human rights and support the
rule of law. The cooperation of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and its
Team of Experts is also essential, as recalled earlier by
the representative of Kazakhstan.
The third aspect is support for justice. The
Investigative Team must collect and store evidence that
could be used in fair and equitable court proceedings,
first in Iraq. We support the efforts of the Iraqi
authorities to strengthen the judicial and governance
systems. In addition, the victims of Da’esh must have
access to justice everywhere. That is something the
Investigative Team should also monitor.
Finally, France will continue to support national
reconciliation and the fight against impunity, which
are inextricably linked. The Investigative Team is an
important tool that is complementary to the measures
undertaken by the Iraqi authorities to ensure that all
the most serious crimes committed in Iraq are brought
before the courts, whoever the perpetrators and victims
may be. Iraq was able to defeat Da’esh militarily, to
hold parliamentary elections in good conditions and to
proceed with the appointment of new authorities. It is

S/PV. 8412

now important to work towards the implementation of
inclusive governance that is based on the rule of law
and that serves the interests of all segments of Iraqi
society, in stability and prosperity, with the support of
the international community.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me join
other delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. You can count on our support. Let me
also thank the Chinese delegation for its very able
stewardship of the work of this body during the month
of November.
Allow me also to offer my most sincerest
condolences to the American people on the passing of
former President Bush, who played quite an important
role in assisting the peaceful and democratic transition
in Poland and in our part of Europe starting in 1989.
Let me also thank Mr. Khan and his team for the
report (see S/2018/1031) and the very informative
briefing. His work, which consists in the collection,
preservation and storage of evidence, remains crucial
to achieving accountability and to providing justice
for the victims of the crimes committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Allow me also
to commend the Iraqi authorities for their cooperation
with Mr. Khan’s team.
As Mr. Khan rightly pointed out, resolution 2379
(2017) is of crucial importance. By that resolution
the Security Council recognized, in a united way,
the importance of judicial accountability to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In that context, for the record, let me stress that we
cannot agree with the view expressed in the Chamber
by one delegation that the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, is illegal.
There is no basis to question the legality of that body,
which was established by General Assembly resolution
71/248. That claim also runs counter to the spirit of
resolution 2379 (2017), concerning the importance of
accountability.
Poland welcomes the commencement of the
Investigative Team’s preparatory activities, the
development of a strategic vision and guiding principles
for the Team’s activities, as well as the implementation
of the financial, logistical and administrative

18-4130713/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

measures necessary to facilitate the commencement
of its substantive work. We look forward to the Team’s
achievement of its full operational capabilities. We
encourage all United Nations agencies to collaborate
closely with the Team and provide it with all necessary
assistance in fulfilling its mandate. As Mr. Khan
stressed, he and his Team need solidarity and support.
Let me assure him of Poland’s full solidarity and
support for his extremely important work.
We strongly believe that in order to advance national
reconciliation and restore stability in Iraq, it is vital to
deliver justice to the victims of atrocities committed
by terrorist groups by holding the perpetrators of those
crimes accountable. Accomplishing this goal will
require, inter alia, carrying out thorough investigations,
evidential material collection and analysis. It should
be done in accordance with the highest international
standards and in close cooperation and communication
with the Iraqi authorities to ensure the broadest
possible usability and admissibility of such evidence
and materials before national courts and by national
investigative and prosecutorial authorities.
We welcome the planned inclusion of Iraqi personnel
in the Team, who will work on an equal footing with
international staff members. We are convinced that their
participation will not only increase the effectiveness
of the Team’s work and its capacity to deliver on its
mandate, but will also enhance support for its activities
among the Iraqi population. We hope that it will also
help to maximize the potential use of its evidentiary
material in credible, impartial and independent
domestic criminal proceedings conducted by competent
domestic courts in Iraq and in third States, as well as
enhance existing accountability processes, commence
new fair proceedings and contribute to reconciliation
and stabilization. We highly appreciate the recognition
of the need to ensure geographic diversity and gender,
ethnic and religious balance in appointing the Iraqi
members of the Investigative Team, which will reflect
the diversity of the Iraqi population and increase the
Team’s capabilities in collecting evidence in various
communities affected by Da’esh.
The provision of protection and support for the
victims should be paramount. Therefore, we commend
the intent to establish the victim and witness protection
unit with the aim of facilitating the delivery of
appropriate support.
14/21

04/12/2018

With regard to the efforts to provide accountability
for the crimes committed by terrorist groups, we
encourage the Iraqi authorities and the Investigative
Team to pay special attention to sexual and genderbased crimes in prosecutions of Da’esh fighters, as
already highlighted by other delegations. Particular
emphasis should also be placed on investigating all
violations and abuses committed against children. In
addition, it is, in our view, indispensable to avoid the
penalization of women and children who are of Da’esh
families and who have no link to the organization.
In conclusion, let me reiterate once again Poland’s
support for the Investigative Team and call for
cooperation with the Special Adviser and the Team in
fulfilling its important mandate. Allow me to stress
the importance of carrying it out in accordance with
United Nations best practices and policies, including
on sharing evidence for use in criminal proceedings in
which capital punishment could be imposed or carried
out, as well as relevant international law, including
international human rights law, rules and standards,
notably those relevant to fair trial and due process. Let
me finally once more acknowledge the commitment of
the Special Adviser to achieving the full operational
capabilities of the Investigative Team and ensuring full
compliance with the Team’s mandate, in accordance
with resolution 2379 (2017), and wish him and the Team
the best of success in fulfilling their important tasks.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me too
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on assuming the presidency and assure you, Sir, of our
full support during the month of December. Let me also
take this opportunity to thank China for an impeccably
run presidency in November.
I would like to thank Special Adviser Khan for
his informative briefing. No doubt, he has a very
challenging set of tasks ahead, but he can certainly count
on Sweden’s continued full support in his endeavour.
I also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Nadia Murad on having been awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize for her efforts to end sexual violence in conflict.
This is an important recognition on behalf of all the
victims of Da’esh, giving impetus to the efforts of
holding those responsible to account.
Advancing accountability for the violations and
abuses of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in the conflicts on the Council’s agenda has
proven extremely difficult. The unanimous support
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

for the decision to establish the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant is therefore particularly significant
and a major achievement. We now need to stay united
in actively supporting the implementation of this
important mandate.
In this regard, we welcome the strategic vision
and priorities set out by the Special Adviser today, in
particular the victims-based approach, putting at the
centre those most impacted by the crimes. The many
examples in reports of the Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten remind
us again and again why this victims-based approach
is so important. In this context, we also underline that
children with perceived or actual association with
Da’esh are — first and foremost — victims and must be
treated as such. Collective support for and trust in the
mechanism on the part of those affected will be crucial.
The establishment of a specialized victim and witness
protection unit is therefore important.
It is crucial to ensure that the Team is adequately
equipped with the expertise and resources needed.
The Team must be able to effectively gather evidence
for the crimes that have been committed against men,
women and children, including sexual and genderbased violence. We are pleased that the Team foresees
close cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The operational and security environment in Iraq
is very complex. We agree with Mr. Khan’s conclusion
that innovative logistical and operational solutions will
be necessary. Strong Iraqi support and buy-in will be
decisive to the success of the Team’s work. Mr. Khan’s
recent meeting with Prime Minister Abdul-Mahdi was
a positive step in this regard. We welcome regular
interaction and coordination between Mr. Khan’s
team and the Steering Committee designated by the
Iraqi Government. As an independent and impartial
institution, the Team can also play a key role in
supporting the Iraqi Government in building capacity
in the legal sector. The cooperation between the Team
and the Iraqi Government can be mutually reinforcing.
We welcome the Team’s intention to achieve
geographical diversity, as well as gender, ethnic and
religious balance, among its Iraqi members. The Team’s

S/PV. 8412

development of trusting relationships with religious
and ethnic minority groups, non-governmental
organizations and other national stakeholders will be
central. The support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the wider United Nations system
is also important.
Accountability for all atrocity crimes committed
in Iraq is crucial. The quest for accountability will
contribute to reconciliation and long-term peace. In this
regard, the rule of law and the Iraqi legal system must
be strengthened, both in the long term and with respect
to legal processes against suspected Da’esh members
currently being pursued by Iraqi courts. We encourage
Iraqi authorities to put in place national legislation that
ensures that perpetrators of international crimes are
tried in Iraq, in full accordance with the principles of
rule of law and due process. United Nations support will
be vital in that regard, and we remain strongly opposed
to the death penalty. In accordance with United Nations
policies and best practices, evidence gathered by the
Investigative Team will not be used in trials that may
lead to capital punishment. That issue must continue to
be closely followed.
Sweden was among the first countries to prosecute
suspected perpetrators of alleged war crimes in Iraq, as
well as in Syria. We look forward to the Team’s support
for universal jurisdiction, including the exchange of
information and potential support for the prosecution
of Da’esh crimes in other national jurisdictions through
mutual legal assistance.
In conclusion, promoting accountability for
crimes committed by Da’esh is a matter of urgency. It
requires political courage, as well as continued, united
international support. Iraq can rely on Sweden as a
committed partner in that moving forward.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We will offer
you all our support, Sir. We appreciate the support of
all relevant parties during China’s presidency of the
Council.
China extends its condolences on the passing of
former United States President George H.W. Bush and
presents its sympathy to his family members.
Iraq is currently at a critical stage of national peace,
stability and reconstruction. An inclusive political
solution is the only way to achieve lasting peace and

18-4130715/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

security in Iraq. China hopes that the new Government
of Iraq will make further progress in promoting
economic development, improving standards of living
and accelerating the reconstruction process.
The activities carried out by terrorists in Iraq
claimed massive civilian casualties and posed a severe
threat to peace and security in Iraq and to regional and
international peace and security. China commends the
Government and the people of Iraq for their tireless
efforts to counter terrorism, and supports Iraq’s efforts
to bring terrorists to justice, in accordance with relevant
domestic laws.
China takes note of the first report of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (see S/2018/1031), and commends
the Team’s work. China supports the Investigative
Team in its efforts to protect the victims of terrorism
and cooperate with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and other mechanisms so as to
avoid the duplication of functions. It is our hope that
the Investigative Team will act consistent with the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and in strict compliance with resolution 2379
(2017) and the terms of reference in fulfilling its
mandate. We also hope that the Investigative Team,
in consultation with the Government of Iraq and all
relevant parties, will develop a detailed implementation
strategy and complete its initial deployment at an
early date, prioritizing the collection and analysis of
existing evidence and conducting targeted, field-based
investigations.

04/12/2018

to make further progress in international counterterrorism cooperation.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to offer our warmest wishes for success to you, Sir, and
your team as you assume the presidency of the Security
Council. You can depend on our full support.
I also thank and commend the delegation of China
for its conduct of the presidency last month with utmost
probity and professionalism.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru has
said in an official communiqué, we offer our deepest
condolences over the passing of former United States
President George H.W. Bush.
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefing delivered by Mr. Karim Khan.
We welcome his appointment and express our support
for the vision, priorities and initial actions of his
management.
Peru, a sponsor of resolution 2379 (2017), by
which the Council established the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, considers it essential to support Iraq in its
efforts with a view to guaranteeing access to justice
and contributing to reconciliation in that country.
We stress the importance of the Investigation Team
being recognized as an impartial and independent
actor, and that its action be guided by the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, including
international human rights law.

As noted in the report, the ability of the Investigative
Team to address challenges effectively will depend
on its ability to maintain the trust and support of the
people of Iraq. The Investigative Team should fully
respect Iraq’s sovereignty and jurisdiction over crimes
committed in its territory, thereby playing a positive
role in enhancing the capacities of the Iraqi Government
to hold terrorist groups accountable for their crimes.

We also stress the need to make available to the
Investigation Team the resources necessary for, among
other aspects related to the fulfilment of its mandate,
the physical and technological infrastructure required
to preserve the evidence it has been collecting. In that
connection, we stress the Special Adviser’s intention to
establish a specialized unit for the protection of victims
and witnesses, which we consider to be essential for the
fulfilment of his mandate.

The situation of international counter-terrorism
efforts remains serious as terrorist forces use diverse
means to conduct terrorist activities and spread
extremist ideas. The international community should
enhance its cooperation, unify its standards and adopt
concrete measures to resolutely fight all terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council. China stands ready
to continue to work with the international community

We consider it important that the Investigative
Team, the Iraqi authorities and civil society maintain
fluid cooperation, in line with the terms of reference
approved by the Council and with an eventual
headquarters agreement, and that they continue to
be assisted by the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs. Moreover, we consider it necessary for the
work of the Investigative Team to be consistent with

16/21

18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

the various entities of the United Nations system,
including the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, as well as with the CounterTerrorism Committee. We highlight the support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, which last
October facilitated the deployment of the Investigative
Team in Baghdad.
We must remember that, despite the evident
progress in the fight against Da’esh, the threat it
represents is still latent in new modalities. The work
of the Investigative Team in promoting the rule of law
and the fight against impunity is essential in order to
confront that threat more effectively. In this regard, in
addition to highlighting the progress made in the current
phase of gathering evidence, we note the desirability
of the Council’s promoting the cooperation required so
that the competent authorities of other countries and
supranational bodies can also enjoy access to them in
order to guarantee access to justice.
Mr. Gebru (Ethiopia): Let me join other members
of the Security Council in congratulating Côte d’Ivoire
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month, and we assure you, Sir, of Ethiopia’s support
and cooperation. We also congratulate China on the
successful completion of its work during its presidency
for the month of November.
We extend our sincere condolences to the United
States of America on the passing of former President
George H.W. Bush.
We thank Special Adviser Khan for his first
briefing on Da’esh accountability in Iraq. It was under
Ethiopia’s presidency that resolution 2379 (2017) was
adopted, with a view to ensuring the accountability of
members of Da’esh for their crimes in Iraq, including
cases that may amount to crimes against humanity. The
adoption of the resolution was an appropriate response
to the request made by the Government of Iraq calling
for the assistance of the international community in
ensuring the accountability of members of Da’esh for
the crimes they committed.
Through its commission of acts involving murder,
kidnapping, hostage-taking, suicide bombings and the
destruction of cultural heritage, Da’esh has committed
very serious crimes that may amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide. We will never
forget the loss of our compatriots who were mercilessly

S/PV. 8412

massacred by Da’esh in Libya, and that is one of the
reasons that we supported the adoption of resolution
2379 (2017): to hold members of Da’esh accountable for
the crimes committed in Iraq.
In that regard, we support the establishment of
the Investigative Team, headed by a Special Adviser,
to support Iraq’s efforts by collecting and preserving
evidence of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide committed by Da’esh.
We believe that that should be done with full respect for
the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes
committed on its territory.
We note that the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh formally began its work and submitted its
first report (see S/2018/1031) on the basis of resolution
2379 (2017). We also note that the Special Adviser
briefed the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. Furthermore, we note his
visit to Iraq and the series of engagements with senior
officials from the executive, legislative and judicial
branches of Government at various levels, as well as
with survivors, civil society groups and members of
different communities.
In the light of the severity of the crimes committed
by Da’esh and the magnitude of the challenge the
country faces, Iraq will need appropriate technical
support and capacity-building. It is important that
Member States, as well as regional and international
organizations, provide appropriate legal assistance and
capacity-building to the Government of Iraq in order
to strengthen its courts and judicial system. Let me
conclude by expressing our full support for the efforts
aimed at ensuring the accountability of Da’esh members
for all of the crimes they have committed, not only in
Iraq but also in other parts of the world.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to
join other delegations that have spoken before me in
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the entire
delegation of Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also wish to
take this opportunity to commend the delegation of
China for efficiently steering the work of the Council
during the month of November. We are grateful for

18-4130717/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

the report introduced by the Special Adviser and Head
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (S/2018/1031),
Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, to whom we express
our full support in the fulfilment of his mandate.
My delegation wishes to highlight the report
submitted by the Special Adviser on the progress made
in coordinating and establishing the Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, with a view
to fulfilling and implementing the mandate established
under resolution 2379 (2017). We encourage continuing
to work together with all of the institutions that form
the United Nations system, and especially continuing
to develop ties and good relations with the Government
and the people of Iraq.
Today Iraq has a new democratically elected
Government that must now confront the challenges
associated with the transition from a post-conflict
situation, which includes rebuilding practically the
entire country and, in particular, ensuring reconciliation
and judicial accountability. Nonetheless, Iraq continues
to face the threat posed by Da’esh, given that, despite
the defeat of that terrorist organization in large parts
of the country, it is still capable of perpetrating
asymmetrical attacks against the civilian population
and its infrastructure, as well as against the forces of
law and order. That has been proven by the attacks
reported by the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq against the populations in Baghdad, Ninawa and
Kirkuk, among others.
Furthermore, the discovery of more than 200
mass graves that could contain the remains of more
than 12,000 victims of Da’esh — mainly women,
children, people with disabilities and members of the
Iraqi forces — highlights the brutality and criminality
of that terrorist organization and the urgent need to
identify the perpetrators of those crimes so that they
can be held accountable for their actions. In that regard,
and taking into account the seriousness of the crimes
against humanity committed by Da’esh, we encourage
the Investigative Team to cooperate with and assist
the Government of Iraq in preserving the integrity of
those mass graves, with the objective of collecting and
preserving as much evidence as possible in order to help
carry out the investigations and corresponding judicial
processes that will guarantee that those violations do
18/21

04/12/2018

not go unpunished, as well as to identify the victims
and return their bodies to their families.
To that end, it is important that the Investigative
Team strengthen capacity-building in order to set up
genetic databases that will allow for the exhumation
and identification of the bodies of victims, which will
strengthen their investigative work. The development
and implementation of measures on the management
and stewardship of all of the evidence collected, as
well as the provision of protection and assistance to
survivors and witnesses, must comply with the highest
international standards.
It is also essential that the Investigative Team
develop synergies and work closely not only with the
different offices and agencies of the United Nations
system, but also with the various subsidiary bodies of
the Council, such as the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; and the CounterTerrorism Committee.
We reiterate that the work of the Investigative
Team in fulfilling its mandate should be carried out
while observing and respecting the sovereignty of Iraq
and maintaining its impartiality, independence and
credibility, so that the investigations supported by the
evidence obtained by the Team are able to meet the
highest criteria of justice.
Finally, it is important to bear in mind that policies
of regime change, interventionism and interference in
the internal affairs of States have been some of the main
causes of Government vacuums and have contributed to
the weakening of the forces of law and order, thereby
facilitating the emergence of terrorism and extremism
in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
I would like to express my condolences and extend
those of Mr. Alassane Ouattara, President of the
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire — who will be sitting here in
the Chamber tomorrow for the high-level debate — on
behalf of the Ivorian Government and its people, on the
death of George Herbert Walker Bush, the forty-first
President of the United States of America, who was one
of the most eminent members of the Security Council.
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

My delegation is grateful to Mr. Karim Asad
Ahmad Khan for the introduction of his report (see
S/2018/1031). The report provides information on the
arrangements that the Investigative Team intends to put
in place for the effective implementation of resolution
2379 (2017), of 21 September 2017. As this is the first
report submitted by Mr. Khan to the Council, Côte
d’Ivoire would like to take this opportunity to sincerely
congratulate him on his appointment to that post and
wish him every success in carrying out the duties
entrusted to him by the Secretary-General.
The recent discovery of 202 mass graves with
more than 12,000 bodies in the northern and western
provinces of Iraq, previously under the control of the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, testifies to the
cruelty of that terrorist group and calls on our Council
to consider the urgent need to operationalize the
Investigation Team. To that end, my country calls on
all Member States to show unfailing solidarity with the
Team so that it can effectively carry out its mission.
Despite the recent military setbacks in Iraq, Da’esh
continues to pose a serious threat to the country’s
stability and to international peace and security,
with more than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters from
approximately 100 countries, its new modus operandi
through the diversification of its financial resources,
the use of social media and the manipulation of local
tribes. Hence the urgent need to mobilize all efforts to
put an end to the activities of that terrorist group as soon
as possible, particularly through the implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to commend the efforts
made by the United Nations and the international
community to strengthen the means of combating
terrorism, which undermines the development efforts
of many States and affects the lives of thousands of
individuals. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the reforms undertaken to restructure and improve
the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture,
in particular through the establishment of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the adoption of resolution
2354 (2017), on the document entitled “Comprehensive
International Framework to Counter Terrorist
Narratives” (S/2017/375), together with guiding
principles and good practices to effectively combat the
means used by Da’esh and Al-Qaida to spread terrorism
throughout the world. My delegation would note the
Council’s responsibility in that regard and the need
for regional and international cooperation in the fight

S/PV. 8412

against Da’esh and its associated groups. Côte d’Ivoire
is determined, for its part, to work with all bilateral and
multilateral partners to eradicate that scourge.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to pay
tribute once again to the courage of the Iraqi security
and defence forces, which defeated Da’esh in 2017, and
congratulate the Iraqi authorities on the successful
holding of parliamentary elections on 12 May, which
resulted in the appointment of Mr. Barham Salih and
Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi, President of the Republic and
Prime Minister, respectively. In my country’s view,
those actions will enable Iraq to regain lasting peace
and stability in order to contribute to spreading peace
in the region and to better utilize its immense wealth.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like, at the outset, to congratulate the Republic
of Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to wish it every
success. We also thank the People’s Republic of China
for the wise manner in which it presided over the
Council last month.
My delegation would like to express its deepest
condolences to the United States delegation in New York,
the United States Administration and the American
people on the passing away of former President George
Herbert Walker Bush.
We also thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan,
Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, for his valuable briefing. We commend his
personal commitment to carry out his work with care
and determination under difficult circumstances, as
well as his tireless efforts to fulfil his mandate pursuant
to resolution 2379 (2017) and the terms of reference
according to the highest international standards.
We welcome the first report (see S/2018/1031) of the
Special Adviser on collecting, preserving and storing
evidence of crimes committed by terrorist group Da’esh,
in order to promote accountability and justice. The
international community is keen to provide assistance
to the Republic of Iraq in the post-Da’esh phase and
following the victories it achieved against Da’esh, as
evidenced by the unified international efforts to adopt

18-4130719/21

S/PV.8412

Threats to international peace and security

an international resolution to condemn and document
evidence of the crimes perpetrated by Da’esh in Iraq.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the United
Kingdom and other co-sponsors, in cooperation with
the Government of Iraq, in sponsoring the resolution.
Those efforts bore fruit, as evidenced in the adoption
of resolution 2379 (2017), which includes a request to
collect evidence of all acts committed by the Da’esh
terrorist organization in Iraq that amount to crimes
against humanity, genocide or war crimes.
Paragraph 2 of the resolution called for establishing
an international Investigative Team headed by a
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General to carry out
the functions of collecting, preserving and storing
evidence of the crimes of Da’esh and submitting same
to national Iraqi courts. That is in line with the content
of the resolution, which reaffirms full respect for the
for the sovereignty and legal and judicial jurisdiction
of Iraq. My country hopes that the Investigative Team
will achieve the desired results. We underscore that the
Government of Iraq has taken the necessary actions
and measures as swiftly as possible to facilitate the
establishment of the International Investigative Team.
We call on the international community and the
States Members of the United Nations to join efforts to
confront and contain the phenomenon of international
terrorism, which threatens international peace
and security, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations on the need for international cooperation to
combat threats to international peace and security.
The working mechanism of the Investigative Team,
pursuant to the resolution and the terms of reference,
is based on full respect for Iraq’s judicial jurisdiction,
and the resolution has set out a number of approaches to
achieve its objectives.
First, the Team shall collect, preserve and store
evidence of crimes committed by Da’esh in Iraq in
order to submit them to national Iraqi courts. It shall
ensure the broadest possible use of that evidence and
enable investigations by the competent Iraqi authorities
on crimes perpetrated by Da’esh. That evidence will
eventually be used in fair and independent criminal
proceedings conducted by the competent Iraqi courts.
The competent Iraqi authorities should be the primary
intended recipients of that evidence, as specified in the
terms of reference, and any other use of that evidence
shall be determined in agreement with the Government
of Iraq, on a case-by-case basis.
20/21

04/12/2018

In that regard, when it comes to the death penalty,
my Government believes that it is premature to talk
about that matter, especially as the Security Council
decided to review the mandate of the Special Adviser
and the Team after a period of two years. We reaffirm
that Iraq will exercise its sovereign right, pursuant to
article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. We reiterate what we said before the
Council on 13 November (see S/PV.8396) with regard to
judicial proceedings for terrorist crimes. They will be
carried out in accordance with the law and we will take
into consideration the right of the accused to defend and
appeal at all stages of the proceedings.
Secondly, resolution 2379 (2017) also underlines
that Member States on whose territory Da’esh has
committed acts that may amount to war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity may ask the
Investigative Team to collect evidence of such acts, but
only with the approval of the Security Council. The
Secretary-General may also establish separate terms of
reference with regard to the work of the Team in that
State.
Thirdly, the resolution reaffirms that the
Investigative Team will ensure that Iraqi experts benefit
from its expertise and will make every possible effort
to share knowledge with and assist the Government of
Iraq.
Fourthly, the Government of Iraq reaffirms the
impartiality and independence of the Investigative
Team pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017) and the terms
of reference that constitute the framework within
which the Team will operate, pursuant to the relevant
provisions of international law and the best practices of
the United Nations in that regard.
Fifthly, in order to ensure that the Government
of Iraq will address the outcomes and results of the
resolution in an optimal manner, we reaffirm the need
for Member States and regional and international
organizations to provide appropriate legal assistance
and capacity-building in order to strengthen the courts
and judicial system of Iraq, pursuant to resolution 2379
(2017).
Sixthly, Iraq calls on Member States and regional
and international organizations to provide their
full support to the Investigative Team — including
financial support, services and equipment — in order
to enable the Team to carry out its work. In that regard,
we commend the contributions of the United Kingdom,
18-41307

04/12/2018

Threats to international peace and security

the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the State of Qatar,
as well as the contribution announced today by the
United States, to endow the Team trust fund. We call
on Member States to support the Team so that it can
carry out its mandate and achieve the political objective
for which it was established.
In conclusion, we hope that the Investigative
Team will work within the approaches and the terms
of reference contained in the resolution, while fully

S/PV. 8412

respecting the sovereignty and judicial system of Iraq.
We call once again on Member States to swiftly meet
the financial requirements cited by the Head of the Team
in his report to the Fifth Committee so that the Team
can fulfil its mandate within the period established by
the resolution. We wish the Head of the Team and its
members every success.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

18-4130721/21
