S/2017/824

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 52 of Security Council
resolution 2348 (2017). It covers major developments that have occurred in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the issuance of my previous report, of
30 June 2017 (S/2017/565). The report describes progress in the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mi ssion in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); provides an overview of political
developments following my report of 15 August on the implementation of the
Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement of 31 December 2016
(see S/2017/712); provides updates on the implementation of recommendations to
adjust the Mission’s posture with respect to supporting the political transition, its
preparedness to address security risks and to monitor and report on human rights
violations and abuses; and outlines the assessment of the performance of
MONUSCO uniformed personnel in protecting civilians.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The implementation of the political agreement of 31 December 2016 continued
to be characterized by significant divisions among its signatories. As attention has
shifted from the establishment and operationalization of inclusive transitional
institutions to the organization of elections, the Independent National Electoral
Commission indicated that holding elections by December 2017, as stipulated in the
agreement, might not be possible for technical reasons. Against this background, the
climate of political uncertainty that had marked the end of Joseph Kabila’s se cond
and final term as President in December 2016 is gradually re -emerging.
3.
On 2 August 2017, a delegation of the opposition platform, Rassemblement
des forces politiques et sociales de la République démocratique du Congo acquises
au changement, submitted to the President of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, Corneille Nangaa, a memorandum, in which the delegation, inter alia,
requested the publication of the electoral calendar by 1 September. The President of
the Commission informed the delegation that an electoral calendar would be

17-16817 (E)

051017

*1716817*

S/2017/824

published by the end of August. However, in a subsequent intervention on social
media, Mr. Nangaa indicated that the date of the publication of the electoral
calendar would be communicated following a joint assess ment by the Commission,
the Government and the National Council for Monitoring the Agreement and the
Electoral Process.
4.
From 28 to 31 August, in Kananga, Kasai Central Province, the Independent
National Electoral Commission convened a meeting of representatives of the
aforementioned organs to assess the electoral process and make recommendations
prior to the publication of the electoral calendar. Participants included Mr. Nangaa,
the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior, Emmanuel Ramazani Sh adary,
on behalf of the Government, and Adolphe Lumanu, a member of the Majorité
présidentielle party and Vice-President of the National Council for Monitoring the
Agreement and the Electoral Process. Members of Parliament, civil society
representatives, members of the Conseil supérieur de l’audiovisuel et de la
communication, the Ambassador of Zimbabwe to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and representatives of Zambia, South Africa, the African Union and the
International Organization of la Francophonie also attended the meeting.
MONUSCO participated in the meeting as an observer. In the final communiqué of
the meeting, issued on 31 August, it was noted that the security situation in the
provinces of Kasai and Kasai Central and the territories of Luilu a nd Kamiji in
Lomami Province had improved; that the training of local Commission agents, the
deployment of registration material and voter registration in those areas were to
commence on 4 September; that Parliament needed to urgently adopt the requisite
electoral legislation and the draft organic law on the organization and functioning of
the National Council during the ordinary session scheduled to begin on
15 September; and that a realistic electoral calendar would be published without
further delay.
5.
On 9 September, the President chaired an inter-institutional meeting in Kinshasa
to assess progress in the electoral process. The President of the Independent
National Electoral Commission explained that, while approximately 99 per cent of
the estimated electorate had already been registered, the lack of the requisite
legislation, logistical means and funding impeded further progress on the electoral
process. Mr. Nangaa affirmed that the diaspora would be given the opportunity to
register, adding that some technical and financial issues had to be solved first. He
reiterated the Commission’s intention to publish a realistic electoral calendar in the
near future, which would take into account the technical, operational and financial
aspects of organizing the elections.
6.
Political demonstrations continued, with protests and general strikes remaining
the main mobilization tools of the Rassemblement. The Rassemblement and its civil
society allies called for a general strike on 8 and 9 August. The strike was mo stly
observed in Kinshasa and Uvira, and partially in Goma, Matadi and Mbuji -Mayi,
but not in other provinces. Pre-emptive deployments of the Congolese National
Police were observed in several major urban centres. Continuing restrictions on civil
and political liberties, including a partial interruption of social media, and the weak
mobilization capacity of the Rassemblement contributed to the limited observation
of the general strike.
7.
On 8 August, the President of the Rassemblement, Félix Tshisekedi,
encouraged the Congolese population to prepare for civil disobedience “until
victory”, adding that it was time for the people to overthrow the “irresponsible
regime”. On 9 August, the Groupe des sept partis politiques subplatform of the
Rassemblement called on civil society actors to mobilize throughout the country by
organizing acts of civil disobedience starting on 1 October if by that time the
Independent National Electoral Commission had not convened the electorate for
2/17

17-16817

S/2017/824

presidential elections. On 20 August, the Rassemblement adopted a road map of
action towards the full implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016,
including the convocation of the electorate by the end of September for elections by
December and the subsequent departure of President Kabila.
8.
Meanwhile, on 10 August, an ad hoc working group composed of prominent
civil society organizations issued its sixth report on the implementation of the
agreement of 31 December 2016. In the report, the working group noted the lack of
political will to implement the agreement and cited the shared responsibility of the
signatories for the political crisis, noting the dominance of the ruling majority on
the political scene, a divided opposition and a marginalized civil society. The
working group underlined the need to adopt a consensual electoral timeline, in
accordance with the political agreement, prioritizing presidential elections. On
18 August, 32 representatives of civil society organizations met in Paris and signed
a “Manifesto of the Congolese Citizen”, calling upon the Congolese people to take
non-violent action to force President Kabila to step down if elections are not held by
December 2017. Leaders of the Rassemblement expressed support for the manifesto.
9.
On 21 August, Mr. Tshisekedi met the former governor of Katanga Province
and aspiring presidential candidate, Moïse Katumbi, in New York. In a subsequent
media interview, both politicians underlined that the agreement of 31 December
2016 was the only way forward and rejected any possibility of a third dialogue.
Both strongly refuted reports of the possible appointment of Mr. Tshisekedi to the
Government as Prime Minister.
10. In the period under review, progress was made on updating the voter register.
As at 10 September, the Independent National Electoral Commission had registered
over 41 million voters; women represented 48 per cent of registered voters. On
4 September, voter registration training began in Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces,
and in the Kamiji and Luilu territories of Lomami Province. On 12 September,
30 voter registration centres opened in the cities of Tshikapa, Kasai Province, and
Kananga, Kasai Central Province.
11. While progress on the presidential, national legislative and provincial legislative
elections foreseen in the political agreement remained slow, the Independent
National Electoral Commission organized partial gubernatorial elections, following
a wave of no-confidence motions tabled in several provincial assemblies. On
26 August, a first round of partial gubernatorial elections, through indirect voting by
the provincial assemblies, was held in eight provinces: Bas-Uélé, Haut-Katanga,
Haut-Lomami, Kwilu, South Kivu, Sud-Ubangi, Tshopo and Tshuapa. A second
round was held in three provinces on 29 August. Candidates of the Majorité
présidentielle party and independent candidates reportedly sponsored by the
Majorité présidentielle prevailed in seven of the eight provinces.
12. The multi-partner basket support fund for the Projet d’appui au cycle électoral
au Congo, managed by the United Nations Development Programme, remains
funded at only 6 per cent of the $123.3 million required, in part owing to donor
concerns regarding uncertainties surrounding the political transition.
13. MONUSCO continues to support the National Oversight Mechanism in the
implementation of national commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. Th e
Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to stress the need for steady progress
on both national and regional commitments by all signatories. My report on the
implementation of the Framework (S/2017/825) provides further details on progress
on those commitments.

17-16817

3/17

S/2017/824

Economic developments
14. The downward macroeconomic trend persisted, with high inflation and a
depreciation of the Congolese franc by 27 per cent since January 2017. However,
the Banque centrale du Congo managed to stabilize the exchange rate at 1,560
Congolese francs to the dollar by late July. In a letter sent on 4 July to the
diplomatic missions of some Western countries and international institutions, the
Prime Minister, Bruno Tshibala, asked for international financial assistance to
overcome the economic crisis. The country continued to experience diminished
purchasing power due to high inflation, which spilled over into labour unrest.
Following a strike on 21 July by medical personnel in Kinshasa, the Conseil des
professeurs d’université au Congo initiated an unlimited strike on 28 July,
demanding the readjustment of their salaries to the current exchange rate, and
similar action was announced by primary and secondary school teachers. On
17 August, the Prime Minister concluded an agreement with the Intersyndicale
nationale de la fonction publique to set the exchange rate for public sector salaries
at 1,130 Congolese francs to the dollar, as compared with the previous rate of 930
francs. On 14 August, during a Council of Ministers meeting chaired by the
President, the Government announced a series of measures aimed at improving the
collection of State revenues and reducing customs fraud and tax evasion.

B.

Security situation
15. Against the backdrop of an uncertain and complex political transition, the
security situation deteriorated further in many areas of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, with a major trend: an increase in the targeting of security forces, mainly
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC), by Mai-Mai
groups. In North Kivu, there were repeated attacks by Mai -Mai groups on FARDC
positions amid continuing violence between Hutu and Nande communities during
the reporting period. The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) also attempted to overrun
some FARDC positions. In South Kivu, Mai-Mai groups staged attacks against
FARDC troops in several strategic locations in late June. In Tanganyika Province,
there were renewed clashes between Twa and Luba militia amid a possible
resurgence of Mai-Mai Kata-Katanga and emerging splits between various Twa
militia factions. The western part of the country also remained volatile, with a major
clash between the Bundu Dia Mayala politico-religious sect and security forces in
Kinshasa and Kongo Central and sporadic violence in the three provinces of the
Kasai region, notably clashes between Kamuina Nsapu militia and security forces,
and between ethnic militia groups.
16. The situation in some border areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remained of concern, with reports of South Sudanese armed groups taking positions
on the border between Haut-Uélé Province and South Sudan, as well as reports of an
incursion of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) into north -eastern Ituri in
late August. Meanwhile, refugees continued to arrive in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, fleeing conflict in the Central African Republic and South Sudan. The
situation in Kasai Province also contributed to movements of refugees from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Angola, with a few spontaneous returns.
Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
17. In North Kivu Province, FARDC troops were intensively targeted by armed
groups and sustained heavy losses. In Rutshuru territory, on 6 July, Nyatura attacked
FARDC troops, killing four soldiers and injuring three others. On 11 July, Mai -Mai
Charles attacked FARDC positions in Nyamilima, killing five soldiers and injuring

4/17

17-16817

S/2017/824

eight others and two civilians. On 29 July, Mai -Mai Charles ambushed FARDC
troops in Nyamilima, leaving six soldiers dead and 11 wounded. In another ambush
on 2 August, Mai-Mai Mazembe elements shot a high-ranking FARDC officer.
Other armed group alliances, notably the Mouvement national pour le renouveau,
have been systematically targeting FARDC and national police positions in the
Grand Nord of North Kivu. In support to efforts by FARDC to regain control of the
situation, MONUSCO conducted patrols in the affected areas and increased
collaboration with the local authorities and civil society through the community
alert networks.
18. Similarly, in Masisi territory, the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain attacked two FARDC positions, killing two soldiers. MONUSCO
intensified its patrols and encouraged FARDC to reinforce its positions. In Walikale,
on 16 July, a coalition of Alliance, Conseil national pour le renouveau et l a démocratie
and Nyatura elements attacked an FARDC camp, making an incursion in western
Kitchanga, prompting the population to seek refuge around a MONUSCO base.
19. Ethnic killings and abductions were also recurrent. In Rutshuru territory,
Nyatura abducted 14 Nande civilians on 3 July. In Masisi territory, Nyatura elements
beheaded a Hunde man at his farm on 8 July. Nyatura also abducted a Hutu chief in
Tongo on 12 July, and nine civilians in Kanyobagonga on 13 July. MONUSCO
successfully facilitated talks between Nande and Hutu communities and managed, in
collaboration with FARDC, to secure the release of all the abductees.
20. In Beni territory, the lull in brutal attacks by ADF on civilians continued.
There was, however, an increase in the number of abductions of civilians and
attacks on the armed forces by ADF. On 12 August, alleged ADF elements, well
equipped and wearing new FARDC uniforms, attacked four FARDC positions
approximately 30 km from Oicha. At least 14 FARDC elements were killed and
three wounded. The assailants also took away FARDC weaponry. The change in the
modus operandi of ADF, from avoiding contact with FARDC to direct attacks on
troops, could be connected to a shared interest between some ADF commanders and
resurgent Mai-Mai groups, whose recent focus has been on attacks on State armed
forces and symbols. On 17 September, one Tanzanian peacekeeper was killed and
another injured in clashes between a joint FARDC-MONUSCO patrol and suspected
ADF elements in Mamudioma.
21. Meanwhile, security concerns remained high in the town of Beni and
Butembo. On 16 July, unidentified armed men kidnapped two Catholic priests near
Butembo and demanded a ransom of $15,000 for their release. In addition, on
7 August, Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové abducted some 65 civilians near
Lubero. In Lubero territory, Mai-Mai groups were increasingly active; most notably,
clashes between Mai-Mai Mazembe and Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové
displaced over 16,000 people. From 29 July to 4 August, in Kirumba, a delegat ion
of the provincial government, with MONUSCO support, engaged without success in
talks with the two armed groups.
22. In South Kivu Province, the resurgence of Mai-Mai Yakutumba and its
temporary capture of FARDC positions near the gold mining town of M isisi in late
June led to the displacement of 80,000 people. FARDC managed to repulse the
armed group with the support of MONUSCO. Mai-Mai Yakutumba has, however,
consolidated its position and control over a significant stretch of the shoreline of
Lake Tanganyika, engaging in piracy operations and accelerating smuggling
activities, which further contribute to strengthening the armed group. The Mission
dispatched two standing combat deployments to support the protection of civilians
and facilitated the deployment of the national police in the area.

17-16817

5/17

S/2017/824

23. Along the border with Burundi, FARDC troops arrested around 50 foreign
combatants, originating from the Forces nationales de libération du Burundi, the
Forces républicaines du Burundi and the Résistance pour un état de droit au
Burundi, which are loosely aligned with Congolese Banyamulenge Tutsi “Gumino”
fighters in the Hauts Plateaux region of South Kivu. This network of armed groups
is competing with Mai-Mai Yakutumba for control of gold mining deposits in the
south of the province.
24. In other developments in South Kivu, on 28 July, 37 prisoners escaped from
the Bukavu central prison following the explosion of a hand grenade. MONUSCO
assisted the authorities in securing the perimeter and preventing further escapes.
25. On 15 September, Congolese security forces forcibly repatriated four
Burundian asylum seekers accused of conducting illegal armed patrols around
refugee sites in Kamanyola, Walungu territory, South Kivu. On the same date,
Burundian asylum seekers and refugees protested against the repatriation in front of
a post of intelligence services in Kamanyola. One FARDC soldier was killed in
clashes between the refugees and security forces. The armed forces and national
police opened fire on the protesters, resulting in 39 refugees killed and over 117
others injured. Six FARDC soldiers and four national police officers were also
injured. Refugees sought shelter around a MONUSCO forward base in the area, and
the Mission provided medical assistance to the wounded. The authorities opened an
investigation into the incident. MONUSCO is also conducting an inquiry into the
response of its peacekeepers, and the Security Council will be informed of its
outcome.
26. In Tanganyika Province, the threat of Mai-Mai Yakutumba in the Bendera area,
near the border with South Kivu, decreased following operations by FARDC,
supported by MONUSCO. However, the level of violence in several areas of the
province remains of concern. The conflict between Luba and Twa militias escal ated
in Kalemie territory, especially in Lambo Kilela, Lukwangulu and Mulonge, where
73 people died and 25 were injured during clashes. Twa militiamen allegedly raped
32 women between June and August 2017 in Nyunzu territory. Mai -Mai KataKatanga elements formerly loyal to the warlord Gédéon Kyungu Mutanga, who
surrendered in 2016, are mobilizing from their locations in Mitwaba, Moba and
Pweto against government security forces. Mai-Mai Kata-Katanga elements are also
mobilizing against the Twa near Moba, signalling a deepening level of complexity
and interwoven community conflicts emerging in the province. The increased resort
to force by provincial authorities in addressing the Twa -Luba conflict has
compounded the humanitarian situation. By the end of July, more than 565,000
people had been displaced in the province, representing an increase of 60,000
people compared with the first quarter of the year. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees estimates that 52 per cent of the internall y
displaced people are women.
27. In Ituri Province, the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) remained
the greatest threat to civilians, accounting for 90 per cent of human rights abuses
documented in July in South Irumu territory. A joint MON USCO-FARDC operation
from 13 to 23 July resulted in the killing of two senior FR PI officers. On 14 July, in
Mambasa territory, an unidentified Mai-Mai group killed four rangers of the Okapi
nature reserve escorting foreign journalists, who escaped unharmed . Following a
rise in violent intercommunal incidents and land disputes, Hema and Lendu leaders
in Djugu territory agreed on 14 July to establish a commission, overseen by the
provincial government and supported by MONUSCO, to address the sources of
tension.

6/17

17-16817

S/2017/824

28. In Haut-Uélé Province, the withdrawal of United States special forces and the
drawdown of the African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army have made it difficult for FARDC to
repel infiltration by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) from the Central African
Republic. In July, LRA systematically attacked and abducted civilians in artisanal
mining areas close to main roads and towns. MONUSCO supported FARDC in
conducting enhanced patrols. As a result, LRA partially withdrew towards the Central
African Republic, but maintained a reduced presence west of Garamba National
Park. MONUSCO is also investigating reports of the presence of South Sudanese
armed groups in different locations in Haut-Uélé and the northern part of Ituri, as
well as the reported incursion of SPLA elements into northern Ituri in late August.
Western Democratic Republic of the Congo
29. There was a relative lull in fighting in the Kasai region during the reporting
period, despite periodic instances of serious violence, such as in Tshikapa, Kasai
Province, and in the Luiza territory of Kasai Central Province, and women and
children continued to account for a significant portion of the victims. The violence
in the Kasai region has resulted in over 1.4 million internally displaced people, most
of whom are women and children, and 31,700 Congolese refugees in Angola, some
of whom have been gradually returning. These returnees have, at times, provoked
violent community tensions, given the increasingly ethnically charged environment
in the Kasai region. Operations by national security forces continued in territories
across four provinces: in the Luebo and Kamonia territories of Kasai, in the
Dimbelenge and Luiza territories of Kasai Central, in Kabeya-Kamwanga, Miabi
and Tshilenge in Kasai Oriental and in Mwene -Ditu in Lomami. In Kalala-Diboko,
Luiza territory, 67 Kamuina Nsapu elements and civilians were allegedly killed
during operations by national security forces.
30. Ethnically based violence continued, with clashes between Kamuina Nsapu,
some of whom have an allegiance to the Luba and Lulua communities, and the
emerging Bana Mura militia, generally comprising individuals from the Tshokwe,
Pende and Tetela ethnic groups. Clashes took place in the Kamonia and Luiza
territories of Kasai Central. The Bana Mura militia, which has received some
support from prominent political figures in Kasai, was allegedly armed and
supported by national security forces and local chiefs. The risk of spillo ver of ethnic
tensions from the Kasai provinces remains acute, with continued clashes between
various ethnic militias, initially triggered by the original conflict involving Kamuina
Nsapu, which have disrupted the delicate ethnic balance in the region.
31. On 19 September, the President chaired the opening ceremony of a three -day
reconciliation forum for the Kasai region, which was attended by several Congolese
stakeholders. Some opposition members declined to take part in the forum, arguing
that identifying the perpetrators of the violence in the region was the prerequisite
for commencing a reconciliation process.
32. Following the Makala prison break in Kinshasa on 17 May, insecurity has
increased, not only in Kinshasa, but also in neighbouring areas. On 14 July, unknown
elements attacked the Kinshasa Central Market, killing its administrator and four
police officers. MONUSCO documented several other attacks on detention facilities
attached to tribunals and some police stations in Kinshasa after the prison break.
33. On 7 August, Bundu Dia Mayala elements carried out attacks and
demonstrations in Kinshasa and Kongo Central, targeting sensitive installations, but
were successfully repulsed by national security forces. MONUSCO documented at
least 43 killings in different locations in Kinshasa in this context.

17-16817

7/17

S/2017/824

Humanitarian situation
34. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, approximately 8.5 million persons,
including 5.5 million children, are in need of humanitarian assistance — a 16 per
cent increase since January 2017. The number of internally displaced people has
reached 3.8 million, and close to 621,700 Congolese nationals have sought refuge in
countries of the subregion. Moreover, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
currently hosts some 541,400 refugees from neighbouring countries. Some
7.7 million people face acute hunger, a 30 per cent increase since 2016, and 43 per
cent of children under the age of 5 are chronically malnourished.
35. In the Kasai region, some 2.8 million people are fa cing critical levels of food
insecurity, an increase of 600 per cent between June 2016 and June 2017. Over
1.5 million children in the Kasai region continue to endure the risks of violence,
displacement and loss of access to health and education. The prosp ect of waterborne
diseases in the upcoming rainy season remains a serious risk for the displaced
population. As of September, 31,700 refugees from the Kasai region were registered
in Angola. The security situation in the region has significantly impeded
humanitarian access, affecting both the delivery of assistance and the verification of
information. Agencies are scaling up and prioritizing the response in the region.
However, as at 25 August, the total funding received for the Kasai response stood at
$23.7 million, representing 37 per cent of the $64.5 million requested in the flash
appeal launched for the complex emergency in the Kasai region. As of September,
funding for the humanitarian response in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remained at 27 per cent of the $812.6 million needed for 2017.
Human rights situation
36. MONUSCO documented 1,329 human rights violations and abuses committed
from June to August, compared with the 1,444 incidents recorded during the period
from March to May. About 73 per cent of those violations and abuses occurred in
conflict-affected provinces. Armed groups perpetrated 533 human rights abuses,
while State agents were responsible for 796 violations, with 27 per cent attributed to
FARDC and 24 per cent to the national police. At least 347 victims of extrajudicial
and arbitrary killings, including 31 women and 58 children, were registered during
the period under review. Armed groups killed 208 people, including 23 women and
12 children, while State agents killed 139 people, including 8 women and 46 children.
37. Democratic space continued to shrink, with violations of civil and political
rights, particularly the freedoms of peaceful assembly, of opinion and of expression.
MONUSCO documented 247 cases of human rights violations linked to restrictions
of democratic space throughout the country from June to August, compared with
245 in the previous three-month period. Of those, five human rights violations were
perpetrated in the context of voter registration operations, b y national police force
officers assigned to secure registration centres, mainly relating to rapes of women
trying to register.
38. Some journalists, political opponents and civil society activists remained the
targets of threats, harassment and violence. Demonstrations staged by civil society
on 31 July against delays in the publication of the electoral calendar were banned by
local authorities in at least five localities, including Beni and Butembo, North Kivu
Province, Bunia, Ituri Province, Lubumbashi, Haut-Katanga Province, and MbujiMayi, Kasai Oriental Province, amid heavy deployment of national security forces.
At least 131 persons, including several journalists, were arrested throughout the
country. Five of them remain in detention. On 7 August, prior to the two-day general
strike announced by the Rassemblement, the use of social media was restricted until
11 August.
8/17

17-16817

S/2017/824

39. MONUSCO continued to address serious crimes committed by armed groups
and security forces against the civilian population through its Prosecution Support
Cells. During the reporting period, support to military justice from such cells
resulted in 23 convictions, including that of Jules Becker, an FARDC colonel
sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment for war crimes.
40. Joint investigation missions continued in some parts of the country and
resulted in the indictment of at least 50 FARDC soldiers and 14 national police
force officers for their involvement in human rights violations and war crimes.
However, in the Kasai region, procedural concerns continued to hamper
MONUSCO support to military justice in ongoing investigations. On 4 and 5 July,
MONUSCO and national authorities jointly identified an additional 38 mass graves
in the Kasai region, bringing the total number of mass graves discov ered since the
beginning of the conflict in the region to 87.
41. MONUSCO continued to provide support to national security forces, in line
with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United
Nations security forces. Steps are under way, at Headquarters, to review that support
and adjust it as appropriate, especially in view of the increasing involvement of
FARDC and the national police in human rights violations.
Sexual violence
42. At least 195 persons, including 120 women, 27 men and 48 children, were
reported as victims of conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by State agents
(20 per cent of all reported conflict-related sexual violence) and armed groups
(80 per cent) between June and August, which represents an increase compared with
the last reporting period. Among State agents, members of FARDC remained the
main perpetrators, with about 18 per cent of violations. Inter -ethnic violence in
Tanganyika Province between Twa and Luba communities resulted in at least 99 of
those victims of sexual violence, including the 27 men.
Child protection
43. Through the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict, MONUSCO ver ified 613 such violations in
conflict-affected areas from June to August, an increase compared with 527 during
the previous reporting period. A total of 403 children, including 24 girls, escaped or
were separated from armed groups. The main armed groups that recruited and used
children were Kamuina Nsapu (102 cases), Mai-Mai Mazembe (68 cases), Raia
Mutomboki (33 cases) and Twa militia (31 cases).
44. MONUSCO also verified the killing of at least 21 children and the maiming of
23; most of those violations were perpetrated by FRPI (8 killed and 6 maimed).
Moreover, there were 51 documented cases of sexual violence against girls,
committed by both State agents (FARDC: 14 cases; national police: 3 cases) and
armed groups (Mai-Mai Simba: 13 cases, FRPI: 7 cases, Nduma défense du CongoRenové: 7 cases). A total of 79 children were documented as having been abducted,
most often by Mai-Mai Simba (21 cases) for purposes of recruitment. The Mission
also verified 22 attacks against schools, FRPI having conducted half of those
attacks, while FARDC was responsible for attacks against four schools.
Regional developments
45. A number of regional and subregional meetings of significance for the political
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were held duri ng the reporting
period.

17-16817

9/17

S/2017/824

46. In his closing statement to the thirty-seventh Ordinary Summit of the Heads of
State and Government of the Southern African Development Community (SADC),
held on 19 and 20 August in Pretoria, the new Chairperson, the President of South
Africa, Jacob Zuma, emphasized that the Summit had taken note of the fact that it
might not be possible to hold elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
December 2017, owing to a number of challenges. The SADC Heads of State and
Government urged the Independent National Electoral Commission to publish a
revised electoral calendar and approved the appointment by SADC of a Special
Envoy to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Prime Minister of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who represented his country at the meeting,
welcomed the support of SADC for the publication of a realistic electoral calendar.
Several Congolese opposition figures and civil society actors criticized SADC for
what some described as a lack of solidarity with the Congolese people on the part of
the organization.
47. On 23 August, in Addis Ababa, the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union held a session on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Peace and Security Council welcomed the decisions taken by the Heads of State and
Government of SADC at the thirty-seventh Ordinary Summit, including the
assessment that it would be unrealistic to hold elections by December; called on the
international community to provide the Independent Na tional Electoral Commission
with the necessary resources; reaffirmed its commitment to the full implementation
of the political agreement of 31 December 2016; and underlined that unilateral
decisions to impose sanctions on personalities in the Democratic R epublic of the
Congo would not create an environment conducive to the resolution of the crisis in
the country.
48. On 26 July, in Kinshasa, the Minister of Public Security of Burundi, Alain
Guillaume Bunyoni, held talks with senior Congolese government officials on
possible joint strategies to curb insecurity along the border of Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. From 7 to 10 September, the Technical Support
Committee of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework visited eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to assess progress on the neutralization of
negative forces and the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of foreign combatants, including the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), and in finding a suitable solution for the relocation
of elements of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A in Opposition), temporarily accommodated in a MONUSCO camp near
Goma, North Kivu, and the repatriation and reintegration of former Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) members still cantoned in Rwanda and Uganda. The Technical
Support Committee formulated recommendations, which are mentioned in my report
on the implementation of the Framework.

III. Deployment of MONUSCO and implementation of
its mandate
A.

Progress in implementing recommendations on adjustments of
Mission priorities, posture and presence
49. MONUSCO continued to adjust its posture and presence, in order to further
align its footprint with the priorities laid out in resolution 2348 (2017), to seek
greater efficiencies, and to accommodate budget reductions decided by the General
Assembly for the 2017/18 financial year.

10/17

17-16817

S/2017/824

50. In improving the Mission’s footprint, flexibility and mobility, one key change
was the expansion and redrawing of the sector boundaries of the MONUSCO force
to enable brigades in eastern provinces to redeploy and intervene more flexibly
across both eastern and western provinces, by relying, inter alia, on rapidly
deployable battalions. MONUSCO also took measures to enhance the mobility of
the Intervention Brigade from its position in Beni, with various Intervention Brigade
companies able to conduct operations throughout eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
51. MONUSCO continued to reinforce its presence in the three Kasai provinces,
by bolstering the field office in Kananga, Kasai Central, and the sub -office in
Mbuji-Mayi, Kasai Oriental, with civilian staff redeployed from elsewhere in the
Mission area, and by establishing a sub-office and a subsector of the United Nations
police force in Tshikapa, Kasai. Plans are also under way, in consultation with the
concerned police-contributing countries, to relocate one formed police unit from the
east to Kananga. The MONUSCO force has increased its presence in the Kasai
region through the deployment of three companies in Kananga, Mbuji-Mayi and
Tshikapa, enabling the rapid redeployment of five temporary standing combat
deployments, if required.
52. The Mission also made significant adjustments in the light of reductions in its
troop ceiling, as requested in resolution 2348 (2017) and in the light of the reduced
budget. MONUSCO and Headquarters developed a plan of reductions that would
best allow the Mission to continue prioritizing both the protection of civilians and
the implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016 and the electoral process
as efficiently as possible. As a result, MONUSCO has repatriated 727 troops from
North Kivu and is in the process of repatriating an addi tional 960 troops by
1 October. Further, MONUSCO seeks to generate three additional companies of
special forces trained in jungle warfare from Intervention Brigade troop contributing countries, to replace three companies being repatriated by November.
The Mission is also generating savings by retaining a smaller footprint of individual
police officers and civilian staff and through significant reductions across
operational categories. These operational reductions include cuts to air support and
cuts in fuel and rations support to national security forces.
53. There was no progress in the deployment, through inter -mission cooperation,
of two additional formed police units.
54. The recently concluded strategic review of MONUSCO (see S/2017/826) will
present further recommendations on adjustments to the Mission, which will inform
the Security Council’s decision on the present report and further discussion on the
strategic dialogue with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and on the exit strategy of MONUSCO.

B.

Assessment of the performance of uniformed Mission personnel in
protecting civilians
55. During the reporting period, there were no instances of underperformance by
the MONUSCO force. This Mission continued to monitor and evaluate on a regular
basis the performance of the force in identifying areas requiring improvement.
56. A majority of the formed police units were found to be operationally ready and
appropriately trained. An evaluation conducted in July showed th at a number of
formed police units were operating with unserviceable or expired equipment
provided by the police-contributing countries concerned. Aside from the issue of the

17-16817

11/17

S/2017/824

unserviceability of equipment, the formed police units were assessed to be
performing generally well.

C.

Preparations to address risks linked to the electoral process
57. MONUSCO continued its efforts to prevent and mitigate the risk of violence
linked to the electoral process, including the risk of widespread violence in urban
areas, maintaining and revising, where appropriate, its local protection contingency
plans. The Mission retains, however, limited capacity to respond in the event of
widespread violence, particularly in urban areas. At present, MONUSCO has two
force infantry companies and two formed police units in Kinshasa. In urban areas
with both force and formed police unit presence, the Mission continues to conduct
joint patrols, with intensifying tempo and reach during moments of anticipated and
actual unrest. The focus remains on prevention, as no additional MONUSCO troops
or police officers would be able to significantly change the situation in the case of a
major deterioration in security.
58. The Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region continued their good offices engagement
with national political actors and key regional partners to encourage the swift
implementation of the agreement of 31 December 2016, which would minimize
further delays in the electoral process and the risk of further violence. MONUSCO
and the Office of the Special Envoy also continued to advocate with the authorities
for the swift implementation of the confidence-building measures enshrined in the
political agreement, which would contribute to the creation of an environment
conducive to the organization of free, fair, credible and peaceful elections.
59. MONUSCO continued its efforts to prevent electoral violence by reinforcing
the capacity of its partners, including national authorities and security forces, to
promote and protect fundamental freedoms and monitor human rights violations and
restrictions on democratic space.

D.

Protection of civilians and neutralization of armed groups
60. To mitigate the reduction of the footprint of the MONUSCO force as a result
of the repatriation of one battalion, the Mission is adjusting its protection of
civilians strategy, shifting from a “protection-by-presence” to a “protection-byprojection” approach, mostly in areas where MON USCO bases are closing. In this
context, MONUSCO reinforced its community alert networks, with an emphasis on
Kasai Central. Community alert networks transmitted, on average, 486 early
warning alerts per month, an average monthly increase of 170 alerts com pared with
the previous reporting period. Of all such alerts, 85 per cent resulted in a response
by the Government and/or MONUSCO to protect civilians. Those not responded to
were either in areas with limited State security deployment and capacity, or in a reas
with difficult access.
61. The concept of protection through projection currently under development
requires a whole-of-mission effort. In North Kivu, MONUSCO relocated one
Intervention Brigade company from Eringeti to Sake to increase its use through out
the country. MONUSCO also conducted a pilot operation led by the rapidly
deployable battalion of North Kivu, with the involvement of civilian teams,
including women, with a view to testing the type of operations that could be
undertaken in areas vacated by the repatriated battalion. Furthermore, community
liaison assistants are now embedded in standing combat deployments and rapidly
deployable battalions.

12/17

17-16817

S/2017/824

62. One Intervention Brigade company, one company from the Western Brigade
and two companies from the rapidly deployable battalion of South Kivu were
deployed to the Kasai region. United Nations police reinforced their presence in the
Kasai region from 3 to 36 officers. In areas where MONUSCO has established a
presence, a decline in protection threats and incidents was reported, while schools
and health centres reopened and 70 per cent of the displaced population returned.
63. In Kasai Central Province, MONUSCO continued to support mediation efforts
aimed at the peaceful resolution of customary conflicts, through capacity-building
workshops with the Direction générale des affaires coutumières. MONUSCO also
began rolling out its child protection action plan for Kasai through training sessions
for FARDC on age assessments and the screening of new recruits.
64. In Tanganyika Province, the Mission supported efforts by provincial
authorities and communities to set up a baraza, or intercommunal peace dialogue, to
prevent violence between Twa and Luba communities in the Kabalo, Kalemie,
Kongolo, Manono and Nyunzu territories.
65. From 12 to 22 July, MONUSCO conducted a joint investigation with judicial
authorities following reports of human rights abuses by FDLR against civilians in
Bunyakiri, South Kivu Province. The Mission confirmed the killing of 34 people,
the wounding of 20, the fact that 7 others were missing and the destruction of more
than 60 houses.
66. The United Nations Mine Action Service responded to 35 requests related to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts, as well as to police and
military efforts, destroying 226 explosive remnants of war, 33,919 rounds of small
arms ammunition and 319 weapons.

E.

Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration
67. From 1 July to 7 August, MONUSCO received 44 Congolese male
combatants, the majority of whom entered phase III of the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. The Mission received and repatriated
46 foreign combatants to Rwanda and one foreign combatant to Burundi, most of
them affiliated with the Forces combattantes abacunguzi.
68. The leader of Nduma défense du Congo, Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, who stands
accused of crimes against humanity before national courts, surrendered to
MONUSCO on 26 July, together with two of his associates. That event followed a
long campaign of awareness-raising and endeavours to support the Government’s
efforts to facilitate Sheka’s capture or surrender. Pursuant to an agreement with the
Government, Sheka and his associates were handed over to national aut horities at
Ndolo prison, in Kinshasa.
69. MONUSCO continued its support for sustaining programme camps in Kamina
and Kitona, where 458 ex-combatants are receiving vocational training, and the
implementation of 37 community violence reduction projects wit h a projected
number of 63,204 beneficiaries, composed mostly of young people at risk (53,820),
as well as a core group of ex-combatants (5,160) in the programme and vulnerable
women (4,224). Basic needs were also provided to 297 FDLR elements and 1,075 of
their dependents in the voluntary disarmament programme camps of Kanyabayonga,
North Kivu, and Walungu, South Kivu, and the Government -managed camp in
Kisangani, Tshopo. Meanwhile, support was also provided to 577 SPLM/A in
Opposition elements accommodated by MONUSCO in Munigi camp in Goma.
MONUSCO continues to work on finding individual solutions for those in the camp.

17-16817

13/17

S/2017/824

F.

Stabilization
70. Stabilization efforts continued within a context of political uncertainty, which
is not conducive to achieving a sustainable impact. Nevertheless, MONUSCO
supported the launching of two additional stabilization programmes in Ituri and
North Kivu Provinces, in the framework of the International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy. Both programmes are financed through the
Stabilization Coherence Fund, as part of a $27 million, multiple donor-funded
budget for stabilization interventions in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
implemented by consortiums led by United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations. The development of compacts between the
Mission and the provincial authorities in Ituri and South Kivu fostered enhanced
engagement of the authorities in the implementation of the Support Strategy.
71. In the framework of the tailored stabilization strategy for South Irumu, Ituri,
MONUSCO force and civilian components developed a joint strategy, aimed at
increasing governmental commitment to identify a sustainable political solution to
the FRPI threat. In the Kasai region, a joint assessment by MONUSCO and the
authorities involved in stabilization activities identified community violence
reduction programmes and dialogue as priorities for stabilization efforts.
72. Following mass escapes from prisons in Bukavu, Bunia, Bunyakiri, Ka bare,
Masisi, Nyuzu and Walungu, the national authorities, with the support of
MONUSCO, adopted a plan to reinforce security in 38 prisons. MONUSCO advised
prison staff on security regulations and advocated with the authorities for the
reactivation of contingency plans. In addition, the Mission established an integrated
prison security task force to comprehensively address prison security challenges
from a political, protection and operational perspective. The United Nations police
force continued to implement its operational strategy on the fight against insecurity
in Beni, Bukavu, Bunia, Goma and Kalemie.

G.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
73. MONUSCO continued to enforce my zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, including through enhanced internal awareness -raising, the
enforcement of strict curfew and out-of-bounds regimes, and military police
deterrent patrols. The availability of toll-free hotlines, a dedicated email address and
complaint drop boxes in MONUSCO facilities enhanced mechanisms for the
reporting of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. One such allegation was
recorded during the reporting period.
74. MONUSCO continued to conduct robust actions to prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse, with increased focus on community outreach activities through
community-based complaint mechanisms. To ensure the timely, adequate and
sustainable provision of support to victims of sexual exploitation and abuse,
MONUSCO continued to work closely with its partners, including the United
Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations Population Fund. A system has also
been put in place in close coordination with the Mission’s Victims’ Rights Advocate,
to maintain contact with victims on a regular basis and to monitor the services
provided to them by partners in order to ensure that their specific needs are met.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
75. Some 95 safety and security related incidents, affecting 10 female and 57 male
United Nations personnel, as well as United Nations assets and operations, were
14/17

17-16817

S/2017/824

reported, compared with 142 in the previous period. These included 49 criminal
incidents targeting both national and international staff, 4 cases linked to civil
unrest, 33 hazard-related cases and 9 incidents related to armed conflict.
MONUSCO support to FARDC operations against armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and ongoing confront ations in the Kasai region
could lead to direct threats to United Nations personnel, programmes and
installations, while the current political and socioeconomic dynamics also entail
security implications.
76. In my letter to the President of the Security Council dated 15 August,
I transmitted the executive summary of the report of the United Nations Security
Management System Board of Inquiry on the critical security incident resulting in
the deaths, in March, of two members of the Group of Experts in Kanan ga, Kasai
Central (S/2017/713, annex). In the letter, I informed the Council of my intention to
discuss with Congolese officials and consult with Council members regarding the
establishment of a follow-on mechanism in connection with the deaths of the two
experts. Following my initial consultations on 17 August in New York with the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration,
I dispatched a small team, led by my Special Envoy fo r the Great Lakes Region, to
Kinshasa to develop and agree on the modalities of United Nations support to the
Congolese investigation into the deaths of the two experts. As agreed with the
Congolese authorities and in connection with my letter dated 17 Sep tember 2017 to
the Vice-Prime Minister, I intend to deploy, as soon as possible, a small team to
assist the Congolese authorities in their investigations into the killing of the experts
and to report regularly to the Security Council on those efforts.

V. Observations
77. The broad consensus achieved among key political actors with the signing of
the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement on 31 December 2016
provided the Congolese people with some hope that the significant gains achieved
in stabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo in recent years could be
maintained. That consensus is fast eroding and a climate of political uncertainty is
gradually re-emerging. I am concerned that the relative respite in mounting political
tensions achieved through the signing of the political agreement could lapse by the
end of 2017, in the absence of a consensus on the political path forward. I therefore
appeal to the signatories of the agreement and to the Government, which has a
particular role to play by virtue of its sovereign responsibilities, to create the
conditions necessary for the political process to move forward. Any failure to
faithfully and fully implement the political agreement and end the transition period
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would only heighten the risk of a further
escalation of the political crisis and a deterioration of the security situation, with
dire consequences on the human rights and humanitarian situations in the country.
The likely repercussions in the region would be grave. In this regard, the support of
the United Nations alone, although vital, will not suffice. I urge regional and
international actors, working in a coordinated and inclusive manner, to maximize
their efforts to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo in navigating the
challenges it faces. A unified front around the importance of the swift and full
implementation of the agreement, culminating in the early holding of credible and
transparent elections, in keeping with the relevant provis ions of the Constitution, is
key to sustaining progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and avoiding a
descent into instability and conflict, with far-reaching consequences for the people
of the country, as well as for the region and beyond.

17-16817

15/17

S/2017/824

78. In the meantime, it is of critical importance that the Government, the
Independent National Electoral Commission and the National Council for
Monitoring the Agreement and the Electoral Process demonstrate the required
political will to advance the electoral process, in the spirit of the agreement of
31 December 2016. I urgently call for the publication of a credible calendar for the
holding of elections in as timely a manner as possible and in line with the provisions
of the agreement.
79. I welcome the commencement in early September of preparations for voter
registration in Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces and in the Kamiji and Luilu
territories of Lomami Province and call upon the Commission to ensure that the
voter registration process is brought to a swift and successful conclusion. I urge the
Parliament to adopt the draft organic law on the organization and functioning of the
National Council and to make the necessary amendments to the electoral law as
soon as possible. I also encourage lawmakers to exp lore the possibility of increasing
the representation of women during the deliberations on the amended electoral law,
in line with the aspirations for gender parity enshrined in the Constitution.
80. The Government, the Commission and the National Council have a
responsibility to ensure a level playing field for all political parties to prepare for,
and participate in, the planned elections. That entails the full implementation of all
the confidence-building measures stipulated in the political agreement, the opening
of political space, and full respect for human rights, including freedom of opinion,
expression and peaceful assembly.
81. I am deeply concerned by the fragile security situation in several parts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo against the backdrop of continued political
uncertainty. While ADF and FDLR have reduced their activities, increased and
repeated targeted attacks by various — Mai-Mai groups and other armed elements
on national security forces and symbols of State authority in N orth Kivu and South
Kivu are a cause for concern. I am also concerned about the security situation in
some areas of the western part of the country. I strongly condemn the attacks by the
Kamuina Nsapu militia in the Kasai region and the acts of violence co mmitted by
the Bundu Dia Mayala elements in Kinshasa and Kongo Central. I urge the
Government to exercise maximum restraint and abide by its human rights
obligations in its efforts to restore security and I call on all actors to end the cycle of
violence, particularly in the Kasai region.
82. Impunity only encourages more violence. I urge the authorities to take decisive
measures to bring impunity to an end. Strong governmental action is required to
bring to justice national police and FARDC elements invol ved in human rights
violations, including those with command responsibilities at all levels.
83. The humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
in the Kasai region, is of grave concern. I call on donors to provide additiona l
humanitarian funding to the flash appeal launched for the Kasai region and for the
overall humanitarian response in the country. I urge the Government, in keeping
with its responsibilities, to do its utmost to alleviate the suffering of the population,
whose living conditions continue to deteriorate as a result of the economic
downturn.
84. Lastly, I wish to thank my Special Representative, Maman Sidikou, for his
leadership and all personnel of MONUSCO and the United Nations country team for
their dedication to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also wish to thank my
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region, Said Djinnit, for his diplomatic efforts at
the regional level. I would also like to express my deep appreciation to the troop and police-contributing countries, as well as to the regional organizations, bilateral
and multilateral partners and non-governmental organizations, for their invaluable
support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
16/17

17-16817

17-16817

S/2017/824

17/17
