S/2015/37

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2157
(2014), in which the Council requested me to conduct a comprehensive review of
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS), to ensure it is aligned with the priorities identified by the
legitimate democratic Government. In addition to presenting the main findings and
recommendations of the review, the report provides an update on key political,
security, human rights, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments since my
update of 11 November 2014 (S/2014/805). It also provides information on the
status of implementation of resolution 2157 (2014) since my report of 12 May 2014
(S/2014/333).

II. Major developments in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Political developments
2.
The political situation in Guinea-Bissau remained stable during the period
under review, with the Government focused on implementing its immediate
priorities and on preparing for the partner round table scheduled for 26 March 2015.
3.
On 11 November, the National Assembly took two important decisions aimed
at implementing its reform programme. First, it elected Francisco Benante as
Inspector-General for the Fight against Corruption and Antonio Jesus Simões
Mendes and Pedro Morato Milaco as Deputy Inspectors. The appointments were a
positive signal that the Government is determined to tackle corruption. Second, the
National Assembly adopted a resolution reactivating the ad hoc Commission for
Constitutional Review established in 2010. The Commission will be chaired by the
President of the National Assembly, Cipriano Cassamá, and will include Members
of Parliament from all political parties represented in the National Assembly. In
order to ensure broad participation in the process, the Commission will also include
representatives from civil society and religious groups, as well as from the Faculty
of Law of Amilcar Cabral University.

14-68158 (E)

210115

*1468158*

S/2015/37

4.
The Government continued to take steps to reform the security sector. On
13 November, it authorized the Minister of Defence to establish a committee to
review the list of military personnel to be demobilized through retirement. The
committee, which includes officials from both the Ministry of Defence and the
armed forces, has commenced its review of the criteria and lists for security
personnel who will be demobilized and receive a pension from a planned special
pension fund.

B.

Security situation
5.
The overall security situation in Guinea-Bissau remained stable during the
reporting period. The new Chief of General Staff of the armed forces, LieutenantGeneral Biaguê Na N’tan, has gradually reshuffled the commanding officers of
various military units since his appointment on 17 September. On 17 November, the
President of Guinea-Bissau, José Mário Vaz, appointed Brigadier-General Antero
João Correia, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, as the new Director
General of the State Information and Security Services. He had served as the Public
Order Police Commissioner-General before the coup d’état of April 2012.
6.
Following a series of accidents involving unexploded remnants of war, as well
as a request from the Ministry of Defence for UNIOGBIS support in the destruction
of a stock of ageing munitions, an expert from the Mine Action Service of the
United Nations was deployed to Guinea-Bissau from 4 to 15 November to assess the
situation and make recommendations for United Nations support. The expert met
with personnel from the armed forces, the Ministries of Defence and the Interior and
non-governmental organizations engaged in demining. In his report, he
recommended that UNIOGBIS assist in mobilizing resources from the international
community to enable national non-governmental organizations to resume
mine-clearance activities. He also recommended that UNIOGBIS engage with the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau to secure the military’s cooperation and support for an
ammunition destruction programme.

C.

Socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
7.
Although the socioeconomic situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile, there
have been some encouraging signs since the new Government was inaugurated in
July. The salaries of public servants are being paid, with donor support, and there
have been improvements in the supply of electricity and water, mainly in Bissau. On
9 December, the National Assembly unanimously approved a national general
budget for 2015 in the amount of 148,000,000,000 CFA francs (approximately
$287,380,000). A deficit of 57,000,000,000 CFA francs (approximately
$110,680,000) will be covered by external funding. In September, the International
Monetary Fund forecast a real gross domestic product growth rate of 2.5 per cent in
2014, based on the gradual resumption of investments after the return to
constitutional order.
8.
Cashew nuts continue to be the main export of Guinea-Bissau and one of the
main sources of income for many families, especially in rural areas. According to
provisional government data, as at 15 September Guinea-Bissau had exported

2/18

14-68158

S/2015/37

127,900 tons of cashew nuts in 2014, out of an export goal of 140,000 tons, at an
average price of $997 per ton.
9.
During the reporting period, some international partners and financial
institutions pledged commitments to support the new authorities. On 13 November,
the West African Economic and Monetary Union committed 510 million CFA francs
(about $968,733) for the construction of a cattle market in Bigene, Cacheu region.
On 18 November, during the meeting of the International Contact Group on GuineaBissau, which was held in New York, the European Union announced a commitment
of 20 million euros. On 4 December, the Government signed an agreement with the
World Bank to receive funding in the amount of $4.85 million as direct budgetary
support and $2.15 million as support for World Food Programme activities in
Guinea-Bissau.
10. No suspected cases of the Ebola virus disease have been reported in GuineaBissau to date. An inter-agency mission led by the World Health Organization
(WHO) visited Guinea-Bissau from 14 to 20 November to assess the status of Ebola
preparedness of the country. The mission concluded that Guinea-Bissau had
completed 51 per cent of the WHO Ebola virus disease preparedness checklist on
core principles, standards, capacities and practices for Ebola prevention and
response.
11. On 2 December, the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Simões Pereira,
announced the reopening of the country’s border with Guinea. The border had been
closed since 14 August as a precautionary measure to prevent the spread of Ebola
into Guinea-Bissau. The decision is significant for cross-border trade, especially for
the communities directly involved.

D.

Human rights situation
12. During the reporting period, no gross human rights violation was registered in
Guinea-Bissau. Very little progress was made, however, in the investigation of, and
in establishing accountability for, past serious human rights violations. One
exception was the reopening by the Office of the Prosecutor-General for the
investigation into the beating of former Transitional Minister of State for Transport
and Communication Orlando Mendes Viegas, which took place on 6 November
2013. On 5 November, the Office of the Prosecutor General held a hearing to
question three suspects in relation to the case.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Supporting an inclusive political dialogue and national
reconciliation process to facilitate democratic governance
13. The National Assembly has commenced efforts to reactivate the national
dialogue and reconciliation process. From 31 October to 2 November, UNIOGBIS
supported the organization of a three-day retreat of the Organising Commission of
the National Conference on Reconciliation to review reports on the work that had

14-68158

3/18

S/2015/37

been accomplished before its activities were suspended in December 2011.
Participants identified a number of activities to be carried out in order to hold a
national conference on reconciliation in 2015. The Commission is expected to
submit its conclusions and recommendations to the honorary committee for
endorsement. The honorary committee is composed of the President of GuineaBissau, the President of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister, the Chief
Justice, religious leaders and representatives of international organizations.

B.

Assisting in strengthening democratic institutions and
enhancing the capacity of State organs to function effectively
and constitutionally
14. During the period under review, UNIOGBIS provided support to the National
Assembly for the organization of two training sessions, held from 21 to 25 July and
from 26 to 29 August, aimed at strengthening the capacities of the 102 newly
elected Members of Parliament. The training helped participants to better
understand their role and responsibilities as outlined in the national Constitution.
UNIOGBIS also provided training on human rights and gender mainstreaming to the
parliamentarians. Similarly, from 5 to 7 November, UNIOGBIS supported the
National Assembly in organizing a three-day workshop to strengthen the capacity of
Members of Parliament in State budget analysis and parliamentary control of the
actions of the Government.

C.

Providing strategic and technical advice and support for the
establishment of effective and efficient law enforcement and
criminal justice and penitentiary systems capable of maintaining
public security and combating impunity while respecting
international human rights and fundamental freedoms
15. The United Nations continued to play a coordinating role in the area of police,
justice and corrections through the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and
Corrections. In May and June, UNIOGBIS carried out assessments of the capacities
of the Public Order Police, the Judiciary Police and the National Guard. The
assessments established a baseline understanding of the status of security
institutions in the areas of logistics, policy, procedures, training and inter-agency
coordination. The assessments will assist in planning capacity-building projects. In
the same vein, from 16 June to 3 July, UNIOGBIS, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations Children’s Fund carried out six
border post assessments to gather information on conditions in the field, to establish
a baseline for the design of future projects. The assessments showed that personnel
at border posts cannot perform their duties effectively owing to poor training and
knowledge of applicable national laws and because they lack proper office facilities
and equipment.
16. Between May and November, with the participation of the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and UNIOGBIS, the Superior Council
for Policing and Internal Security Coordination, which comprises the heads of
police institutions, held six meetings to strengthen coordination, informationsharing and joint security analysis among the various policing institutions.

4/18

14-68158

S/2015/37

UNIOGBIS managed the agenda and performed the function of the secretariat for
the meetings.
17. Between 3 and 8 July, with the financial support of the Peacebuilding Fund,
UNIOGBIS carried out specialized training on anti-riot techniques for 60 officers,
including two women, from the Rapid Intervention Unit of the Public Order Police.
UNIOGBIS also donated 50 sets of defensive equipment (shields, helmets and
batons) for crowd control.
18. The United Nations continued to support the national authorities in addressing
issues related to the right to health and the rights of persons deprived of their
liberty. Between 1 May and 30 November, the centres for access to justice provided
support to more than 1,120 beneficiaries (22 per cent of whom were women) with
the support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). UNIOGBIS
further supported the Ministry of Justice in drafting internal procedures for prisons
to ensure compliance with national law and international instruments relating to
sentenced prisoners and other detainees. Early in September, UNIOGBIS supported
the distribution to prison guards and others concerned with detention-related issues
of the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders.
19. Between 14 and 16 October, UNIOGBIS facilitated and funded a workshop on
penitentiary administration and the rule of law organized by the Prison Directorate
of the Ministry of Justice. In total, 25 prison directors, social workers and prison
staff, including four women, participated in the workshop, the purpose of which was
to increase the knowledge and skills of prison staff in the areas of penitentiary
administration and the rule of law in accordance with international standards. Areas
covered in the workshop included national and international norms for the treatment
of prisoners, alternatives to detention and social rehabilitation.
20. With the support of UNDP, on 15 July the National Judicial Training Centre
launched a six-week capacity development programme in the areas of civil and
criminal law for 16 magistrates, judges and prosecutors. The officials were all
assigned to sectoral and regional courts. In terms of justice service delivery in
remote areas, UNDP assisted the Ministries of Justice and of Public Works in
conducting feasibility studies in the Cacheu and Oio regions to identify suitable
sites on which to construct sectoral courts. The construction of those courts in both
regions started in December.
21. Between 28 and 30 October, the Ministry of Justice, with the support of
UNIOGBIS, organized the fourth National Forum on Criminal Justice. Participants
in the Forum recommended that a comprehensive review of the relevant criminal
codes be conducted and that an interministerial commission be established to study
the national legal framework governing military justice with a view to harmonizing
it with the Constitution, international norms and human rights standards.

14-68158

5/18

S/2015/37

D.

Providing strategic and technical advice and support to national
authorities and relevant stakeholders, including in coordination
with the Economic Community of West African States and its mission
in Guinea-Bissau, in implementing the national security sector reform
and rule of law strategies, as well as developing civilian and military
justice systems that are compliant with international standards
22. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS continued to coordinate with the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the national
authorities with respect to the overall reform of the defence and security sector in
accordance with Security Council resolution 2151 (2014).
23. On 15 September, the ECOWAS-Guinea-Bissau joint cell in the Permanent
Secretariat of the National Security Sector Reform Steering Committee presented to
the Minister of Defence a draft proposal for retirement packages for military and
police personnel. The draft indicates the number of military and police beneficiaries
and provides details on their future benefits, including housing, medical and
transportation benefits, based on their rank and length of service. It reiterates earlier
plans that a one-time lump-sum payment be made on retirement, followed by a
monthly pension over a five-year period. The proposal includes a list of
753 personnel to be retired in the first of five batches over a five-year period. The
total number of retirees in all five batches will be 2,282 personnel. UNIOGBIS is a
member of the Permanent Secretariat.

E.

Assisting national authorities to combat drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime in close cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
24. The efforts of UNIOGBIS and UNODC to improve the operational capacity
and efficiency of the national investigating law enforcement agencies and to align
them with international standards continued during the reporting period. Since July,
a UNODC consultant has been co-located with UNIOGBIS to facilitate the full
operationalization of the Transnational Crime Unit of Guinea-Bissau within the
framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative. Together with UNIOGBIS, the
consultant facilitated several training courses for Unit personnel. Between 15 and
26 September, 20 police officers, including four women, working in the Unit and in
other law enforcement agencies received advanced computer training. Between
22 and 26 September, 10 police officers from the Unit and the Judiciary Police were
trained in crime analysis techniques. From 27 October to 7 November, training
aimed at improving crime analysis in relation to drug trafficking and moneylaundering, particularly in the collection, organization, collation, dissemination and
re-evaluation of data, was provided to 20 law enforcement officers, including four
women.
25. Between 19 June and 21 November, the Judiciary Police and the Transnational
Crime Unit carried out four operations that resulted in the arrest of six individuals
and the seizure of 3 kg of cocaine and 57 kg of marijuana. On 14 October, the
Ministry of Justice approved three standard operating procedures for the Unit and
the Judiciary Police on the destruction of seized drugs, data analysis for criminal
investigation and the handling of informants. On 18 November, the Government

6/18

14-68158

S/2015/37

made available a building that will host the office of the Unit. The Public Order
Police, the Judicial Police, the Customs and the National Guard will be co-located
in that building.
26. Between 24 and 27 October, UNODC and UNIOGBIS supported the
organization of a meeting on organized crime and drug trafficking. The meeting,
which was held at the invitation of the Prime Minister and the President of the
National Assembly, was attended by over 100 participants from the National
Assembly and the Government. The participants discussed drug trafficking,
corruption, money-laundering and terrorism, as well as how to strengthen the
criminal justice system in order to fight these crimes in Guinea-Bissau. At the end
of the meeting, participants adopted a political declaration emphasizing the
commitment of the National Assembly and the Government to work together to
address the threats posed by organized crime to peace and stability in GuineaBissau.

F.

Assisting national authorities in the promotion and protection
of human rights, as well as undertaking human rights monitoring
and reporting activities
27. On 4 and 5 June, UNIOGBIS supported the celebration of International
Children’s Day for 150 children in six schools in the region of Bafatá. The events
included the presentation of films and discussions on the rights to education, health
and protection from violence and abuse.
28. From 7 to 11 July and from 27 to 31 October, the Judicial Training Centre
conducted, with the support of UNIOGBIS, the second and third phases of a series
of one-week trainings on human rights in the administration of justice. Participants
included judicial and law enforcement officials based in Bissau and the regions. The
training focused on international principles related to the independence and
impartiality of judicial actors, the rights and protection of persons deprived of
liberty, the application of preventive detention and the right to due process and a
fair trial.
29. From 11 to 14 August, UNIOGBIS held human rights seminars for
30 members of the security forces in regions of Bafatá and Gabú. The training
focused on international and national human rights laws, in particular the United
Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, the national minimum
standards for the treatment of prisoners, the law on female genital mutilation
(adopted in January 2014) and the laws on domestic violence and human trafficking.

G.

Mainstreaming a gender perspective into peacebuilding, in line
with Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
30. Between 16 and 25 June, UNIOGBIS and the Islamic Council of GuineaBissau finalized a report on the roles of men and women in the Council’s leadership
and the role of women in mediation and conflict resolution in Guinea-Bissau. The
report included the following recommendations: pursuing efforts to increase
capacity-building for both men and women on gender and women’s rights as they
relate to Islam; identifying women leaders within the Council and empowering them

14-68158

7/18

S/2015/37

as mediators, based on traditional experience and international human rights
instruments; and bringing women in the law enforcement sector and women leaders
from the Council together to work on conflict resolution. The translated version of
the report will be prepared and provided by UNIOGBIS to partners and the Council
for further dissemination.
31. On 10 September, UNIOGBIS, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of
Women, Family and Social Cohesion organized a workshop for journalists, civil
servants and representatives of women’s organizations to raise awareness of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the National Action Plan on Gender.
The workshop aimed at mobilizing the Government to mainstream gender
perspectives into all areas of its work and to build national capacity within the
public sector to review the Action Plan. The participants recommended reviewing
the Action Plan and its implementation strategy, amending the electoral law in order
to increase women’s political participation and appointing gender focal points in
government line ministries. They also requested the Ministry of Women, Family and
Social Cohesion to work towards obtaining funds for the implementation of the
Action Plan and to facilitate regional consultations on gender.
32. On 28 and 29 October, the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Cohesion,
the ECOWAS Women, Peace and Security Network and UNIOGBIS organized a
two-day workshop in Canchungo, Cacheu region, for 50 women from civil society
organizations, public administration entities and political parties. The workshop
sought to raise awareness of the need to amend legislation, including the
Constitution, to align it with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). At the end of
the meeting, the participants issued a declaration requesting the urgent adoption of
measures on quotas for women, both in the electoral law and in the law on political
parties, a review of the policy document on the reform of the defence and security
sectors to ensure that it explicitly includes gender issues and the integration of
human rights and gender equality in the national education curriculum to combat
discrimination and the high prevalence of domestic violence against women.

H.

Working with the Peacebuilding Commission in support of the
peacebuilding priorities of Guinea-Bissau
33. On 14 August, the Peacebuilding Fund allocated $500,000 in support of a
UNODC project aimed at reinforcing the electronic information-sharing capacity of
national law enforcement agencies, including the Transnational Crime Unit.
34. The Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and of the Commission’s countryspecific configuration for Guinea-Bissau, Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, visited
Guinea-Bissau on 29 and 30 October to attend the thirteenth special session of the
Council of Ministers of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP).
Mr. Patriota met with the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly,
the Minister for the Presidency of the Council of Ministers, the Ministers of
Defence and of Foreign Affairs, my Special Representative in Guinea-Bissau, the
ambassadors of Angola and the ECOWAS Commission. Discussions held during the
various meetings focused on how the Peacebuilding Commission could best assist
Guinea-Bissau in promoting the country internationally, support the new authorities
to implement key reforms, notably in the security sector, advance the Government’s

8/18

14-68158

S/2015/37

priorities, and support the mobilization of resources, with particular emphasis on the
partner round table.

I.

Contributing to the mobilization, harmonization and coordination
of international assistance, including for the implementation of the
national security sector reform and rule of law strategies, and
enhancing cooperation with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries, the European Union and other partners in
support of the restoration and maintenance of constitutional order
and the stabilization of Guinea-Bissau
35. My Special Representative has been actively working to ensure continued,
effective coordination among international partners. He has started convening
monthly coordination meetings with international partners in Bissau. On 14 and
24 November, he met with the secretariats of the International Organisation of La
Francophonie in Paris and of CPLP in Lisbon. While raising awareness of the need
for continued engagement in Guinea-Bissau, he also advocated enhanced support for
the efforts of the Government to carry out State reforms, in particular in the defence,
security and justice sectors. He further emphasized the importance of harmonizing
the positions of all international partners and ensuring coordination of efforts.
36. On 18 November, the International Contact Group for Guinea-Bissau held its
tenth meeting in New York, after two years of inactivity. At the meeting, which was
attended by my Special Representative and key bilateral and multilateral partners of
Guinea-Bissau, participants welcomed the progress made in Guinea-Bissau,
including the strong commitment of the new authorities to commence implementing
reforms in the areas of public administration, justice, education, public services and
the defence and security sector. It also expressed strong support for a continued
UNIOGBIS and ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) presence in the
country and called on all international partners to actively participate in the
upcoming donor conference.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
37. During the reporting period, the senior leadership of the United Nations
country team and UNIOGBIS adopted a road map for the preparation of a new
integrated strategic framework (the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for 2016-2020) that will be aligned with the updated national
development plan to be presented to the partner round table. It is expected that the
framework will be finalized and endorsed at the country level by the end of
February 2015.
Public information
38. During the reporting period, media activities were centred around a project
funded by the Peacebuilding Fund on strengthening the media’s watchdog role in a

14-68158

9/18

S/2015/37

democratic society. UNIOGBIS raised awareness of rule of law, human rights and
gender issues through national radio programmes and the main weekly newspapers.
From October to December, it organized seminars on institution-building in São
Domingos, Bafatá, Buba and Bissau for some 86 media directors and editors,
including the press unit of the armed forces, governmental spokespersons and
representatives of civil society. UNIOGBIS also conducted a public awareness
campaign in support of the Government’s Ebola task force.

B.

Staff safety and security
39. During the period under review, no direct threats were made against United
Nations staff. Three burglaries at United Nations residences were reported, however.
In the light of recent incidents involving the accidental explosion of remnants of
war, United Nations staff have been advised of the risks and cautioned to be alert
when working in the field.

V. Main findings of the strategic assessment on Guinea-Bissau
40. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2157 (2014), I dispatched a strategic
assessment mission to Guinea-Bissau from 3 to 14 November to conduct a
comprehensive review of the mandate of UNIOGBIS and ensure that it is aligned
with the priorities identified by the legitimate, democratic Government. Led by the
Department of Political Affairs, the mission consisted of representatives from
UNIOGBIS, the United Nations country team, UNDP (representing the United
Nations Development Group), the Peacebuilding Support Office, UNODC, the
Office of the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Department of Field Support and the
Department of Safety and Security.
41. The mission consulted with a broad array of interlocutors and enjoyed the full
cooperation of the authorities of Guinea-Bissau. It met with national authorities,
including the President, the Prime Minister and the President of the National
Assembly, as well as ministers and secretaries of State from all relevant ministries.
Meetings were also held with representatives of other State institutions, including
the Supreme Court, the Office of the Prosecutor General, the Military Tribunal and
security and law enforcement agencies. The mission consulted with political parties,
women’s associations, religious leaders, traditional leaders, youth representatives
and media organizations, and visited the UNIOGBIS regional office in Bafatá to
survey United Nations-supported projects and to engage with interlocutors in the
region. Throughout the visit, the mission consulted with international partners
engaged in Guinea-Bissau.

A.

Context and main factors of instability
42. The restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau has introduced a
period of hope. The elections in April and May were widely deemed to have been
free, fair and transparent. The country has a legitimate, competent and inclusive
Government. In meetings with the strategic assessment mission, the President, the

10/18

14-68158

S/2015/37

Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly elaborated broadly
consistent views regarding the key priorities of the country and the vision for its
future. As a manifestation of this consensus, the government priority plan was
approved unanimously by the National Assembly in September. The Prime Minister
is working to create a collaborative political environment and has included several
individuals from opposition parties and civil society in his Government in an
attempt to build trust and bolster stability. The appointment of five women
ministers, out of 16, including for the key Ministries of Defence and of Justice, is
also a sign of political will for inclusive governance.
43. The Government has acted quickly, with the help of partners, to demonstrate
the dividends of the restoration of constitutional order, notably by paying most
salary arrears in the public service and by working to increase the delivery of public
utilities to the population. Initial steps have been taken to reform the armed forces,
most notably the dismissal of its Chief of General Staff, General Antonio Indjai, on
15 September. The Government has established a national technical commission in
the Prime Minister’s office to review the commitments made by the former
transitional Government, with particular focus on the extraction of natural
resources. The donor conference planned for 26 March 2015 will be decisive for
moving forward on a number of governmental priorities and start the long-term
work of stabilizing the country in order to focus on sustainable development.
44. The Government has shown strong political will to implement necessary
reforms and, in doing so, is already encountering signs of resistance. The Statebuilding exercise in Guinea-Bissau is in its very initial stages. The country faces
extreme levels of poverty and the social contract is weak. A constructive
relationship between the President, the Prime Minister and the President of the
National Assembly will continue to be essential as they push forward the necessary
reforms.
45. Meanwhile, the potential for relapse into instability and unconstitutionality
will remain high as long as the root causes remain unaddressed. Since its
independence in 1974, the country has never seen a Government complete its term
in office. Coups d’état took place in 1980, 1998-1999, 2003 and 2012, attempted
coups took place in 1985 and 1993, and alleged attempts took place in 2009, 2011
and 2012. The political instability in the country has been accompanied by repeated
gross violations of human rights, including politically motivated assassinations,
abductions, cases of torture, arbitrary arrests, detentions of political opponents and
civil society representatives, and restrictions on the freedom of expression and
assembly.
46. Peace and security issues in Guinea-Bissau are strongly connected with
development challenges. The root causes of instability in the country lie in a
complex interrelation of four main factors: (a) political-military dynamics;
(b) ineffective State institutions and the absence of rule of law; (c) poverty and lack
of access to basic services (particularly for women and youth); and (d) impunity and
human rights violations.
Political-military dynamics
47. The armed forces have had a disproportionate influence on civilian and
political life and have been able to shift political alliances, influence decisionmaking and topple democratically elected Governments. The power of the military

14-68158

11/18

S/2015/37

stems in part from a failure to convert the armed wing of the anti-colonial liberation
movement, the People’s Revolutionary Armed Forces, into a regular professional
army after independence in 1974. This allowed military commanders to continue
influencing political decision-making structures. It also contributed to a dynamic in
which disaffected members of the political elite, in order to bolster their own
positions and agendas, made alliances of convenience with the armed forces. As a
consequence, there has been very limited civilian oversight of military forces and
Guinea-Bissau continues to be characterized by an intricate web of relationships
between the political, business and military spheres. In spite of the very positive
change brought about by the elections, the rather small group exerting influence on
key State functions still includes some who are involved in corruption and illicit
activities, including human and drug trafficking.
48. The long-standing paucity of political and social dialogue among the people,
political actors and the army has exacerbated the divides within society. There are
indications that political factions have begun to instrumentalize tribal issues to their
advantage, which could deepen ethnic divides. More specifically, it appears that the
Balanta community, which is dominant in the armed forces, has had limited access
to socioeconomic opportunities outside the armed forces; addressing this matter
should be an important component of any reform of the security sector. With less
than 8 per cent of women in the armed forces, and even fewer in positions of
authority, as well as inadequate conditions (e.g. lack of separate barracks and
equipment), the army is not equipped to attract more female recruits and to respond
to the security and defence needs of the entire population.
Ineffective State institutions and lack of rule of law
49. During decades of instability, the politico-military elite has monopolized the
State and effectively abolished the separation of powers. The rest of the population
has been connected to the State through links of patronage at best and, at worst, not
at all. Political patronage often takes precedence over fair competition and
recruitment based on merit. Owing to low wages and frequent delays in the payment
of salaries, public servants and the judiciary are highly susceptible to corruption and
bribery. Outside the capital, the State is hardly present, which is why local political
and social structures, including traditional and religious leaders, perform core
functions that would normally be under the purview of the State. While these
traditional structures play an important role in filling the gaps left by the State,
including in conflict resolution, they perpetuate the lack of a relationship between
citizens and the State, as well as between the regions and the capital, and in some
cases exacerbate the exclusion of women.
Poverty and lack of access to basic services
50. The weak State institutions of Guinea-Bissau have been unable to deliver
services to a population suffering from dire poverty. For decades, while the elite has
competed for power and control over resources, the population has been denied the
right to access basic services. The vast majority of the population, especially in the
rural areas where an estimated 80 per cent live, has virtually no access to
socioeconomic opportunities. Women are disproportionately affected in this regard,
as they have limited or no entitlement to land ownership (depending on their ethnic
group), despite constituting the greater part of the workforce in subsistence

12/18

14-68158

S/2015/37

agriculture. Maternal mortality rates in Guinea-Bissau are among the highest in the
world and gender-based violence is widespread.
51. While Guinea-Bissau has the climate and soil to develop the agricultural
sector, thereby driving economic growth and job creation, this potential has never
been realized. Agriculture is limited to subsistence farming and the export of raw
commodities (especially cashew nuts). This reality, which is disadvantageous to the
overwhelming majority of the population, could be changed through investment in
processing, packaging and related agro-industrial enterprises; this has been
identified by the Government as a priority area to spur socioeconomic development.
It is paradoxical that with an estimated 80 per cent of the population involved in
agriculture just 7 per cent of the population is food secure. In addition, there is a
dire lack of access to potable water.
52. Most communities do not have access to health care and education. In total,
64 per cent of women and 48 per cent of men are illiterate; in rural areas, those rates
are higher, posing an obstacle to development and economic growth. The military
coup of April 2012 led to the disengagement of the international community and a
reduction of 55 per cent in aid for public investments in 2012. In addition, the coup
undermined the functioning of State institutions from an already low level, thereby
exacerbating the already precarious living conditions. The population has not been
able to fully participate in the development of the country and has been excluded
from the distribution of wealth as well as from involvement in State functions and
decision-making, deepening a sentiment of disenfranchisement from the State and
mistrust in the political leadership.
Impunity and human rights violations
53. The security and justice institutions of Guinea-Bissau are particularly weak,
generating a widespread culture of impunity. The judiciary has little independence
and limited means to carry out its core functions, especially the investigation of and
prosecution for criminal acts committed by people in positions of power. The
prisons in the country are not aligned with human rights and security standards.
Access to justice for the population, an essential prerequisite for human rights,
remains an important challenge, particularly in rural areas and for women. Less than
10 per cent of people who avail themselves of the justice system are women,
although they disproportionally suffer from abuses and crime. Impunity constitutes
one of the main threats to peace and stability, development and reconciliation in
Guinea-Bissau, and amnesty has been the preferred instrument to deal with the
serious crimes and human rights abuses that have been committed. Absent true
reconciliation, amnesty has proved to be counterproductive, removing a deterrent to
crime and human rights violations. The two-year transition that followed the 2012
coup provided fertile ground for the military junta and affiliated politicians in power
to scale up unlawful activities. The population has little trust in the justice system,
which is perceived as being ineffective, biased and aimed at serving and covering
up the interests of the powerful.

B.

Risks and opportunities
54. The main risk factors that would have a severe impact on peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau are the following:

14-68158

13/18

S/2015/37

(a) An unravelling of the political consensus within the inclusive Government
and the exacerbation of tensions between the main political leaders could lead to a
Government lacking sufficient unity to undertake essential reforms, increased
military interference in the affairs of Government or, in the worst instance, a coup
d’état;
(b) Individuals could exploit the assassination or sudden death of political or
military leaders (and/or rumours to that effect) in order to enhance their own
position at the expense of stability;
(c) A possible outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in Guinea-Bissau would
have a negative impact on the population and on the country’s already fragile State
institutions.
55.

Conversely, the current context offers the following opportunities:

(a) A competent, legitimate and inclusive Government whose leaders favour
consensus-building and dialogue and that enjoys substantial domestic and
international support;
(b) The political will of the Government to discuss and fight corruption,
impunity, transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, as well as the strong
regional links to combat such threats;
(c) The desire of national stakeholders to turn the page on decades of
political instability;
(d) The commitment of international partners and financial institutions to
resume cooperation and their positive reaction to steps taken on security sector
reform, including, notably, the change in military leadership;
(e) The Government’s commitment to increasing women’s participation in
decision-making and aligning the national legal framework with international
human rights conventions;
(f)

The continued presence of ECOMIB as a force for stability and security;

(g) The delivery of peace dividends and initial efforts to promote inclusive
economic growth and the responsible exploitation of natural resources;
(h) The positive and constructive relationship between religious leaders and
the role they can play in peacebuilding in general and in forging intercommunal
tolerance in particular;
(i) The presence of UNIOGBIS and my Special Representative, who is well
positioned to exercise my good offices and coordinate international support.

C.

Priorities of the legitimate democratic Government
56. The main priorities of the country for the four-year period 2014-2018, as
recently approved by the Cabinet of Ministers and adopted by the National
Assembly in September, are set out below:
(a) To consolidate the rule of law and promote good governance and the
reform of State institutions;
(b)

14/18

To promote economic growth and poverty reduction;

14-68158

S/2015/37

(c)

To promote and enhance human development through capacity-building;

(d) To revive efforts on foreign policy and regional integration and leverage
the diaspora.
57. As articulated by the Prime Minister, the vision of the Government for the
development of the country and the strategy for the partner round table contains
four priorities approved by the National Assembly. These are:
(a) Government stability (through structural reforms, including in the
defence, security and justice sectors);
(b) Industrialization of the agricultural sector (enabling the transformation of
crops into value-added agro-industrial products);
(c) Investment in energy and transportation infrastructure (with an emphasis
on clean energy, roads and ports);
(d) Monetizing and protecting the rich biodiversity of Guinea-Bissau
through sound investments by credible partners (to diversify the economy so that it
is not dependent solely on the export of raw cashew nuts and external aid).
58. During the consultations held by the strategic assessment mission with the
country’s leaders, three priorities of particular relevance for the alignment of the
mandate of UNIOGBIS came to the fore:
(a) Facilitation of dialogue and building of trust between the country’s main
political actors through the use of my good offices;
(b)
process;

Provision of technical support for a national dialogue and reconciliation

(c) Strong mobilization and coordination of international partners to
maintain internal stability and security in Guinea-Bissau.

D.

Strategic options and areas of intervention
59. National and international counterparts agree that UNIOGBIS has played a
crucial role since its deployment in the country and in particular in helping GuineaBissau to emerge from the crisis and restore constitutional order. While the mandate
of UNIOGBIS remains valid, some modifications in the emphasis of its
implementation are warranted, based on the priorities of the legitimate, democratic
Government, as well as on an analysis of the comparative advantages of the United
Nations integrated presence in the country.
Strengthen the coordination and mobilization of international assistance
60. In order to support the legitimate, democratic Government of Guinea-Bissau,
there is a need to strengthen the coordination and mobilization of international
assistance in the consolidation of peace and democracy. The strategic assessment
mission observed unanimous and strong support for my Special Representative in
convening and coordinating international partners. Given the lack of coherence
among partners in the past, the current opportunity should be continuously nurtured
and built upon. As part of its coordination role, the United Nations has been asked
by the Government to help mobilize international attention and support and convey

14-68158

15/18

S/2015/37

the message that the Government is credible and willing to carry out key reforms.
More specifically, UNIOGBIS and UNDP have been requested to support the
organization of a donor round table, scheduled to take place on 26 March 2015, to
mobilize sufficient resources to carry out key reforms. In addition, it is
recommended that the Government establish, with the support of partners, as
needed, mechanisms of accountability in the use of donor contributions.
Reinforce the good offices role of my Special Representative and support a
national dialogue and reconciliation process
61. In maintaining the presence of UNIOGBIS, key interlocutors have asked for
my Special Representative to take on an active good offices role to forge a
constructive relationship among important stakeholders, as well as among and
within the institutions of the State. There is therefore a need to reinforce the good
offices role of my Special Representative, including with surge capacity if required.
This role is essential for mitigating intra- and inter-party divisions, in order to
maintain a united and inclusive Government, which is necessary for the
establishment of civilian control over the military and the implementation of
socioeconomic reforms.
Support the continuation of the Economic Community of West African States
Mission in Guinea-Bissau
62. All interlocutors acknowledged the role played by ECOMIB since its
deployment to Guinea-Bissau as a stabilization force with a strong deterrent
function. At critical moments, the presence of ECOMIB has prevented the
degradation of the fragile situation. To date, ECOMIB has been entirely supported
by ECOWAS. The Government and other interlocutors strongly believe that the
mandate of ECOMIB needs to be extended during this delicate phase of peace
consolidation. ECOWAS has indicated some difficulties in its ability to continue
carrying the financial burden of the Mission by itself, and support from other
partners is under discussion. In the meantime, all involved interlocutors favoured
Security Council endorsement of the continuation of ECOMIB.

E.

Exit strategy
63. The current integrated structure of UNIOGBIS, in which one of my deputy
special representatives is also the Resident Coordinator, is conducive to a smooth
transition, as the United Nations country team will gradually take over tasks that
UNIOGBIS is mandated with carrying out. In this context, the UNIOGBIS
leadership, utilizing its existing strategic policy group, will regularly assess
progress in mandate implementation. This will assist the United Nations in GuineaBissau in planning and prioritizing its resource mobilization activities, taking into
account progress and ultimate success in the implementation of the UNIOGBIS
mandate.

VI. Observations
64. Following the return to constitutional order after the successful elections and
the installation of the national authorities, Guinea-Bissau is striving to move from

16/18

14-68158

S/2015/37

fragility to stability. I commend the country’s elected authorities for the strides they
have already made in addressing the basic needs of the people that they represent as
a first step towards a sustainable peace. I also note with satisfaction that the
political leadership and society of Guinea-Bissau as a whole are demonstrating their
commitment to reforming the security sector, the justice system, the public
administration and the economy. In this regard, a constructive relationship between
the President, the Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly will
continue to be essential.
65. Notwithstanding this positive outlook, State institutions in the country remain
weak and the root causes of instability remain largely unaddressed. I call upon all
national actors to remain vigilant against the erosion of gains already made and to
continue efforts to build political trust with the people. The consolidation of the rule
of law and protection of international human rights and fundamental freedoms must
remain a priority. I also ask that they continue to take all measures needed to
prevent corruption, impunity or the use of Guinea-Bissau as a transit point for drug
trafficking and organized crime.
66. The continued and sustained engagement of international partners will remain
critical for the foreseeable future given that considerable socioeconomic needs
remain unmet and poverty levels are extremely high. I call upon the international
community to use the partner round table planned for 26 March 2015 as an
opportunity to further enhance their engagement with Guinea-Bissau and to
establish a forward-looking partnership. As one pillar of such a partnership,
I encourage donors and authorities to support the Government in developing
transparent aid coordination and tracking systems. It is important that partners
continue to provide predictable and long-term support to help Guinea-Bissau make
the necessary shift from its current economy, which is dependent on the export of
cashew nuts and on external assistance.
67. At the root of the cycle of instability in Guinea-Bissau lies the fact that there
has not been serious and genuine dialogue aimed at national reconciliation among
the various stakeholders in the country. In this regard, I urge national stakeholders
to embark on a path that moves the country firmly away from unconstitutional
seizures of power towards sustained democratic governance. Achieving this will
require an inclusive national dialogue aimed at finding collective solutions to the
problems facing the country. I welcome the initial steps taken to reactivate the
national dialogue and reconciliation process. I encourage all national stakeholders to
ensure that the process is inclusive, addresses the root causes of instability and
provides a solid platform on which to ensure sustained national reconciliation,
political stability and socioeconomic development.
68. To ensure that the mandate of UNIOGBIS is aligned with the priorities of the
legitimate, democratic Government, I recommend the inclusion of the priorities
identified in paragraphs 60-62 of this report in the mission’s mandate, namely:
strengthened coordination of international partners and mobilization of international
assistance; a reinforced role for my Special Representative with regard to the use of
my good offices and greater support for a national dialogue and reconciliation
process; and Security Council support for the continuation of ECOMIB, given its
essential role as a partner to Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations.

14-68158

17/18

S/2015/37

69. I also recommend an extension of UNIOGBIS for a period of 12 months, until
29 February 2016, which would allow the mission to provide sustained support to
the Government in moving its priorities forward.
70. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS
and the United Nations country team under the leadership of my Special
Representative, Miguel Trovoada, as well as to regional and international partners
for their continuing contributions to peacebuilding efforts in Guinea-Bissau.

18/18

14-68158
