RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

Page

791 (VIII). Measures to limit the duration of regular sessions of the General
Assembly (23 October 1953) (item 54) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
792 (VIII). Continuation of the United Nations Tribunal in Libya (23 October
1953) (item SS) . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
793 (VIII). Invitation to non-member States to become Parties to the Convention on the Political Rights of Women (23 October 1953) (item 64) . . . . . . . .
794 (VIII). Transfer to the United Nations of the functions exercised by the
League of Nations under the Slavery Convention of 25 September 1926
(23 October 1953) (item 30) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
795 (VIII). Appeal to States to accelerate their ratifications of, or accessions to,
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and measures designed to -ensure the widest possible diffusion of the nature,
contents and purposes of the Convention ( 3 November 1953) ( item 67) . . . .
796 (VIII). Publication of documents concerning the drafting and application
of the Charter: Preparatory work with regard to the possible holding of a
General Conference of the Members of the United Nations in accordance with
Article 109 of the Charter (27 November 1953) (items 58, 70 and 72) . . . . . .
797 (VIII). Arbitral procedure (7 December 1953) (item 53) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
798 (VIIi.). Regime of the high seas (7 December 1953) (item 53) . . . . . . . . . .
799 (VIII). Request for the codification of the principles of international law
governing State responsibility (7 December 1953) (item 53) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

791 (VIII). Measures to limit the duration of
regular sessions of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Having regard to General Assembly resolution 689
(VII) of 21 December 1952,
Having regard to the report 1 of the Special Committee on Measures to Limit the Duration of Regular
Sessions of the General Assembly,
1. Takes note of the above-mentioned report;
2. (a) Amends rule 38 of its rules of procedure
to read as follows :
"The General Committee shall comprise the President of the General Assembly, who shall preside,
the seven Vice-Presidents, the Chairmen of the
six Main Committees and the Chairman of the Ad
H oc Political Committee when one is established.
No two members of the General Committee shall be
members of the same delegation, and it shall be so
constituted as to ensure its representative character.
Chairmen of other committees upon which all Members have the right to be represented and which are
established by the General Assembly to meet during
the session, shall be entitled to attend meetings of
the General Committee and may participate without
vote in the discussions";
( b) Amends the second sentence of rule 39 of its
rules of procedure to read as follows :
1 See

document A/2402.

49

SO
50

51

51
51
51
52

"The Chairman of a Main Committee or of the
Ad H oc Political Committee shall, in case of absence, designate the Vice-Chairman of the Committee as his substitute";
3. Amends rule 98 of its rules of procedure to read
as follows:
"Each Main Committee, taking into account the
closing date for the session fixed by the General
Assembly on the recommendation of the· General
Committee, shall adopt its own priorities and meet
as may be necessary to complete the consideration
of the items referred to it."
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

792 (VIII).

Continuation of the United Nations
Tribunal in Libya

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 388 (V) of 15 December
1950 on the economic and financial provisions relating
to Libya, article X of which set up a United Nations
Tribunal in Libya and defined its functions,
Noting that the Governments of Italy and Libya
are conducting negotiations for the conclusion of the
various agreements provided for in resolution 388 (V),
Noting that both those Governments, in their replies 2
to a letter from the Secretary-General, state that they
2

49

49

See document A/2459.

General Assembly-Eighth Session

50

consider that the Triounal should be continued for a
further period,
Having noted the explanatory memorandum 3 by the
Secretary-General concerning the continuation of the
functions of the Tribunal,
1. Resolves that the United Nations Tribunal in
Libya shall continue in existence ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the Governments concerned regarding the future of the Tribunal, to report to the General Assembly
at its tenth session.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
793 (VID). Invitation to non-member States to
become Parties to the Conventi<,n on the Po•
litical Rights of Women

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 504 E (XVI) dated 23 July 1953,
Considering that articles IV and V of the Convention on the Political Rights of Women provide, inter
alia, that the Convention shall be open for signature
and ratification or for accession on behalf of any nonmember State to which an invitation has been addressed
by the General Assembly,
Decides to request the Secretary-General to dispatch
such an invitation to each non-member State which is
or hereafter becomes a member of one or more of the
specialized agencies of the United Nations, or which
is or hereafter becomes a Party to the Statute of the
International Court of Justice.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

vention") the League of Nations was invested with certain
duties and functions, and
Considering that it is expedient that these duties and functions should be continued by the United Nations,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
The States Parties to the present Protocol undertake that
as between themselves they will, in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol, attribute full legal force and effect to
and duly apply the amendments to the Convention set forth
in the annex to the Protocol.
Article II
1. The present Protocol shall be open for signature or acceptance by any of the States Parties to the Convention to
which the Secretary-General has communicated for this purpose a copy of ~he Protocol.
2. States may become Parties to the present Protocol by:
(a) Signature without reservation as to acceptance;
(b) Signature with reservation as to acceptance, followed
by acceptance;
( c) Acceptance.
3. Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of a formal
instrument with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Article III
1. The present Protocol shall come into force on the date on
which two States shall have become Parties thereto, and shall
thereafter come into force in respect of each State upon the
date on which it becomes a Party to the Protocol.
2. The amendments set forth in the annex to the present
Protocol shall come into force when twenty-three States shall
have become Parties to the Protocol, and consequently any
State becoming a Party to the Convention, after the amendments thereto have come into force, shall become a Party to
the Convention as so amended.

Article IV

In accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 102 of the Charter

794 (VID). Transfer to the United Nations of
the functions exercised by the League of Nations under the Slavery Convention of 25
September 1926

The General Assembly,
Considering Economic and Social Council resolution
475 (XV), adopted on 27 April 1953, concerning the
transfer to the United Nations of the functions exercised by the League of Nations under the Slavery
Convention of 25 September 1926,
Desirous of continuing international co-operation
relating to the elimination of slavery,
1. Approves the Protocol which accompanies the
present resolution;
2. Urges all States Parties to the Slavery Convention to sign or accept this Protocol ;
3. Recommends all other States to accede at their
earliest opportunity to the Slavery Convention as
amended by the present Protocol.
453rd plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.
Protocol amending the Slavery Convention
signed at Geneva on 25 September 1926
The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Considering that under the Slavery Convention signed at
Geneva on 25 September 1926 (hereinafter called "the Cons Ibid.

of the United Nations and the regulations pursuant thereto
adopted by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations is authorized to effect registration of the
present Protocol and of the amendments made in the Convention by the Protocol on the respective dates of their entry into
force and to publish the Protocol and the amended text of the
Convention as soon as possible after registration.
Article V
The present Protocol, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations Secretariat. The
texts of the Convention to be amended in accordance with
the annex being authentic in the English and French languages
only, the English and French texts of the annex shall be equally
authentic, and the Chinese, Russian and Spanish texts shall be
translations. The Secretary-General shall prepare certified copies
of the Protocol, including the annex, for communication to
States Parties to the Convention, as well as to all other States
Members of the United Nations. He shall likewise prepare for
communication to States, including States not Members of the
United Nations, upon the entry into force of the amendments
as provided in article III, certified copies of the Convention as
so amended.
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, signed the present
Protocol on the date appearing opposite their respective signatures.
Done at the Headquarters of the United Nations, ::srew York,
this. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of ........................ •
one thousand nine hundred and fifty-three.
• The above Protocol was opened for signature or acceptance at United K ations Headquarters on 7 December 1953.
