A/77/386

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 100

Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly
Report of the First Committee
Rapporteur: Mr. Nazim Khaldi (Algeria)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session the item entitled:
“Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth
Special Session of the General Assembly:
“(a) United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services;
“(b) Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons;
“(c) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa;
“(d) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean;
“(e) United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and
the Pacific;
“(f) Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa;
“(g) United Nations Disarmament Information Programme;
“(h) United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament”
and to allocate it to the First Committee.
2.
At its 1st meeting, on 29 September 2022, the First Committee decided to
conduct its work in three phases. The first phase would be a general debate on all
disarmament and international security items allocated to it, namely items 90 to 108,
as well as a general debate on the working methods of the Committee and programme

22-25294 (E)

211122

*2225294*

A/77/386

planning, namely items 124 and 139; the second phase would be dedicated to thematic
discussions; and the third phase would be for action on all draft proposals.
3.
At its 2nd to 10th meetings, on 3, 4, 6 and 7 and from 10 to 13 October, the
Committee held its general debate on items 90 to 108. At its 10th meeting, on
13 October, the Committee also held its general debate on items 124 and 139. On
14 October, at its 11th meeting, the Committee held exchanges with the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs and other high-level officials in the field of
arms control and disarmament nominated by regional groups. The Committee also
held 14 meetings (11th to 24th), on 14, from 17 to 21 and from 24 to 27 October, for
thematic discussions and panel exchanges with independent experts. At those
meetings, as well as during the action phase, draft resolutions and decisions were
introduced and considered. At its 23rd meeting, on 27 October, the Committee held a
joint panel discussion of the First and Fourth Committees on possible challenges to
space security and sustainability. The Committee took action on all draft resolutions
and decisions at its 25th to 32nd meetings, on 28 and 31 October and from 1 to
4 November. 1
4.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following
documents:
(a)

Report of the Conference on Disarmament (A/77/27);

(b) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disarmament
Information Programme (A/77/115);
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations disarmament
fellowship, training and advisory services programme (A/77/117);
(d) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific (A/77/118);
(e) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean
(A/77/120);
(f) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa (A/77/121);
(g) Report of the Secretary-General on regional confidence-building
measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa (A/77/145).

II. Consideration of proposals
A.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.32
5.
On 10 October, the delegation of Nigeria, on behalf of Albania, Algeria, Austria,
Belgium, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, Guatema la,
Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, Poland,

__________________
1

2/28

For an account of the Committee’s discussion of the item, see A/C.1/77/PV.2, A/C.1/77/PV.3,
A/C.1/77/PV.4, A/C.1/77/PV.5, A/C.1/77/PV.6, A/C.1/77/PV.7, A/C.1/77/PV.8, A/C.1/77/PV.9,
A/C.1/77/PV.10, A/C.1/77/PV.11, A/C.1/77/PV.12, A/C.1/77/PV.13, A/C.1/77/PV.14,
A/C.1/77/PV.15, A/C.1/77/PV.16, A/C.1/77/PV.17, A/C.1/77/PV.18, A/C.1/77/PV.19,
A/C.1/77/PV.20, A/C.1/77/PV.21, A/C.1/77/PV.22, A/C.1/77/PV.23, A/C.1/77/PV.24,
A/C.1/77/PV.25, A/C.1/77/PV.25 (Resumption 1), A/C.1/77/PV.26, A/C.1/77/PV.27,
A/C.1/77/PV.28, A/C.1/77/PV.29, A/C.1/77/PV.30, A/C.1/77/PV.31 and A/C.1/77/PV.32.
22-25294

A/77/386

Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland and the United States of America, submitted a draft resolution entitled
“United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services”
(A/C.1/77/L.32). Subsequently, Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, the Comoros, Cyprus, Eswatini, Georgia, Iceland, Ireland, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Malawi, Montenegro, Singapore, Thailand, the United Republic
of Tanzania and Zimbabwe joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
6.
At its 30th meeting, on 3 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.32 without a vote (see para. 21, draft resolution I).

B.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.57
7.
On 13 October, the delegation of India, on behalf of Bangladesh, India, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam,
submitted a draft resolution entitled “Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of
Nuclear Weapons” (A/C.1/77/L.57). Subsequently, Afghanistan, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Maldives, Mauritius, Myanmar, Nepal and Sri Lanka joined in sponsoring
the draft resolution.
8.
At its 25th meeting, on 28 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.57 by a recorded vote of 118 to 50, with 14 abstentions (see para. 21, draft
resolution II). The voting was as follows: 2
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,

__________________
2

22-25294

Subsequently, the delegation of Belarus informed the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.
3/28

A/77/386

San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Armenia, Brazil, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Fiji,
Guyana, Japan, Marshall Islands, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Serbia, Sudan, Thailand.

C.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.31
9.
On 8 October, the delegation of Nigeria, on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of African States, as well as on behalf
of Australia, Austria, Italy and Portugal, submitted a draft resolution entitled “United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa” (A/C.1/77/L.31).
10. At its 31st meeting, on 4 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.31 without a vote (see para. 21, draft resolution III).

D.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.44
11. On 11 October, the delegation of Peru, on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, as well as on behalf of Austria, submitted a draft resolution entitled “United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean” (A/C.1/77/L.44).
12. At its 31st meeting, on 4 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.44 without a vote (see para. 21, draft resolution IV).

E.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.37
13. On 10 October, the delegation of Nepal, on behalf of Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, China, Japan, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, the
Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka and Viet Nam, submitted a draft
resolution entitled “United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific” (A/C.1/77/L.37). Subsequently, Bhutan, India, Maldives,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Myanmar, Samoa, Singapore, Thailand
and Timor-Leste joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
14. At its 31st meeting, on 4 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.37 without a vote (see para. 21, draft resolution V).

F.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.28
15. On 10 October, the delegation of Cameroon, on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Economic Community of Central
African States, submitted a draft resolution entitled “Regional confidence-building
measures: activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa” (A/C.1/77/L.28).
16. At its 31st meeting, on 4 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.28, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 21, draft resolution VI).

4/28

22-25294

A/77/386

G.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.20
17. On 5 October, the delegation of Mexico, on behalf of Argentina, Austria,
Belgium, Costa Rica, Croatia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Lebanon, Mexico,
Norway, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal and Spain, submitted a draft resolution
entitled “United Nations Disarmament Information Programme” (A/C.1/77/L.20).
Subsequently, Colombia, Germany, Hungary, Kiribati, Peru and Thailand joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
18. At its 30th meeting, on 3 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.20 without a vote (see para. 21, draft resolution VII).

H.

Draft resolution A/C.1/77/L.9
19. On 22 September, the delegation of Indonesia, on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
submitted a draft resolution entitled “United Nations regional centres for pea ce and
disarmament” (A/C.1/77/L.9).
20. At its 31st meeting, on 4 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.1/77/L.9 without a vote (see para. 21, draft resolution VIII).

22-25294

5/28

A/77/386

III. Recommendations of the First Committee
21. The First Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and
advisory services
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 1
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 108 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, the first special session devoted to
disarmament, 2 to establish a programme of fellowships on disarmament, as well as its
decisions contained in annex IV to the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special
Session of the General Assembly, the second special session devoted to disarmament, 3
including its decision to continue the programme,
Noting that the programme continues to contribute significantly to developing
greater awareness of the importance and benefits of disarmament and a better
understanding of the concerns of the international community in the field of
disarmament and security, as well as to enhancing the knowledge and skills of fellows,
allowing them to participate more effectively in efforts in the field of disarmament at
all levels,
Recognizing the need for Member States to take into account gender equality
when nominating candidates to the programme,
Recalling all the resolutions on the matter since the thirty-seventh session of the
General Assembly, in 1982, including resolution 50/71 A of 12 December 1995,
resolution 73/73 of 5 December 2018 and resolution 75/74 of 7 December 2020,
Believing that the forms of assistance available under the programme to Member
States, in particular to developing countries, will enhance the capabilities of their
officials to follow ongoing deliberations and negotiations on disarmament, both
bilateral and multilateral,
1.
Reaffirms its decisions contained in annex IV to the Concluding Document
of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly and the guidelines approved
by the Assembly in its resolution 33/71 E of 14 December 1978; 4
2.
Notes with satisfaction that the programme has trained 1,076 officials from
170 Member States throughout its more than 44 years of existence, many of whom
hold positions of responsibility in the field of disarmament within their own
Governments;
3.
Expresses its appreciation to all Member States and organizations that
have consistently supported the programme throughout the years, thereby
contributing to its success, in particular to the European Union and to the
Governments of Argentina, Brazil, Germany, Japan, Kazakhstan, Paki stan, the
__________________

A/77/117.
Resolution S-10/2.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session, Annexes , agenda items 9–13,
document A/S-12/32.
4
A/33/305.
1
2

6/28

22-25294

A/77/386

Republic of Korea and Switzerland for continuing extensive and highly educative
study visits for the participants in the programme during 2021 and 2022;
4.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the International Court
of Justice, the International Criminal Court, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Vienna Centre for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
for organizing specific study programmes in the field of disarmament in their
respective areas of competence, thereby contributing to the objectives of the
programme;
5.
Encourages Member States to leverage the knowledge of the United
Nations disarmament fellows as a useful resource on matters related to disarmament
and international security;
6.
Commends the Secretary-General for the diligence with which the
programme has continued to be carried out;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement annually the
programme within existing resources and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its seventy-ninth session;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-ninth session,
under the item entitled “Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the sub-item entitled “United
Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services”.

22-25294

7/28

A/77/386

Draft resolution II
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons
The General Assembly,
Convinced that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat to the
survival of humankind,
Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of
8 July 1996 on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons, 1
Convinced that a multilateral, universal and binding agreement prohibiting the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would contribute to the elimination of the
nuclear threat and to the climate for negotiations leading to the ultimate elimination
of nuclear weapons, thereby strengthening international peace and security,
Conscious that some steps have been taken by the Russian Federation and the
United States of America towards a reduction of their nuclear weapons and that
further steps – in all relevant formats – on nuclear arms control and disarmament can
contribute to the improvement of the international climate and the goal of the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that, in paragraph 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 2 it is stated that all States should actively participate
in efforts to bring about conditions in international relations among States in which a
code of peaceful conduct of nations in international affairs could be agreed upon and
which would preclude the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that any use of nuclear weapons would be a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and a crime against humanity, as declared in its resolutions
1653 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 33/71 B of 14 December 1978, 34/83 G of
11 December 1979, 35/152 D of 12 December 1980 and 36/92 I of 9 December 1981,
Recognizing that a legally binding prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons is
not contrary to but in fact contributes to international efforts for the achievement and
maintenance of a world free of nuclear weapons,
Stressing that an international convention on the prohibition of the use of
nuclear weapons would be an important step in a phased programme towards the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons, with a specified framework of time,
Noting with regret that the Conference on Disarmament, during its 2022 session,
was unable to undertake negotiations on this subject as called for in General Assembly
resolution 76/56 of 6 December 2021,
1.
Reiterates its request to the Conference on Disarmament to commence
negotiations in order to reach agreement on an international convention prohibiting
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances;
2.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report to the General
Assembly on the results of those negotiations.

__________________
1
2

8/28

A/51/218, annex.
Resolution S-10/2.
22-25294

A/77/386

Draft resolution III
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa
The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United
Nations, in which it is stipulated that a function of the General Assembly is to consider
the general principles of cooperation in the maintenance of international peace and
security, including the principles governing disarmament and arms limitation,
Recalling its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 D of 3 December
1986, 42/39 J of 30 November 1987 and 43/76 D of 7 December 1988 on the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and its resolutions
46/36 F of 6 December 1991 and 47/52 G of 9 December 1992 on regional
disarmament, including confidence-building measures,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the Regional Centre, the most
recent of which is resolution 76/57 of 6 December 2021,
Recalling further its resolution 73/46 of 5 December 2018, in which it
recognized the role of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control,
Reaffirming the role of the Regional Centre in promoting disarmament, peace
and security at the regional level,
Welcoming the continuing and deepening cooperation between the Regional
Centre, the African Union and African subregional organizations in the context of the
adoption of Agenda 2063 by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union, and in particular the objective of silencing the guns in Africa,
Welcoming also the work of the Regional Centre in support of the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals, 1 in particular Goal 16 on peace, justice and
strong institutions, and target 16.4, which addresses the reduction of illicit arms flows,
Recalling the decision taken by the Executive Council of the African Union at
its eighth ordinary session, held in Khartoum from 16 to 21 January 2006, 2 in which
the Council called upon member States to make voluntary contributions to the
Regional Centre to maintain its operations,
Recalling also the call by the Secretary-General for continued financial and
in-kind support from Member States, which would enable the Regional Centre to
discharge its mandate in full and to respond more effectively to requests for assistance
from African States,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 3

2.
Commends the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa for its sustained support to Member States in implementing
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation activities through seminars and
conferences, capacity-building and training, policy and technical expertise, and
information and advocacy at the regional and national levels;
3.
Welcomes the continental dimension of the activities of the Regional
Centre in response to the evolving needs of African Member States and the region’s

__________________

See resolution 70/1.
A/60/693, annex II, decision EX.CL/Dec.263 (VIII).
3
A/77/121.
1
2

22-25294

9/28

A/77/386

new and emerging challenges in the areas of disarmament, peace and security,
including maritime security;
4.
Recalls the undertaking by the Regional Centre to deepen its partnership
with the African Union Commission in the context of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed on
19 April 2017, as well as with African subregional organizations, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to facilitate close cooperation between the Regional
Centre and the African Union, in particular in the areas of disarmament, peace and
security;
5.
Welcomes the contribution of the Regional Centre to continental
disarmament, peace and security, in particular its contribution to the implementation
of Agenda 2063 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union, the objective of silencing the guns in Africa and its master road map
of practical steps to silence the guns in Africa, as well as its assistance to the African
Commission on Nuclear Energy in its implementation of the African NuclearWeapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Pelindaba); 4
6.
Also welcomes efforts by the Regional Centre to promote the role and
representation of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control
activities;
7.
Calls upon Member States and other bilateral and multilateral stakeholders
to further enable the Regional Centre to provide adequate assistance to African
Member States on arms control and disarmament from a human security perspective,
notably in the following areas of arms control: prevention of violent extremism, youth
and peace and security, and women and peace and security;
8.
Notes with appreciation the tangible achievements of the Regional Centre
and the impact of the assistance that it provides to African States to control small
arms and light weapons through capacity-building for national commissions on small
arms and light weapons, defence and security forces, and United Nations
peacekeeping mission personnel, as well as the support that the Centre provided to
States in preventing the diversion of such weapons, in particular to non-State armed
groups and terrorist groups, 5 and also notes with appreciation the assistance provided
by the Centre in the implementation of the Central African Convention for the Control
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components
That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly (Kinshasa
Convention), 6 which entered into force on 8 March 2017, and its substantive support
to the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, in the implementation of the Economic Community of West African States
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials and on security sector reform initiatives, and to East Africa on programmes
to control brokering of small arms and light weapons, including the additional
assistance provided by the Centre to African Member States in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004;
9.
Commends the Regional Centre for the support and assistance that it
provided to African States, upon request, on the Arms Trade Treaty, 7 including
through the organization of subregional and regional seminars and workshops;
10. Urges all States, as well as international governmental and
non-governmental organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions to
__________________

A/50/426, annex.
Security Council resolution 2370 (2017).
6
See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 3013, No. 52373.
4
5

10/28

22-25294

A/77/386

enable the Regional Centre to carry out its programmes and activities and meet the
needs of African States;
11. Urges, in particular, States members of the African Union to make
voluntary contributions to the trust fund for the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa, in conformity with the decision taken by the
Executive Council of the African Union in Khartoum in January 2006;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Regional Centre
with the support necessary for greater achievements and results;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its seventy-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session,
under the item entitled “Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the sub-item entitled “United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa”.

22-25294

11/28

A/77/386

Draft resolution IV
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 K of 30 November
1987 and 43/76 H of 7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, with
headquarters in Lima,
Recalling also its resolution 76/58 of 6 December 2021 and all previous
resolutions on the Regional Centre,
Recognizing that the Regional Centre has continued to provide substantive
support for the implementation of regional, subregional and national initiatives and
has intensified its contribution to the coordination of United Nations efforts towards
peace and disarmament and for the promotion of economic and social development,
and emphasizing the role of the Centre in providing support for the realization of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 1
Reaffirming the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request,
substantive support for the initiatives and other activities of the Member States of the
region for the implementation of measures for peace and disarmament and for the
promotion of economic and social development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 2 and expressing its
appreciation for the important assistance provided, upon request, by the Regional
Centre to countries in the region, including through capacity-building and technical
assistance activities for the implementation of disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control instruments,
Welcoming the support provided by the Regional Centre to Member States in
the implementation of disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control instruments,
Emphasizing the need for the Regional Centre to further develop and strengthen
its activities and programmes in a comprehensive and balanced manner, in accordance
with its mandate and in line with the requests for assistance by Member States,
Welcoming the ongoing support provided by the Regional Centre to Member
States in the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, 3
Welcoming also the assistance provided by the Regional Centre to States, upon
request, in the management and securing of national weapons stockpiles and in the
identification and destruction of surplus, obsolete or seized weapons and ammunition,
as declared by competent national authorities, in particular the implementati on of the
Roadmap for Implementing the Caribbean Priority Actions on the Illicit Proliferation
of Firearms and Ammunition across the Caribbean in a Sustainable Manner by 2030
(Caribbean Firearms Roadmap),
Welcoming further the initiative of the Regional Centre to continue to conduct
activities in line with efforts to promote the equitable representation of women and
the engagement of youth in all decision-making and implementation processes with
regard to matters related to disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control, as
__________________

Resolution 70/1.
A/77/120.
3
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
1
2

12/28

22-25294

A/77/386

encouraged in its resolutions 65/69 of 8 December 2010 and 74/64 of 12 December
2019,
Recalling the report of the Group of Governmental Experts on the relationship
between disarmament and development, 4 referred to in General Assembly resolution
59/78 of 3 December 2004, which is of utmost interest with regard to the role that the
Regional Centre plays in promoting the issue in the region in pursuit of its mandate
to promote economic and social development related to peace and disarmament,
Noting that security, disarmament and development issues have always been
recognized as significant topics in Latin America and the Caribbean, the first
inhabited region in the world to be declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Recognizing the cooperation between the Regional Centre and the Agency for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean on
strengthening the nuclear-weapon-free zone established by the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of
Tlatelolco),5 as well as its efforts in promoting peace and disarmament education,
especially among youth,
Bearing in mind the important role of the Regional Centre in promoting
confidence-building measures, arms control and limitation, disarmament and
development at the regional level,
Recognizing the importance of information, research, education and training for
peace, disarmament and development in order to achieve understanding and
cooperation among States,
1.
Reiterates its strong support for the role of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean
in the promotion of activities of the United Nations at the regional and subregional
levels to strengthen peace, disarmament, stability, security and development among
its Member States;
2.
Welcomes the activities carried out in the past year by the Regional Centre,
and requests the Centre to continue to take into account the proposals to be submitted
by the countries of the region for the implementation of the mandate of the Centre in
the areas of peace, disarmament and development and for the promotion of, inter alia,
the prevention, combating and eradication of the illicit trade in small a rms and light
weapons, ammunition and explosives, the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and the reduction and prevention of armed violence at the regional and
subregional levels;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the political support provided by Member
States, as well as for the financial contributions made by Member States and
international governmental and non-governmental organizations, to strengthen the
Regional Centre, its programme of activities and the implementation thereof, and
encourages them to continue to make and to increase voluntary contributions;
4.
Invites all States of the region to continue to take part in the activities of
the Regional Centre, proposing items for inclusion in its programme of activities and
maximizing the potential of the Centre to meet the current challenges facing the
international community with a view to fulfilling the aims of the Charter of the United
Nations in the areas of peace, disarmament and development;
5.
Recognizes that the Regional Centre has an important role in the promotion
and development of regional and subregional initiatives agreed upon by the countries
__________________
4
5

22-25294

See A/59/119.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
13/28

A/77/386

of Latin America and the Caribbean in the field of weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons, and conventional arms, including small arms and light
weapons, in the relationship between disarmament and development, including the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, 6 in the promotion of the
participation of women and youth in this field and in strengthening voluntary
confidence-building measures among the countries of the region;
6.
Encourages the Regional Centre to further develop activities in all
countries of the region in the important areas of peace, disarmament and development
and to provide, upon request and in accordance with its mandate, support to Member
States of the region in the national implementation of relevant instruments, inter alia,
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the Arms Trade Treaty, 7 as well as in
the implementation of the 1540 programme on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session,
under the item entitled “Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the sub-item entitled “United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean”.

__________________
6
7

14/28

See resolution 70/1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 3013, No. 52373.
22-25294

A/77/386

Draft resolution V
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 42/39 D of 30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of
15 December 1989, by which it established the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Asia and renamed it the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, with headquarters in Kathmandu,
Recalling also the mandate of the Regional Centre to provide, on request,
substantive support for the initiatives and other activities mutually agreed upon by
the Member States of the Asia-Pacific region for the implementation of measures for
peace and disarmament, through appropriate utilization of available resources,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 1 and expressing its
appreciation to the Regional Centre for its important work in prom oting dialogue and
confidence-building measures through the organization of meetings, conferences and
workshops in the region, including national and subregional workshops on awarenessraising and promoting the universalization of the Hague Code of Conduct against the
Proliferation of Ballistic Missiles; 2 capacity-building training for States of Asia and
the Pacific on strengthening the implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weap ons in
All Its Aspects; 3 a capacity-building project for States of Asia and the Pacific on gun
violence and illicit small arms trafficking from a gender perspective; capacity building and awareness-raising in support of the establishment and maintenance of
gun-free zones in Asia and the Pacific; and the twentieth United Nations-Republic of
Korea Joint Conference on Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Issues,
Expressing appreciation for the timely execution by Nepal of its host country
commitments for the physical operation of the Regional Centre,
Welcoming the work by the Regional Centre in support of the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 16, 4 in particular target 5.2 to eliminate all
forms of violence against all women and girls, target 5.5 to ensure women’s full and
effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership and target 16.4 to
significantly reduce illicit financial and arms flows,
Welcoming also the efforts by the Regional Centre to promote the role and
representation of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control
activities,
Welcoming further the youth-focused outreach activities undertaken by the
Regional Centre,
1.
Expresses its satisfaction at the activities carried out over the past year by
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the
Pacific, and invites all States of the region to continue to support the activities of the
Regional Centre, including by continuing to take part in them, where possible, and by
proposing items for inclusion in the programme of activities of the Centre, in order
to contribute to the implementation of measures for peace and disarmament;
__________________

A/77/118.
A/57/724, enclosure.
3
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
4
See resolution 70/1.
1
2

22-25294

15/28

A/77/386

2.
Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Nepal for its cooperation and
financial support, which has enabled the Regional Centre to operate from Kathmandu;
3.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the Office for
Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat for providing the necessary support with a
view to ensuring the smooth operation of the Regional Centre and to enabling the
Centre to function effectively;
4.
Appeals to Member States, in particular those within the Asia-Pacific
region, as well as to international governmental and non-governmental organizations
and foundations, to make voluntary contributions, the only resources of the Regional
Centre, to strengthen its programme of activities and the implementation thereof;
5.
Reaffirms its strong support for the role of the Regional Centre in the
promotion of activities of the United Nations at the regional level to strengthen peace,
stability and security among its Member States;
6.
Underlines the importance of the Kathmandu process for the development
of the practice of region-wide security and disarmament dialogues;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session,
under the item entitled “Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the sub-item entitled “United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific”.

16/28

22-25294

A/77/386

Draft resolution VI
Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, in particular its resolution 76/60 of
6 December 2021,
Recalling also the guidelines for general and complete disarmament adopted at
its tenth special session, the first special session devoted to disarmament,
Bearing in mind the establishment by the Secretary-General on 28 May 1992 of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, the purpose of which is to encourage arms limitation, disarmament,
non-proliferation and development in the Central Africa subregion,
Recalling that the purpose of the Standing Advisory Committee is to conduct
reconstruction and confidence-building activities in Central Africa among its member
States, including through confidence-building and arms limitation measures,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building measures
taken on the initiative and with the participation of all States concerned and taking
into account the specific characteristics of each region, since such measures can
contribute to regional stability and to international peace and security,
Convinced that development can be achieved only in a climate of peace, security
and mutual confidence both within and among States,
Reaffirming the importance and relevance of the Standing Advisory Committee
as an instrument of preventive diplomacy in the subregional architecture for the
promotion of peace and security in Central Africa,
Bearing in mind the revitalization of the activities of the Standing Advisory
Committee decided upon at the forty-fourth ministerial meeting of the Committee,
held in Yaoundé from 29 May to 2 June 2017, with a view to enhancing its
contribution to the achievement of the objectives of peace, security and development
in Central Africa,
Taking note of the conclusions of the scientific symposium, held to mark the
thirtieth anniversary of the Standing Advisory Committee, on its substantial
contribution in the service of preventive diplomacy, as well as the recommendations
and the road map for their implementation,
Recalling the entry into force of the Central African Convention for the Control
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components
That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly (Kinshasa
Convention) on 8 March 2017 1 and the third Conference of States Parties to the Arms
Trade Treaty, held in Geneva from 11 to 15 September 2017,
Convinced that the resources released by disarmament, including regional
disarmament, can be devoted to economic and social development and to the
protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in particular those of
developing countries,
Reaffirming the Libreville Declaration on the Adoption and Implementation of
the Regional Strategy and Plan of Action for Combating Terrorism and the Trafficking
__________________
1

22-25294

See A/65/517-S/2010/534, annex.
17/28

A/77/386

in Small Arms and Light Weapons in Central Africa, adopted by the States members
of the Standing Advisory Committee on 26 November 2015 at their forty-first
ministerial meeting, held in Libreville from 23 to 27 November 2015, 2
Recalling the communiqués of the forty-eighth 3 and forty-ninth ministerial
meetings of the Standing Advisory Committee, held from 27 to 31 May and from 25
to 29 November 2019 in Kinshasa and Luanda, respectively, the Brazzaville
Declaration on Cooperation for Peace and Security in Central Africa, 4 the Bata
Declaration for the Promotion of Lasting Democracy, Peace and Development in
Central Africa 5 and the Yaoundé Declaration on Peace, Security and Stability in
Central Africa, 6
Bearing in mind resolutions 1196 (1998) and 1197 (1998), adopted by the
Security Council on 16 and 18 September 1998, respectively, following its
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, 7
Welcoming the adoption, on 31 May 2022, of Security Council resolution 2634
(2022) on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea,
Recalling the successful conclusion of the Summit of Heads of State and
Government on Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé
on 24 and 25 June 2013, the inauguration in Yaoundé, on 11 September 2014, of the
Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea, the
effective commencement of its activities with the installation of its statutory officials
in Yaoundé on 22 February 2017, the inauguration of new offices of the Regional
Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa in Pointe Noire, Congo, on 20 October
2014, and the launch of the Multinational Maritime Coordination Centre in Cotonou,
Benin, in March 2015, and also the conclusion of the African Union Extraordinary
Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Security and Safety and
Development in Africa, held in Lomé on 15 October 2016,
Recalling also its resolution 69/314 of 30 July 2015, the first such resolution on
tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife, and also its resolutions 70/301 of 9 September
2016, 71/326 of 11 September 2017, 73/343 of 16 September 2019 and 75/311 of
23 July 2021, and reaffirming the outcome of the high-level meetings on poaching
and illicit wildlife trafficking, hosted by Gabon and Germany and held on the margins
of the high-level segments of the sixty-eighth and sixty-ninth sessions of the General
Assembly,
Emphasizing the need to strengthen the capacity for early warning, conflict
prevention and peacekeeping in Africa, and recalling in this regard the concrete
conflict prevention initiatives facilitated by the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs of the Secretariat,
Welcoming the establishment of the Commission of the Economic Community
of Central African States and the close cooperation established between the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the Economic Community, as well as
the signing of the framework of cooperation agreement between the two entities on
14 June 2016,

__________________

See A/70/682-S/2016/39, annex 3.
A/73/967-S/2019/613, annex, enclosure I.
4
A/50/474, annex I.
5
A/53/258-S/1998/763, annex II, appendix I.
6
A/53/868-S/1999/303, annex II.
7
A/52/871-S/1998/318.
2
3

18/28

22-25294

A/77/386

Taking note of the decisions adopted by the Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of Central African States at its eighteenth
ordinary session, held in Libreville on 27 November 2020, at its nineteenth ordinary
session, held virtually on 30 July 2021, and at its twentieth session, held in person in
Brazzaville on 19 January 2022,
Welcoming the continued implementation of the institutional reform of the
Economic Community of Central African States, including the installation of the
Committee of the Wise,
Bearing in mind the increased focus of the Standing Advisory Committee on
human security questions, such as trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, as an important consideration for subregional peace, stability and conflict
prevention, and recalling the adoption by the General Assembly at its seventy -second
session of the political declaration on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons 8 following the high-level
meeting of the Assembly on the appraisal of the Global Plan of Action,
Expressing continued concern about the fragile situation in the Central African
Republic and in the neighbouring countries affected, and noting the importance of
promoting the political process through the reactivation of the joint bilateral
commissions between the Central African Republic and its neighbours and the
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic 9 between the Government and armed groups for lasting peace, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, and strengthening the authority of the State,
Welcoming the adoption of the joint road map for peace in the Central African
Republic at the third mini-summit of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, held in Luanda on 16 September 2021, and the republican dialogue held in
Bangui from 21 to 27 March 2022, which brought together the majority of political
and social forces with a view to ensuring peace, stability, security and reconcilia tion
in order to find a peaceful solution to the crisis affecting the country,
Highlighting the regional security implications of the situation in the Central
African Republic, and reiterating the commitment of the region and the international
community to supporting the parties in the effective implementation of the Political
Agreement, including through the provision of political, security, technical and
financial support,
Welcoming the signature by the Central African Republic and its neighbouring
countries, in Yaoundé on 27 April 2022, of a joint declaration on the dignified return
of refugees of the Central African Republic to their country,
Recalling the Brazzaville Declaration on Confidence-Building Measures, 10 and
expressing concern that the issue of mercenaries has become a major security concern,
undermining trust and creating tensions among States members of the Standing
Advisory Committee,
Welcoming the adoption of the declaration on democratic and peaceful elections
as a means of strengthening stability and achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals in Central Africa at the fiftieth ministerial meeting of the Standing Advisory
Committee, 11
__________________

Resolution 72/1.
S/2019/145, annex.
10
A/73/224, annex IV.
11
A/76/274, annex I.
8
9

22-25294

19/28

A/77/386

Taking note of the inclusive and sovereign national dialogue on national
reconciliation held in N’Djamena from 20 August to 8 October 2022 with the aim of
laying new foundations for the peace and stability of Chad,
Welcoming the call by States members of the Economic Community of Central
African States during the forty-ninth ministerial meeting of the Standing Advisory
Committee, in Luanda, on the need to strengthen partnership with the United Nations
to address the impact of climate change on peace and security in the subregion,
Expressing concern about the impact of cross-border criminality, in particular
the activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army, the terrorist attacks by groups affiliated
with Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin region and incidents of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea, the illegal exploitation of natural resources, and the issue of transh umance
and its cross-border security implications for peace, security and development in
Central Africa,
Welcoming the progress made by the States members of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Benin in making the Multinational Joint Task Force operational in
order to combat effectively the threat posed by the Boko Haram terrorist group to the
Lake Chad basin region,
Recalling the adoption by the Lake Chad Basin Commission, with the support
of the African Union, of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy
for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region in Abuja on
30 August 2018,
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 2349 (2017) of 31 March 2017, in
which the Council called for, inter alia, increased assistance to the countries of the
region,
Considering the urgent need to prevent the possible movement of illicit
weapons, mercenaries and combatants involved in conflicts in the Sahel and in
neighbouring countries in the Central African subregion,
Concerned by the persistence of the humanitarian crisis due to the displacement
of populations in several Member States, the resurgence of inter-community conflicts
due in particular to the scarcity of resources, the use of transhumance for criminal
purposes, now identified as a phenomenon of emerging insecurity in Central Africa,
as well as the rise of hate speech, especially during electoral processes,
Recalling the conclusions of the fifty-second and fifty-third ministerial meetings
of the Standing Advisory Committee, held in Libreville from 22 to 26 November 2021
and in Yaoundé from 30 May to 3 June 2022, respectively,
1.
Reaffirms its support for efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building
measures at the regional and subregional levels in order to ease tensions and conflicts
in Central Africa and to further sustainable peace, stability and development in the
subregion;
2.
Welcomes and encourages the initiative of the States members of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa to further develop collaboration and synergies with the Economic Community
of Central African States;
3.
Welcomes the role played by the Standing Advisory Committee throughout
the 30 years of its existence, which has enabled the creation of institutions, such as
the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa and the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa and its organs, including the early
warning mechanism for Central Africa and the Central Africa Multinational Force,
that have contributed towards the establishment of lasting peace in the subregion;
20/28

22-25294

A/77/386

4.
Invites the Standing Advisory Committee and the Economic Community
of Central African States to initiate discussions on the relationship between the two
entities in the light of the institutional reform of the Economic Community, and urges
them to consider how to harmonize their views and actions so as to avoid overlap and
duplication in the implementation of their respective mandates;
5.
Encourages the Standing Advisory Committee, in view of the
repositioning of the Economic Community of Central African States and the
strengthening of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, to continue
to serve within the United Nations as a high-level body for continuous monitoring,
reflection and the fostering of solutions, with regard to the concerns and needs of the
Central African subregion in the area of peace and security;
6.
Welcomes efforts under way by the Standing Advisory Committee and its
secretariat to implement the communication strategy adopted at the forty-fifth
ministerial meeting of the Committee, held in Kigali from 4 to 8 December 2017, and
encourages member States and other partners to support initiatives aimed at
increasing the visibility of the Committee, including among the populations of the
subregion, in cooperation with civil society;
7.
Reaffirms the importance of disarmament and arms control programmes in
Central Africa carried out by the States of the subregion with the support of the United
Nations, the African Union and other international partners;
8.
Encourages Member States to provide assistance to those States members
of the Standing Advisory Committee that have ratified the Arms Trade Treaty, 12 and
encourages those that have not yet done so to ratify the Treaty;
9.
Encourages States members of the Standing Advisory Committee and
other interested States to provide financial support for the implementation of the
Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly (Kinshasa Convention), and encourages signatories that have
not yet done so to ratify the Convention;
10. Welcomes the holding of the first Conference of States Parties to the
Central African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly, in Yaoundé from 11 to 13 June 2018, in accordance with article
34, paragraph 3, of the Kinshasa Convention, and requests the Secretary-General to
convene the review conference of the Kinshasa Convention, in accordance with
article 34, paragraph 5, of the Convention, at the earliest opportunity, working closely
with the Economic Community of Central African States;
11. Encourages Member States to assist States parties to the Kinshasa
Convention with coordination activities for the control of small arms and light
weapons at the regional and national levels, including funding thereof, as
expeditiously as possible;
12. Urges Member States to increase financing for the Saving Lives Entity
fund and to support the projects and activities of Member States, in particular by
supporting the establishment and strengthening of national commissions for the
control of small arms and light weapons, the establishment of a platform for the
exchange of experiences among the national commissions, and the establishment and
operationalization of the Convention secretariat;

__________________
12

22-25294

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 3013, No. 52373.
21/28

A/77/386

13. Reaffirms its support for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy 13 and its four pillars, which constitute an ongoing effort, and calls upon
Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international, regional and
subregional organizations to step up their efforts to implement the Strategy in an
integrated and balanced manner and in all aspects;
14. Welcomes the adoption, by the Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of Central African States at its seventeenth
ordinary session, on 30 July 2020, of the strategy on preventing and combating
terrorism in Central Africa, and requests United Nations, regional and international
partners to support its implementation;
15. Welcomes the joint summit of the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States, in coordination with the African Union Commission, on peace,
security, stability and the fight against terrorism and violent extremism, held in Lomé
on 30 July 2018, and recalls the Lomé Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and
the Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism adopted at that summit;
16. Encourages the Economic Community of Central African States and the
Economic Community of West African States to work together towards the
implementation of the Lomé Declaration;
17. Encourages the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to carry
out the programmes of activities adopted at their ministerial meetings, and requests the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to continue to provide support;
18. Appeals to the international community to support the efforts undertaken
by the States concerned to implement disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, and urges the States concerned to ensure that such programmes take into
consideration the needs of women and children associated with former combatants;
19. Welcomes the efforts of Cameroon and the Congo in providing assistance
to the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in the Gulf o f Guinea
and the Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa, respectively, and
urges other member States to honour their financial commitments in order to ensure
the predictable and sustainable operation of the two Centres;
20. Encourages Member States to continue to implement the outcomes of the
Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety and Security in the
Gulf of Guinea by operationalizing the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea and activities of the Regional Centre for
Maritime Security in Central Africa, and also encourages the implementation of the
Charter on Maritime Security and Safety and Development in Africa adopted at the
African Union Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime
Security and Safety and Development in Africa;
21. Calls upon Member States and subregional bodies to take immediate
concerted action to counter the phenomenon of poaching and trafficking in wildlife
and natural resources, including through the implementation of the provisions of its
resolutions 69/314, 70/301, 71/326, 73/343 and 75/311;
22. Welcomes the progress made by the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Economic Community of West African States in initiating common
policies and joint programmes on the management of pastoralism and cross-border
transhumance, and encourages the Economic Community of Central African States to
adopt the protocol on pastoralism and cross-border transhumance in Central Africa;
__________________
13

22/28

Resolution 60/288.
22-25294

A/77/386

23. Encourages the development of mechanisms for regulation by the
Economic Community of Central African States, and calls for the holding of a high level conference to discuss issues relating to pastoralism and cross-border
transhumance with a view to ensuring joint and integrated management thereof;
24. Welcomes the adoption by experts, in Kinshasa on 24 June 2022, of the
draft regional strategy and plan of action for preventing and combating hate speech
in digital, audiovisual and written communication media in Central Africa, and
encourages its political endorsement without delay by the States members of the
Standing Advisory Committee, with a view to the development of a common approach
for deconstructing such discourse and promoting coexistence in the countries of the
Economic Community of Central African States;
25. Requests the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, in
collaboration with the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Africa, to facilitate the efforts undertaken by the States members of the Standing
Advisory Committee, in particular for their execution of the Implementation Plan for
the Kinshasa Convention; 14
26. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, with the support of the international community, to
continue to assist the countries of Central Africa in tackling the issues of refugees and
displaced persons in their territories;
27. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide their full assistance to the
Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa;
28. Welcomes the increased contributions made by several Member States to
the trust fund of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, reminds the States members of the Standing Advisory
Committee of the commitments that they undertook on the adoption of the Declaration
on the Trust Fund of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa on 8 May 2009 15 and the Bangui Declaration on 10 June
2016, 16 and invites those States members of the Committee that have not already done
so to contribute to the trust fund;
29. Urges other Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to support the activities of the Standing Advisory Committee effectively
through voluntary contributions to the trust fund;
30. Urges the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, to
strengthen the gender component of the various meetings of the Committee relating
to disarmament and international security, in line with the Sao Tome Declaration on
the Participation of Women in the Statutory Meetings of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, adopted on 1 December
2016, 17 in which member States were invited to increase the representation of women
in delegations participating in the statutory meetings of the Committee, and strongly
encourages the States members of the Committee to ensure that gender-related
considerations are taken into account in the activities of the Committee;
31. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support to the
Standing Advisory Committee, expresses appreciation for the role played by the
__________________

See A/65/717-S/2011/53, annex.
A/64/85-S/2009/288, annex I.
16
A/71/293, annex I.
17
A/72/363, annex II.
14
15

22-25294

23/28

A/77/386

United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, welcomes the outcome of the
strategic review of the Office, and strongly encourages the States members of the
Standing Advisory Committee and international partners to support the work of the
Office;
32. Welcomes the efforts of the Standing Advisory Committee towards
addressing cross-border security threats in Central Africa, including activities of
groups affiliated with Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army, and acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, the issue of transhumance and its
cross-border security implications, as well as the fallout from the situation in the
Central African Republic, and also welcomes the role of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa in coordinating those efforts, working closely with the
Economic Community of Central African States, the African Union and all relevant
regional and international partners;
33. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General for his support for the
revitalization of the activities of the Standing Advisory Committee, and requests him to
continue to provide the assistance needed to ensure the success of its regular meetings;
34. Decides to review the relevance and effectiveness of the work of the
Standing Advisory Committee every three years in order to align its scope of
competence with the constantly changing institutional environment and the numerous
challenges facing Central Africa;
35. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
36. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session,
under the item entitled “Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the sub-item entitled
“Regional confidence-building measures: activities of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa”.

24/28

22-25294

A/77/386

Draft resolution VII
United Nations Disarmament Information Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision taken in 1982 at its twelfth special session, the second
special session devoted to disarmament, by which the World Disarmament Campaign
was launched, 1
Bearing in mind its resolution 47/53 D of 9 December 1992, in which it decided,
inter alia, that the World Disarmament Campaign should be known thereafter as the
United Nations Disarmament Information Programme and the World Disarmament
Campaign voluntary trust fund as the voluntary trust fund for the United Nations
Disarmament Information Programme,
Recalling its resolutions 51/46 A of 10 December 1996, 53/78 E of 4 December
1998, 55/34 A of 20 November 2000, 57/90 of 22 November 2002, 59/103 of
3 December 2004, 61/95 of 6 December 2006, 63/81 of 2 December 2008, 65/81 of
8 December 2010, 67/67 of 3 December 2012, 69/71 of 2 December 2014, 71/74 of
5 December 2016, 73/79 of 5 December 2018 and 75/80 of 7 December 2020,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General, 2
1.
Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to make effective use of
the limited resources available to him and, amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, for adapting his working methods to fulfil his mandate in order to continue
to disseminate, as widely as possible, information on arms control and disarmament
to Governments, the media, non-governmental organizations, educational
communities and research institutes, and for carrying out a seminar and conference
programme;
2.
Stresses the importance of the United Nations Disarmament Information
Programme as a significant instrument in enabling all Member States to participate
fully in the deliberations and negotiations on disarmament in the various United
Nations bodies, in assisting them in complying with treaties, as required, and in
contributing to agreed mechanisms for transparency;
3.
Commends with satisfaction the launch of The United Nations
Disarmament Yearbook for 2020 and 2021, as well as its online editions, by the Office
for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat;
4.
Notes with appreciation the cooperation of the Department of Global
Communications of the Secretariat and its information centres in pursuit of the
objectives of the Programme;
5.
Recommends that the Programme continue to inform, educate and generate
public understanding of the importance of multilateral action and support for it,
including action by the United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament, in the
field of arms control and disarmament, in a factual, balanced and objective manner,
and that it focus its efforts:
(a) To continue to publish The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, the
flagship publication of the Office for Disarmament Affairs, in all official languages,
as well as its Occasional Papers, Study Series and other ad hoc information materials
in accordance with the current practice;
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session, Plenary Meetings ,
1st meeting, paras. 110–111.
2
A/77/115.
1

22-25294

25/28

A/77/386

(b) To continue to update the disarmament website as a part of the United
Nations website in as many official languages as feasible;
(c) To promote the use of the Programme as a means to provide information
related to progress in the implementation of nuclear disarmament measures;
(d) To continue to intensify United Nations interaction with the public,
principally non-governmental organizations and research institutes, to help to further
an informed debate on topical issues of arms limitation, disarmament and security;
(e) To continue to organize discussions on topics of interest in the field of
arms limitation and disarmament with a view to broadening understanding and
facilitating an exchange of views and information among Member States and civil
society;
6.
Recognizes the importance of all support extended to the voluntary trust
fund for the United Nations Disarmament Information Programme, and once again
invites all Member States to make further contributions to the fund with a view to
sustaining a strong outreach programme;
7.
Takes note of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on disarmament and non-proliferation education, 3 which reviews
the implementation of the recommendations made in the 2002 study on disarmament
and non-proliferation education; 4
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session a report covering both the implementation of the activities of
the Programme by the United Nations system during the previous two years and the
activities of the Programme contemplated by the system for the following two years;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-ninth session,
under the item entitled “Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the sub-item entitled “United
Nations Disarmament Information Programme”.

__________________
3
4

26/28

A/77/133.
A/57/124.
22-25294

A/77/386

Draft resolution VIII
United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 60/83 of 8 December 2005, 61/90 of 6 December 2006,
62/50 of 5 December 2007, 63/76 of 2 December 2008, 64/58 of 2 December 2009,
65/78 of 8 December 2010, 66/53 of 2 December 2011, 67/63 of 3 December 2012,
68/57 of 5 December 2013, 69/70 of 2 December 2014, 70/61 of 7 December 2015,
71/80 of 5 December 2016, 72/64 of 4 December 2017, 73/80 of 5 December 2018,
74/70 of 12 December 2019, 75/81 of 7 December 2020 and 76/61 of 6 December
2021 regarding the maintenance and revitalization of the three United Nations
regional centres for peace and disarmament,
Recalling also the reports of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, 1 the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific 2 and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean, 3
Reaffirming its decision, taken in 1982 at its twelfth special session, to establish
the United Nations Disarmament Information Programme, the purpose of which is to
inform, educate and generate public understanding and support for the objectives of
the United Nations in the field of arms control and disarmament,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 J of
3 December 1986, 42/39 D of 30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989
on the regional centres for peace and disarmament in Nepal, Peru and Togo,
Recalling that the thirtieth anniversary of the establishment by the General
Assembly of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Africa, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and
the Pacific and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean was celebrated in 2016 and in 2017,
Recognizing that the changes that have taken place in the world have created
new opportunities and posed new challenges for the pursuit of disarmament, and
bearing in mind in this regard that the regional centres for peace and disarmament can
contribute substantially to understanding and cooperation among States in each
particular region in the areas of peace, disarmament and development,
Noting that, in paragraph 279 of the Final Document of the Eighteenth Summit
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Baku on 25 and
26 October 2019, 4 the Heads of State or Government emphasized the importance of
United Nations activities at the regional level to increase the stability and security of
its Member States, which could be promoted in a substantive manner by the
maintenance and revitalization of the three regional centres for peace and
disarmament,
1.
Reiterates the importance of United Nations activities at the regional level
to advance disarmament and to increase the stability and security of its Member
States, which could be promoted in a substantive manner by the maintenance and
further strengthening of the three regional centres for peace and disarmament;
__________________

A/77/121.
A/77/118.
3
A/77/120.
4
A/74/548, annex.
1
2

22-25294

27/28

A/77/386

2.
Commends the three regional centres for peace and disarmament for their
sustained support provided to Member States for over 30 years in implementing
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation activities through seminars and
conferences, capacity-building and training, policy and technical expertise, and
information and advocacy at the global, regional and national levels;
3.
Reaffirms that, in order to achieve positive results, it is useful for the three
regional centres to carry out dissemination and educational programmes that promote
regional peace and security and that are aimed at changing basic attitudes with respect
to peace and security and disarmament so as to support the achievement of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations;
4.
Appeals to Member States in each region that are able to do so, as well as
to international governmental and non-governmental organizations and foundations,
to make voluntary contributions to the regional centres in their respective regions in
order to strengthen their activities and initiatives;
5.
Emphasizes the importance of the activities of the Regional Disarmament
Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all support necessary, within
existing resources, to the regional centres in carrying out their programmes of
activities;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session,
under the item entitled “Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly”, the sub-item entitled “United
Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament”.

28/28

22-25294
