United Nations

A/RES/57/238

General Assembly

Distr.: General
31 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 84 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/57/529/Add.3)]

57/238. World Summit on the Information Society
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/183 of 21 December 2001,
Recalling also the Meeting of the General Assembly devoted to information
and communication technologies for development, held in New York on 17 and
18 June 2002, 1
Welcoming the preparations for the World Summit on the Information Society
undertaken at the national and regional levels, and encouraging all countries to
intensify their work,
Welcoming also the regional conference held in Bamako from 25 to 30 May
2002, in the context of the preparatory process of the Summit,
Welcoming further the establishment of the Bureau of the Preparatory
Committee for the World Summit on the Information Society, and encouraging
Member States to support it in accomplishing its task,
Welcoming the convening of the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee,
held at Geneva from 1 to 5 July 2002,
Welcoming also the decision of the Information and Communication
Technologies Task Force to contribute actively to the preparatory process for the
Summit and, to that end, to hold its next meeting at Geneva on 21 and 22 February
2003,
1.
Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General containing the report of
the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the ongoing
preparatory process for the World Summit on the Information Society; 2
2.
Invites the Member States concerned to participate actively in the
regional conferences to be held under the auspices of the regional commissions in

_______________
1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Plenary Meetings, 104th to 106th
meetings (A/56/PV.101–104), and corrigenda.
2
A/57/71-E/2002/52 and Add.1.

02 55516

A/RES/57/238

Bucharest in November 2002 and in Bávaro, Dominican Republic, and Tokyo in
January 2003;
3.
Encourages non-governmental organizations, civil society and the
private sector to contribute further to, and actively participate in, the
intergovernmental preparatory process for the Summit and in the Summit itself,
according to the modalities of participation established by the Preparatory
Committee;
4.
Encourages all relevant United Nations bodies and other
intergovernmental organizations, including international and regional institutions, as
well as the Information and Communication Technologies Task Force, to enhance
their cooperation in and support to the preparatory process for the Summit;
5.
Recommends that the occasion of the World Summit on the Information
Society be used for arranging events related to the Summit;
6.
Recommends also that, while addressing the whole range of relevant
issues related to the information society, all actors involved adopt a coordinated
approach to addressing the needs of all countries, including developing countries, in
particular the least developed countries;
7.
Requests the International Telecommunication Union, in the context of
its leading managerial role in the preparatory process for the Summit, in close
cooperation with the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and in
coordination with other information offices of the United Nations system, to launch
a public information campaign to raise global awareness of the Summit, within the
existing resources and through voluntary contributions;
8.
Reiterates its call to the international community to make voluntary
contributions to the special trust fund established by the International
Telecommunication Union to support the preparations for and the holding of the
Summit, as well as to facilitate the effective participation of representatives of
developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, in the regional
meetings to be held in the first half of 2003, the preparatory meetings to be held in
2003 and the Summit itself;
9.
Invites countries to send representation at the highest political level to
the Summit, which will be held at Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003 and at
Tunis in 2005;
10. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations to inform all heads of
State and Government about the importance of the forthcoming Summit;
11. Invites the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication
Union to submit to the General Assembly for information, at its fifty-eighth and
fifty-ninth sessions, through the Economic and Social Council, a report on the
preparations for the Summit.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002

2
