S/PV.8015

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8015th meeting

Thursday, 27 July 2017, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/623)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-23264 (E)
*1723264*

S/PV.8015

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/623)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting. Ms. Mueller is joining the
meeting via video-teleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/623, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: On behalf of Mr. Stephen O’Brien,
the Emergency Relief Coordinator, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief
the Council on the latest humanitarian developments
in Syria. As you mentioned, I am speaking from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in Amman.
Earlier today, I had the opportunity to visit the
Azraq refugee camp, the second largest in Jordan after
the Zaatari camp. About 35,000 Syrian refugees are
living there, with many of them having been there for
several years. Most of them are women and children.
About a quarter of the refugees are originally from
Aleppo, and nearly 20 per cent are from Homs. My visit
left me with many impressions.
First, it made clear the level of the generosity and
hospitality shown by Jordan and other neighbouring
2/10

27/07/2017

host countries, whose local authorities and communities
have welcomed the influx of Syrian refugees, despite
the pressures it has put on their own resources.
Secondly, I saw the tremendous work being done by
the humanitarian organizations whose programming
enables families not just to survive but to lead
dignified lives in the most difficult conditions. Most
of all, however, I was inspired by the incredible hope
and strength of the people I met, despite the terrible
circumstances that have been forced on them. Their
message was clear, and I would like to pass it on to the
Council today. What they want, more than anything, is
for the guns to fall silent and the conflict to end, and to
be able to go home when it is safe to do so.
The hope and strength in Azraq are replicated
across Syria — a remarkable fact considering that daily
life remains dangerous and desperate for millions of
people inside the country. While we have continued
to see a drop in the violence in some areas since the
4 May memorandum on de-escalation, particularly in
recent weeks in Dar’a governorate, the humanitarian
and protection situation remains extremely difficult for
civilians in many parts of the country. In the besieged
area of eastern Ghouta, in rural Damascus, and the
Jobar neighbourhood in the city of Damascus, military
operations have started again.
In early and mid-July, air strikes and shelling on
the towns of Ein Tarma and Hazzeh reportedly killed
and injured several people. A local market in the
besieged town of Kafr Batna was shelled on 16 July,
killing or injuring many civilians. On 19 July, mortar
shelling on the Harasta hospital in a north-eastern
suburb of Damascus reportedly injured one person
and damaged the medical facility in another reminder
that the scourge of attacks on civilian infrastructure
continues unabated.
Despite the announcement on 22 July of a ceasefire
for eastern Ghouta, we have received reports of air
strikes on Irbin, Douma, Zamalka and Otaya towns in
the past three days that have killed or injured scores
of civilians. Urgent effort is needed to de-escalate
the situation, and we call on the parties to ensure the
protection of civilians and unimpeded humanitarian
access. In Idlib, infighting among non-State armed
groups and designated terrorist groups in several towns
over the past week has caused civilian casualties and
led to rising tensions. On 18 July, four people were
killed in a car-bomb attack in Armanaz town, and many
17-23264

27/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

more incidents have been reported. Some humanitarian
partners have had to suspend activities as a result.
The Bab Al-Hawa crossing point on the Turkish
border — a lifeline for civilians in north-western
Syria — was reportedly closed owing to the fighting
and insecurity on the Syrian side of the border from
19 to 25 July, although humanitarian and commercial
shipments have since resumed. The situation in areas
of north-western Syria held by non-State armed groups
remains extremely worrying, particularly given the high
level of need among approximately 1 million displaced
people living in the area, including many from formally
besieged areas.
Operations countering Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) continue in Raqqa governorate.
Heavy fighting and air strikes continue to result in
civilian casualties and injuries. For example, reports
indicate that dozens of civilians were killed and
injured as a result of air strikes and shelling in July.
Large-scale displacement also continues to be recorded
with more than 30,000 people displaced since 1 July,
bringing the total to more than 200,000 since 1 April in
Raqqa governorate.
Significant protection concerns remain for
those displaced, particularly in terms of freedom
of movement outside of the camps in which they are
being hosted. Humanitarian conditions are also very
difficult for those who are displaced, particularly with
temperatures approaching 50°C. An estimated 20,000
to 50,000 people remain inside Raqqa city, which is
now encircled, and their situation is perilous. There
is no way for them to get out. Civilian movement out
of the city remains extremely difficult owing to the
presence of mines and other unexploded ordnance, as
well as shelling, sniper activities and air strikes. As
military operations continue, our concern is further
civilian casualties, especially since ISIL has allegedly
used civilians as human shields. The Emergency Relief
Coordinator noted last month that military actors must
do everything in their power to ensure that civilians
caught up in the fighting are protected. The United
Nations and its partners are responding to those who
have been displaced, and we are ready to provide
support in Raqqa city as soon as access and security
conditions allow.
The health situation, particularly the low
availability of trauma-care services, is a major concern
in view of the intense fighting and shifting front lines.

S/PV. 8015

We continue to engage with relevant parties and actors
on the ground to ensure that medical care be made
available to those who need it, but a lot more needs to
be done.
The situation at the berm on the Syrian-Jordanian
border has also taken a worrying turn for the more than
50,000 Syrian civilians stranded there. On 18 July,
the explosion of an improvised explosive device in
Al-Rukban camp reportedly killed three children and
injured five others. Reports indicate that the Syrian
army is now surrounding the area on the Syrian side
following field battles between it and non-State armed
groups. Given the desperate security and humanitarian
situation, it is crucial that humanitarian programming
to the area be regular and uninterrupted. We are also
working hard with partners to identify a solution for the
people stranded in the berm area.
Let me now turn to the latest news concerning
humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. Unfortunately, there is little positive news
to report. There have been no convoys to besieged
areas in July, although airdrops to Deir ez-Zor have
continued. In terms of convoys to hard-to-reach areas,
we have been down to one convoy per week for the
month of July, while reaching more than 120,000
people in Yalda, Babila, Beit Sahem in rural Damascus,
Al-Houle, Harbanifseh and Dar Kabira. Meanwhile,
other humanitarian partners also delivered convoys
from Damascus to hard-to-reach areas in July. That
means that, under the United Nations June-July plan,
we have thus far reached only more than a third of the
1 million people who were targeted.
The obstacles to convoys proceeding as planned are
predictable, including the lack of approvals, facilitation
letters from the Government of Syria and other
administrative delays, as well as insecurity and fighting.
At the same time, arbitrary restrictions imposed by
some non-State armed groups, listed terrorist groups
and self-designated local authorities also continue to
obstruct access in various ways, especially in Idlib
and the Eastern governorate of Syria. That means that,
despite reductions in violence, we have not been able to
noticeably increase our reach.
Despite the security and access challenges in
reaching besieged and hard-to-reach areas, as well as
the high threat posed to humanitarian workers, the
United Nations and its partners continue to implement
one of the largest humanitarian operations in the world

17-232643/10

S/PV.8015

The situation in the Middle East

in Syria. Humanitarians continue to reach millions of
people on a monthly basis. The latest and only available
data as of May shows that humanitarians collectively
reached 8.5 million people in a single month, including
4.4 million women and girls and 4.1 million men and
boys with multisectoral assistance.
Of particular note is the beginning of the polio
vaccination campaign this week by the World Health
Organization, UNICEF and other health partners,
which is targeting 450,000 children in Deir ez-Zor and
Raqqa. Thus far, 27 polio cases have been confirmed.
I call on all parties to ensure the safety of and access
for the vaccination campaign teams. As members
are aware, the polio virus respects no borders or any
political, religious or security affiliations, and we must
contain it.
This month marks the third anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). Since then, the
modality has been a success with United Nations crossborder deliveries providing a lifeline for millions of
people in nine governorates. With more than 15,000
trucks monitored and confirmed by the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism during this period for the
integrity of their consignments without incident, the
importance of United Nations cross-border operations
is surely beyond question. As it remains a vital lifeline
to so many need, that modality to deliver aid must be
preserved during the coming months.
The conflict in Syria may be complex, but
ensuring that people are protected and supported is our
imperative as humanitarians and human beings. None
of us should stand silent while civilians suffer and
while fear tactics and the denial of food water, medical
supplies, and other forms of aid are used as methods of
war. What we and the Syrian people look to the Security
Council and to the international community for today
is that all parties uphold their basic obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law;
that civilians are protected; that attacks on civilian
infrastructure be stopped; that regular and unhindered
access to all modalities, including medical supplies, be
allowed; and that the horrific practice of siege end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
4/10

27/07/2017

Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), Ms. Ursula Mueller, for her comprehensive
briefing. We reiterate our gratitude to her and her entire
team for their ongoing efforts in Syria. They are always
ready and willing to provide assistance, regardless of
the difficult conditions on the ground.
Regrettably, despite those efforts, aid distribution
has become increasingly sporadic, thereby preventing
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
from being able to carry out the duties entrusted to it.
The ongoing fighting, security issues or — even more
incomprehensibly — the lack of authorization by and
the bureaucracy imposed by the Syrian Government all
prevent humanitarian assistance from being provided to
those who need it most. As we have noted on previous
occasions, that is in no way the fault of OCHA but
rather of the Security Council and the member States
with influence over the parties to the conflict. To date,
we have not been able to wield that influence effectively
to ensure that all parties to the Syrian conflict grant
unimpeded access to the humanitarian aid convoys.
For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in
Syria, Yemen and in any other conflict is our top
priority. Thus far, all conflicting parties in Syria have
continued to ignore and violate that basic principle of
international law. As often occurs in all such conflicts,
the most vulnerable — including women, children
and the elderly — have been and continue to be those
most affected. That is why Uruguay has endorsed
the establishment of an international impartial and
independent mechanism to investigate serious violations
of human rights law and international humanitarian law
committed in Syria, including those that are considered
to be war crimes, such as the use of chemical weapons
on civilians.
Seeking justice for the hundreds of thousands
of innocent victims of the conflict will be crucial to
achieving lasting peace in Syria and to ensuring that
the country and its entire population can overcome
the horrors of this protracted war. It will also have a
compelling effect on the future of the country. In the
same vein, we support the request of Secretary-General
António Guterres that events occurring in Syria be
referred to the International Criminal Court.
17-23264

27/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

For several months now, the priorities in Syria
have been clearly defined. The Council is duty-bound
to produce results in order to give hope to the Syrian
people that the war is ending; those who have committed
atrocities since 2011 will be held accountable and that
a new kind of political climate will emerge in order
to rectify the effects of many years of divisions and
clashes that have left a trail of death and destruction for
the country and its people. Until it has been achieved,
the primary goal is and should continue to be a political
solution that would put an end to the crisis and lead
to a peaceful transition in Syria, negotiated by all
Syrians, mediated by the United Nations and supported
by the entire international community. We trust in the
good offices of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in
his efforts to translate into concrete steps the road map
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) in order to achieve
that goal.
The second goal must be to reduce the levels of
violence and allow for the cessation of hostilities
throughout the majority of the country. The Astana
process, which is playing a very positive role,
complements the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva and has
already achieved considerable progress. We are also
pleased that the United States, Russia and Jordan have
been able to broker an agreement on a ceasefire in southwestern Syria, which has seen a spike in violence over
the past few months. We support the efforts of the three
guarantor countries and encourage them to continue
working to finalize the details of the implementation of
the ceasefire in the four safe zones and in other parts of
the country that may be added subsequently.
Nonetheless, for the third consecutive month, we
must voice our concern about the continued lack of
information on the implementation of the memorandum
signed on 4 May, in particular given the fact that, to
date, neither the United Nations nor humanitarian aid
has been granted unhindered access to those areas. That,
however, would give some assurance that the essential
principles of international humanitarian law are being
respected, such as humanitarian access, the prohibition
of forced displacement, and freedom of movement so
that people can freely enter and leave those areas.
The third goal, which is as equally important as
the political transition process and the cessation of
hostilities, is clearly humanitarian access. We would
like to receive more encouraging news but it is clear
that we remain far from any promising outcome that
would ease the suffering of the millions of Syrian

S/PV. 8015

civilians who depend on that aid to survive each day.
We will continue therefore to call for the immediate,
sustained and unhindered access of humanitarian aid to
all besieged and hard-to-reach areas. Nonetheless, the
top priority must be to lift all unjustifiable sieges.
We must mention that is has been over a year since
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), and yet attacks
on hospitals and health centres in Syria continue. In
June alone, four incidents at such centres were reported.
It is shocking that the parties continue to ignore the
provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), thereby depriving
millions of people of their right to medical attention,
leaving hundreds of victims among medical and healthcare personnel. Such acts constitute serious violations
of international humanitarian law and war crimes.
Clashes and indiscriminate attacks continue to cause
damage to civilian infrastructure, which is on the brink
of collapse after years of bombing. We condemn such
attacks in Syria, Yemen and wherever they occur.
In conclusion, Uruguay asserts that the full
and effective implementation of measures such as
the consolidation of the cessation of hostilities, the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure and
administrative procedures that allow for humanitarian
access to be granted could all make a major difference
in the lives of the Syrian people, who, month after
month, demand that the Council take concrete and
effective action on the ground.
With regard to the de-escalation zones that would
allow for the temporary cessation of attacks, Uruguay
maintains that it is very important for those zones to
be temporary so as to preserve the unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. As we have
previously mentioned, it is therefore imperative, as
soon as possible, to honour commitments that place
emphasis on the humanitarian situation. We trust that
the Security Council can overcome its differences and
shoulder its responsibilities in the area of international
peace and security.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for her briefing. We again reiterate our firm support as
she conducts her duties.
Bolivia would like to highlight the efforts made
by Russia, Iran and Turkey as the guarantor countries

17-232645/10

S/PV.8015

The situation in the Middle East

27/07/2017

of the ceasefire in Syria. We also highlight the Astana
meeting held on 4 May as a step forward, through the
establishment of four de-escalation zones to prevent
further incidents, put an immediate end to armed
clashes and allow for improved and unconditional
provision of humanitarian aid. We call for the Astana
agreement and resolution 2336 (2016) of 30 December
2016 to be fully implemented, as long as dangerous and
hard-to reach areas exist.

and the lack of basic services. We reiterate our most
heartfelt thanks to the work being done by the staff at
the various humanitarian agencies, whose personnel are
putting their own lives on the line to provide food and
nutrition and medical supplies as well as assistance to
alleviate the crisis undergone by the Syrian people. We
call on the parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and the risky work being carried out
by the staff on the ground.

According to the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 13.5 million people already
have been forced to leave their homes in search of
security. Many of them are minors and therefore are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance. According to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, 6.6 million people have been displaced
internally, 4.6 million live in areas that are difficult to
access and are constantly being attacked, not to mention
that after six years of ongoing violence approximately
5 million people have had to take refuge in neighbouring
countries. To date, more than half of the population has
been forced to leave their homes. We emphasize, as
Ms. Mueller did, our thanks to the countries that are
hosting refugees.

We commend the work being carried out by the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic both to ensure security
in the deployment of humanitarian assistance and in
evacuating people from areas where armed clashes
have broken out.

Despite the ceasefire agreements, ongoing attacks
have resulted in the deaths of a considerable number of
civilians, and women and children are always the most
affected. We are alarmed that these attacks are also
being directed at civilian infrastructure, such as homes,
schools and hospitals where lives can be saved. Bolivia,
a peace-loving country, insists that the ceasefire
agreements must be implemented and respected. We
reiterate, at the same time, the obligation that all parties
that are involved have to guarantee the security and
integrity of those who are trapped in the conflict. In this
regard, we once again remind the parties involved in the
conflict that they must provide unconditional access for
humanitarian assistance and guarantee and protect the
security and integrity of that assistance and not identify
the humanitarian assistance convoys as military targets.
We also call for the intensification of efforts to ensure
access to areas that are besieged and hard to access in
line with international humanitarian law.
As long as military tactics are given priority over
politics, there can be no lasting peace and civilians,
in particular women and children, will continue to be
exposed to violence, the lack of humanitarian access
6/10

We express, once again, our vigorous condemnation
of all terrorism. It is criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of the reason for it or where or when or
by whom it is carried out. We reaffirm that all States
must fight this scourge using all peaceful means at
our disposal and the Charter of the United Nations and
other international instruments.
In that regard, we condemn the terrorist attacks
against the Russian Embassy in Damascus on 24 and
25 June. The Plurinational State of Bolivia firmly
believes that the creation of more de-escalation zones
should continue to be pursued so that humanitarian
assistance for the civilian population can be extended.
In this regard, we welcome the ceasefire in the southwest of Syria, agreed on the 7 July, between Russia, the
United States and Jordan, as well as the work carried
out in Cairo and Moscow forums.
Finally, the only way to resolve this conflict is
through an inclusive and orderly political process
that is led by and for the Syrian people. We therefore
reaffirm our support for the advances made at the
Astana and Geneva meetings. We have high hopes that
this dialogue will lead to a lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of my country has read the
forty-first monthly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/623). We note that certain parts of the report are
somewhat different from previous reports. Nonetheless,
we regret that, yet again, the authors of the report
have overlooked the real reasons for the deterioration
17-23264

27/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

of the living conditions of Syrian citizens. The report
also ignores the real obstacles that are preventing
humanitarian assistance from reaching those who need
it. Foremost among them are the following.
First is the extremely critical security situation as
a result of the terrorism of Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and associated groups, entities and individuals. In
addition, there has been infighting among these armed
terrorist groups for a while now. They are the ones who
are impeding humanitarian convoys access, mining the
roads used by convoys or failing to agree to monitor
crossing points.
Secondly, coercive unilateral economic measures
are being imposed by the United States, the European
Union and other States. These measures affect first
and foremost the Syrian people and, as a result, have
seriously impacted humanitarian conditions in Syria,
including basic services, such as health care, water,
electricity and education. The logistical difficulties
are enormous and prevent us from implementing the
humanitarian plans. For example, the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent has very few trucks and lacks fuel, not
to mention the air strikes carried out by the United
States targeting power stations, water stations and
other infrastructure.
Thirdly, the Governments of donor countries
have reneged on the pledges about which they brag
at international conferences from which the Syrian
Government is completely excluded, even though it
is the primary party concerned. This is why current
humanitarian financing is only 21 per cent of what is
needed. This is a major obstacle, yet it is completely
ignored by the authors of the report.
Fourthly, certain regional and international parties
are continuously intervening in Syrian affairs in a
negative way, with a view to achieving their destructive
agendas, prolonging the Syrian crisis and obstructing
efforts aimed at reaching a peaceful political resolution
through a Syrian-led political process, without foreign
intervention, which the United Nations has repeatedly
endorsed. I know whereof I speak. As representatives
are aware, I was away for three months during which
time I was deeply involved in the Astana and Geneva
processes. I know very well who was impeding the
agreements in Astana and Geneva.
Today we are meeting to discuss the fortyfirst report. We have been engaging in this monthly
exercise for three and a half years now. We continue

S/PV. 8015

to read reports that are clearly lacking in expertise and
professionalism. We have also listened to malicious
briefings, once from Amman and others from Beirut
and Geneva, yet we have not heard no briefing from
the United Nations representatives in Damascus. These
reports contradict the noble humanitarian objectives
that are supposed to be achieved through a process that
can succeed only with cooperation, coordination and
humanitarian partnership that are free from any political
consideration, between the Syrian Government, on the
one hand, and the United Nations, on the other.
I would like to refer to what Ms. Mueller said a
while ago from Amman. In all her briefings, she has
never mentioned the least form of cooperation with the
Syrian Government. Not once has she mentioned any
cooperation whatsoever with the Syrian Government.
She mentioned aid that she had provided to 8 million
people. In other words, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) had helped 8 million
people, but where did this happen? Did it happen on
Mars or perhaps on Jupiter? She noted that she had
provided humanitarian aid that reached millions of
different people. Perhaps on the planet Venus, where
there is no Government. She did not say that she had
carried out these positive activities in cooperation
with the Syrian Government. OCHA would not have
been able to do that without the cooperation of the
Syrian Government. However, she did not mention a
word about any cooperation of the Syrian Government
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other United Nations agencies.
This what we mean when we say there has been
lack of professionalism and maturity with regard to the
United Nations reports on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. We want a humanitarian partnership between our
Government and the Office. OCHA cannot replace the
Syrian Government. We will not allow that to happen
. Ms. Mueller also said: “[W]e and the Syrian people
look to the Security Council [to ensure] that civilians
are protected”. Who gave Ms. Mueller the right to speak
on behalf of the Syrian people? How could she overstep
her mandate and say that she and the Syrian people ask
the Security Council to provide protection for civlians?
How dare she say that before the Security Council?
I am sure that, regrettably, the monthly reports
have deliberately been diverted from their objective.
These reports are misused. Instead of trying to help us
to overcome the difficulties that prevent humanitarian
aid from reaching those who need it, these reports are

17-232647/10

S/PV.8015

The situation in the Middle East

used to slander the Syrian Government and to apply
pressure to the Syrian Government and its allies in the
fight against terrorism. They are just a cover to channel
humanitarian aid convoys to armed terrorist groups
instead of reaching the Syrian people who need them,
with a view to prolonging the crisis and boosting the
morale of terrorists who use civilians as human shields.
Ms. Mueller cast doubt even on the fact that
terrorists are using civilians as human shields, when
she said that terrorists had allegedly used civilians
as human shields”. “Allegedly”. Can she really say
these are allegations after all these scandals in Mosul,
Aleppo, Homs, Palmyra and Raqqa. Ms. Mueller is
still unconvinced that Da’esh used civilians as human
shields. She has allegations. She received allegations.
The Syrian Government spares no effort to
assume its responsibilities to improve the living
conditions of Syrian citizens without discrimination.
However, United Nations officials with mandates in
the humanitarian process, particularly in OCHA, have
persistently refused to enter into a genuine humanitarian
partnership with the Syrian Government. They have
opted for the logic of anonymity, for demolishing
the bridges of mutual cooperation and trust and for
questioning its credibility as a humanitarian partner
whose cooperation is inescapable in order to implement
the humanitarian response plans.
In that regard, with the permission of the UnderSecretary-General and Ms. Mueller, I would like
to present documented information for the official
record. We as a Government take responsibility for
this information, to the effect that there are officials of
international and United Nations agencies working on
the ground in Syria who prefer to distance themselves
from the contents of the monthly reports of the
Secretary-General with respect to the activities of their
agencies in Syria. Those agencies have confirmed to
us that they had not provided the reported information
to OCHA. Those agencies have even rejected the
inclusion of this information in the monthly reports in
such a negative and fragmented way because it does not
reflect the true nature of the coordination and effective
cooperation with the Syrian Government on the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. That is what we hear from
United Nations representatives in Damascus.
Moreover, those international and United Nations
officials have affirmed that some OCHA officials
encourage those agencies to not cooperate with the
8/10

27/07/2017

Syrian Government. OCHA seems to be saying that
it does not need the Syrian Government in order to
carry out its humanitarian work, as if the Office were
working on another planet or doing its humanitarian
assistance work on Mars. It goes without saying that
this contradicts the obligations of OCHA towards the
Syrian Government under Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). In that regard,
my Government draws the attention of the authors
of the report to the fact that the criticism of national
reconciliation sends a message of support to terrorists
and their financiers because this reconciliation is
intended to end the suffering of millions of people
who have been used as human shields by terrorists for
several years now.
The national character of such reconciliation is
based on the following. We offer the opportunity to all
armed persons to regularize their situation, surrender
their weapons and either remain with their families
in their homes or to leave the area included in the
reconciliation agreement and relocate elsewhere. We
have made this offer without the slightest pressure on
the civilians living in those areas. That has allowed a
number of families to return to their homes and to live
normal lives. Does that cause concern to the authors of
the report? Is it not something that they should instead
encourage and even be positively involved in?
With respect to criticizing the reconciliation, the
authors of the report had no qualms about rejecting
any direct accusation of the aircraft of the so-called
international coalition led by the United States. The
coalition uses incendiary weapons, causing the deaths
of thousands of innocent civilians, as well as the
destruction of infrastructure, including dams, bridges,
hospitals, schools, development institutions of the
Syrian people and the economic resources which it
needs for reconstruction. I note in particular wells, and
gas and oil infrastructure.
I would also like to mention the massacres of
civilians in the cities of Mayadin and Al-Bukamal in
May. I would also mention attacks in the villages of
Sur and Dablan, the region of Mayadin, the village of
Ziban on the outskirts of Deir ez-Zor in late June, Tal
al-Shayer on 19 June, Zayanat village on 4 July, and
the village of Kishkish, in southern rural Hasakah
province, on 12 July. Those are just a few examples.
I should like to put a question to the authors of
this report and to all of United Nations officials on
17-23264

27/07/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian soil. Are not these losses in human life, which
run into the thousands, as well as the losses to Syrian
infrastructure, which have cost us billions of dollars,
the result of the barbaric bombings of the so-called
international coalition and a cause of the suffering of
the Syrian people? Should not those figures be included
in detail in the monthly reports? Should not the United
Nations take the initiative to pay compensation to
Syrian civilians who have lost their homes, their farms,
their factories and their schools, which the children who
have been killed can no longer attend? Who will pay
the cost of all the losses inflicted by this international
coalition on Syrian power and water stations, dams,
bridges and oil and gas facilities?
The Government of Syria would like to ensure
that the realities concerning the implementation of
the distribution plan for humanitarian aid are clearly
understood, especially for some of the more unstable
regions. To that end, my Government has sent many
messages to the Secretary-General, the Security Council
and the United Nations Office in Geneva, presenting
statistics and precise figures on the humanitarian
convoys, with the help of our national humanitarian
partners. However, the authors of the report and the
representatives of OCHA continue to tamper with those
numbers under an agenda that seeks to pressure my
Government and in fact blackmail it. We want to know
how it is that the authors of the report speak of only two
humanitarian convoys since the beginning of this year,
when the facts and figures clearly show that 48 such
convoys have been able to reach their destinations since
the beginning of 2017. That is an enormous difference.
The report says that two convoys have reached areas
that are very hard to reach, to the benefit of 412,580
families. We say that there were 48 such convoys. I
repeat, 48 humanitarian convoys, not two as stated in
the report.
The report also mentions 11 besieged areas. The
Government of my country reaffirms that terrorist
groups are responsible for the siege of these towns.
Those groups are besieging these towns inside and
out, preventing access to them, using civilians in those
areas as human shields, and denying civilians access
to food, medical and humanitarian aid. In fact, they
are selling those items to civilians at exorbitant prices,
which many cannot afford.
What happened in eastern Aleppo is still fresh in
our minds. We all remember that after the city was
liberated, thousands of tons of food and medical supplies

S/PV. 8015

were discovered to have been stored in areas controlled
by terrorist groups in eastern Aleppo. That scenario
is happening again today in other areas, especially in
eastern Ghouta, outside Damascus. In spite of all that,
the authors of the report, shockingly, have apparently
seen none of what has been happening in these areas,
except what is negative and questionable, while turning
a blind eye to what is real and positive.
There have also been accusations that the Syrian
Government has been confiscating medical equipment.
In this regard, the Government of my country stresses
that the items that have been confiscated are either used
for complex surgeries sent to areas where there are
no hospitals and no specialized medical personnel to
perform such surgeries, or that the number of civilians
in those areas and the amounts of medical equipment
sent to them are sometimes disproportionate. I note in
this regard that the Syrian Government has sometimes
responded to calls to evacuate the injured from regions
considered by the United Nations to be besieged or
hard to reach, removing them to Government hospitals
where the medical infrastructure is better and they can
receive the care they need.
On the other hand, the staff of OCHA have
procrastinated and delayed implementing the
procedures they need to take in order to dispatch the
humanitarian convoys. They have even refused to
send these convoys to many areas that deserve aid and
need help. They have focused on areas where armed
terrorist groups are located and abandoned the regions
where those groups are absent. For instance, the Fu’ah
and Kafraya areas have both been under siege by the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups for the past
three and a half years. Despite that, the United Nations
has stopped sending humanitarian convoys to either
town — and I am talking about 7,000 Syrian citizens
who are in need of that aid. That has been the case ever
since the so-called Four Towns Agreement came to an
end several months ago. I would therefore like to ask the
Security Council, which is convened today to discuss
the humanitarian situation in my country, Syria, to take
every measure necessary to end the suffering of those
two villages, which are under siege by armed terrorist
groups seeking to commit genocide by shelling, sniping
and starvation, similar to what we saw in the 15 April
bombing of Rashidin, in which, Council members will
recall, more than 120 women and children were killed.
In conclusion, I must emphasize that the noble goal
of the humanitarian operation in Syria is to save the lives

17-232649/10

S/PV.8015

The situation in the Middle East

of millions of Syrians suffering from the effects of the
crisis and the terrorist war that has been waged on my
country for the past seven years. Its success therefore
depends on establishing a genuine humanitarian
partnership and measures that engender mutual trust
and transparency between the Syrian Government and
the United Nations. I hope that when the next report
is published, the Security Council will be able to hear
from representatives of United Nations agencies who
are actually on Syrian territory.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The
representative of the United States has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): In response
to the last speaker’s statement, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller and the dedicated and brave teams of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the United Nations agencies. They and
their implementing partners on the ground are saving
lives and helping the Syrian people every day, while the
Syrian Government continues to terrorize its people and
cause unimaginable suffering. OCHA has our support.

10/10

27/07/2017

The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Security
Council for the month of July, before adjourning the
meeting I would like to express the delegation of
China’s sincere appreciation to the members of the
Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives and their staffs, and to the secretariat
of the Council, for all the support they have given us.
It has indeed been a busy month, and one in which
we rallied to achieve consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the secretariat, as well as all the relevant conference
service officers, interpreters and translators. As we end
our presidency, I know I speak on behalf of the Council
in wishing the delegation of Egypt good luck for the
month of August.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

17-23264
