S/2020/1105

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2020
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the third report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in Mali. It covers the period
from 1 July 2017 to 31 March 2020 and the information provided focuses on the six
grave violations committed against children, the perpetrators thereof and the context
in which the violations took place.
The report focuses on the central and northern regions of Mali and sets out the
trends and patterns of grave violations against children by all parties to the conflict.
Details of progress made in addressing grave violations against children are also
provided.
The report concludes with a series of recommendations to end and prevent grave
violations against children in Mali and improve the protection of children.

20-14989 (E)

271120

*2014989*

S/2020/1105

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, is the third report of the Secretary -General on
children and armed conflict in Mali to be submitted to the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. It covers the period from 1 July
2017 to 31 March 2020 and describes trends and patterns of grave violations against
children that have occurred since the previous repor t (S/2018/136) and the progress
made in ending and preventing such violations, in follow -up to the recommendations
contained in the previous report and to the conclusions of the Working Group
(S/AC.51/2018/1/Rev.1). The violations presented herein have been verified by the
United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting in Mali, which is
co-chaired by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). Where
possible, parties to conflict responsible for grave violations are identified. The ability
to verify information was at times hampered by insecurity o r access restrictions.
Therefore, the information contained herein does not represent the full scale of
violations committed in Mali during the reporting period.
2.
The report is focused on trends of violations in central and northern regions of
Mali perpetrated by all parties to conflict, including armed groups that have formed
since the previous report of the Secretary-General. In the annexes to the most recent
report on children and armed conflict (A/74/845-S/2020/525), Ansar Eddine,
Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) and Mouvement pour
l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest (MUJAO) were listed for the
recruitment and use of children and for perpetrating rape and other forms of sexu al
violence against children. Platform, including affiliated groups, was listed for the
recruitment and use of children.

II. Overview of the political and security situation
3.
Presidential elections that resulted in the re-election of the then-sitting President
were held on 29 July 2018 and legislative elections were held on 29 March 2020. The
reporting period witnessed the signature of the Pact for Peace in Mali between the
Government of Mali and the United Nations in October 2018, representing a re newed
momentum to pursue and accelerate a more inclusive peace process. The inclusive
national dialogue was held from October to December 2019, with sessions at the local,
district and regional levels with representatives of political parties and civil soc iety,
including women and youth groups and the diaspora. Since the end of the reporting
period and beyond the scope of this report, the situation deteriorated significantly and
culminated in a coup d’état, on 18 August 2020. At the time of preparing the pr esent
report, in September 2020, a transitional Government had been appointed (see
S/2020/952).
4.
Progress regarding the extension of state authority in the north, the cantonment
of combatants and the integration of armed groups into national security mechanisms,
as provided for under the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in
2015, remained slow. Nevertheless, there were noteworthy developments regarding
justice and the rule of law. The National Accord Act (Loi d’entente nationale) was
promulgated in July 2019, outlining measures aimed at fostering reconciliation
following the crisis of 2012. The measures include the cessation of prosecution
against those who may have committed crimes but have expressed repentance, the
compensation of victims and the reintegration into society of those who have
renounced violence. The scope of the law excludes war crimes, crimes against
humanity, rape and crimes that are not subject to a statute of limitations. The law
2/16

20-14989

S/2020/1105

extending the jurisdiction of the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and
Transnational Organized Crime 1 to war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, which will provide the basis for the Unit to prosecute perpetrators of large scale attacks on civilians, was promulgated in July 2019. As at 5 September 2019, the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission had received 16,000 testimonies, of
which 660 came from children. In December 2019, a first public pilot hearing focused
on violence against children, among other issues, was held and will inform five more
hearings scheduled for 2020 and 2021.
5.
Progress was made with regard to the national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme required by the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation,
with pre-screening prior to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of over
74,000 former combatants in Gao, Ménaka, Mopti, Kidal and Timbuktu Regions. An
accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and integration process
for combatants in the framework of the Operational Coordination Mechanism 2 was
launched in November 2018 by the National Disarmament, D emobilization and
Reintegration Commission and the Commission on Integration, as called for in the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. As of 7 May 2020, 1,189 military personnel
were deployed to northern Mali as part of the reconstituted units of the na tional armed
forces. A total of 1,330 former armed groups combatants were integrated into the
Malian Defence and Security Forces.
6.
The security situation in central and northern Mali remained volatile and in 2019
the parliament adopted a bill extending for one year the nationwide state of emergency
in place since November 2015. The period was marked by anti-terrorist operations by
national and international forces, confrontations between armed groups and their
respective communities, as well as carjackings and targeted killings across the
country. Attacks and threats of attacks against hospitals, schools and protected
personnel and an increase in the number of closed schools, abductions, armed
banditry and ambushes continued to affect children. Furthermore , central Mali was
caught in a spiral of violence and retaliation due to growing intercommunal conflict
exacerbated by the presence of armed groups, including those designated by the
United Nations as terrorists. The area witnessed violent attacks against the civilian
population, causing killings and mass displacement and negatively affecting
children’s lives and welfare. For instance, in March 2019, the attack on Ogossogou
village, in Mopti Region, by Dozo traditional hunters resulted in at least 85 childr en
being killed. Large numbers of smaller scale attacks against villages, including
retaliatory acts, also continued. Since February 2018, in an attempt to mitigate against
security threats, the Government restricted the circulation of motorcycles and pick -up
vehicles in cercles of Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu Regions.
7.
Armed attacks became more sophisticated, increasingly frequent and well coordinated, employing tactics such as suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices, remote-controlled explosive devices and indirect fire. The lack of control by
armed groups signatories to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation over some of
the areas in which they operate gave way to a substantial increase in the activities of
groups designated by the United Nations as terrorists, such as Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam
wa al-Muslimin (JNIM), 3 targeting national forces, MINUSMA forces and
__________________

Decree No. 2015-0723 on the organization and working methods of the Specialized Judicial Unit
dealing with counter-terrorism and transnational organized crime was adopted on 9 November 2015.
2
Composed of members of the Malian Defence and Security Forces and armed groups signatories
to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, it is responsible for the progressive redeployment
of the national armed forces in northern Mali, the coordination of mixed patrols and for securing
cantonment sites and protecting interim authorities.
3
English translation: Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims, coalition of groups designated
as terrorists including Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Ansar Eddine, Front de
libération du Macina (FLM), and Al-Mourabitoun.
1

20-14989

3/16

S/2020/1105

international forces, as well as civilians. Groups designated as terrorists expanded
their influence in many regions and some acted as the main security providers, thus
yielding various levels of acceptance from local communities.
8.
Humanitarian access in northern and central Mali became increasingly
challenging owing to criminality, the activities of armed groups and military
operations. The number of security incidents affecting humanitarians, mostly
banditry-related, remained high. The humanitarian situation was marked by a sharp
increase in the number of internally displaced persons in central and northern Mali.
According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the number of
persons displaced has more than doubled since 2019, with 250,998 internally
displaced persons registered in April 2020 and Mopti Region hosting the largest
displaced population (102,481). By the end of the reporting period, a total of 4.3
million people, 77 per cent of whom were women and children, were in need of
humanitarian assistance, an increase of 1.1 million people compared with 2019. By
the end of March 2020, all schools had closed nationwide owing to the outbreak of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).

III. Parties to the conflict in Mali
9.
Since the previous report, new and splinter armed groups have emerged, and
some increased their violent activities, particularly in central Mali. The self-declared
self-defence group Dan Na Ambassagou 4 (DNA) was created in November 2016 in
Mopti Region with the aim of filling the void, in the absence of state authorities, to
protect Dogon country and its population. The group is well structu red and organized
into different wings, including a political wing and a military -like hierarchy, with a
structure including company and battalion commanders. DNA was officially
dissolved by the Government on 24 March 2019 but remains active. Massacres in
Fulani villages in Mopti Region were attributed to DNA during 2019 and 2020. Other
groups of local hunters referred to as Dozo, and composed of different ethnicities, but
mainly Bambara and Dogon, are also present in areas near Douentza, Djenné, and
Ségou in Mopti Region. These groups do not have the same military organization as
DNA.
10. A leadership crisis within the Platform coalition resulted in its division, with the
emergence of two opposing factions in 2019. One is led by Harouna Toureh
(Coordination des mouvements et forces patriotiques de résistance/CMFPR-I) and
supported by Ahmed Ould Sidi Mohamed (Mouvement arabe de l’AzawadPlateforme (MAA-Platform)) and Abballah Ag Hamzatta (Groupe d’autodéfense des
Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés (GATIA)). The second faction is led by Fahad Ag
Almahmoud (GATIA) and supported by Moulaye Ahmed Ould Moulaye (MAA Platform) and Alassane Djitteye (CMFPR-I). The latter died on 5 May 2020 and his
replacement is still unknown.
11. The Coordination des mouvements de l’inclusivité (CMI) was formed in early
2020 with the aim of establishing a coalition 5 of armed groups that are not part of
either Platform or Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA). CMI is
composed of Mouvement populaire pour le salut de l’Azawad, Mou vement pour le
salut de l’Azawad of the Chamanamas (MSA-Chamanamas); the Congrès pour la
__________________
4
5

4/16

Known as the hunters who “trust/confide in God” or “put their trust in God”, i n Dogon language.
The Coordination des mouvements de l’inclusivité (CMI) is not considered a third coalition
group (in addition to Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad CMA and Platform) by the
Agreement Monitoring Committee (Comité de suivi de l’Acco rd), which is the monitoring
structure of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.
20-14989

S/2020/1105

justice dans l’Azawad (CJA), the Front populaire de l’Azawad of Jimmy the Rebel,
and CMFPR-III under the leadership of prosecutor Mahamane Alassane Maiga.

IV. Grave violations against children
12. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 1,764 grave
violations affecting 1,092 children (251 girls, 811 boys, 30 sex unknown), including
some children who were victims of multiple violations. This re presents a sharp
increase compared with the previous report, which covered a longer period of three
and a half years and during which 740 grave violations affecting 507 children were
verified. All categories of violations increased throughout the reporting period, except
for rape and other forms of sexual violence, which is however estimated to be highly
underreported. Of concern, the recruitment and use and killing and maiming of
children peaked in 2019. This upsurge can be explained by the increase in con flict,
particularly in the central regions, where a drastic deterioration in the security and
humanitarian situation was witnessed following the escalation of intercommunal
violence, including between the Dogon and Fulani communities, and the presence of
armed groups, including those designated by the United Nations as terrorists. Another
worrisome trend was represented by the sharp increase in the number of verified
attacks on schools and hospitals, which more than tripled since the previous report.
The safe access of humanitarian actors to conflict-affected populations, including
children, as well as the detention of children for their alleged association with armed
groups, were also issues of great concern for the protection of children.
13. In the majority of verified violations (52 per cent), it was not possible to
attribute responsibility to a particular party to the conflict, while most of the
remaining cases were attributed to armed groups (44 per cent). Government security
forces were responsible for 52 grave violations, representing almost 3 per cent of the
total. Overall, Mopti Region was the most affected, recording the highest number of
grave violations (666), followed by Gao (394), Kidal (251), Timbuktu (185), Ménaka
(138) and other regions.

A.

Recruitment and use
14. The country task force verified 516 cases of the recruitment and use of children,
affecting a total of 513 children (60 girls, 453 boys), between the ages of 9 and 17.
Three boys were recruited twice (once by GATIA and once by MNLA). The number
of cases represents almost a twofold increase compared with the previous report
(283). Cases were attributed to the Malian armed forces (45) and armed groups (468).
Signatory armed groups and their splinter groups were the main perpe trators,
accounting for more than two thirds of cases of recruitment and use (376). A total of
202 children were recruited by CMA (MNLA (132), the Mouvement arabe de
l’Azawad-CMA (MAA-CMA) (35), the Haut Conseil pour l’unité de l’Azawad
(HCUA) (34), and an unidentified member of CMA (1)), followed by Platform (151)
(GATIA (58), Ganda Lassal Izo (41), Ganda Koy (19), MAA -Platform (10), Ganda
Izo (8), the Front de libération des régions du Nord (5), and unidentified members of
Platform (10)). Splinter groups of Platform and CMA recruited and used 23 children
(CMFPR-II (15), an undetermined branch of CMFPR (I or II) (3), CJA (3) and
Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad (MSA) (2)). Armed groups designated as
terrorists were responsible for 39 cases: JNIM (34) (Front de libération du Macina
(FLM) (27), Ansar Eddine (4), Al-Mourabitoun (1) and other JNIM elements (2)),
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS) (1), MUJAO (1) and unidentified armed
groups (3). Other perpetrators were Dozo traditional hunters (4), DN A (2) and

20-14989

5/16

S/2020/1105

unidentified armed groups (47). The Malian armed forces were responsible for the
recruitment and use of 45 children, all boys.
15. The verified cases of recruitment occurred between 2014 and 2020, with all
cases verified during the reporting period. The most affected region was Kidal, with
197 verified cases, followed by Gao (189), Ménaka (52), Mopti (41), Timbuktu and
Ségou (12 each). It was verified that 10 children were recruited in two neighbouring
countries. Children received military training and were used as combatants. Others
were used in support roles, such as domestic workers, couriers, cooks, drivers, guards,
patrollers and for manning checkpoints.
16. For the first time since 2014, 45 children, all boys, were verified as associated
with the Malian armed forces in Gao Region in 2019 (24) and in 2020 (21). All
between the ages of 9 and 16, the boys were used as domestic workers and couriers.
Following advocacy, including by the country task force, all the boys were released
to their families during the first quarter of 2020 and have been receiving reintegration
support from UNICEF partners.
17. A trend of constant increase was observed in the number of cases of the
recruitment and use of children since the previous report. The number of violations
peaked in 2019, when 215 cases were verified, following on from 114 cases in 2018
and 25 between July and December 2017. Numbers remained high in the first quarter
of 2020, with 159 children verified as having been recruited and used. Child
recruitment was largely based on community-level recruitment and in many instances,
families encouraged children to join the groups. In addition, children and young
persons left out of school and without occupation sought enrolment as a way of
earning money. With the closure of hundreds of schools in northern and central Mali
and the lack of opportunities for livelihoods or prospects of a better future, many
children saw few alternatives to joining armed groups.
18. During the reporting period, 60 girls between the ages of 11 and 14 were
recruited and used by armed groups, representing more than 11 per cent of the children
recruited and used, almost double the number verified in the previous report. At least
29 girls were sexually abused during their associatio n with armed groups. The other
girls were used as cooks and to fetch firewood. The country task force received
allegations indicating that an unspecified number of girls received military training
to be ready for combat. The gender-sensitive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and increased access to services and programmes for survivors
of sexual violence may create opportunities to better identify girls associated with
armed groups.
Deprivation of liberty of children for alleged association with armed groups
19. A total of 94 boys between the ages of 12 and 17 were captured by the Malian
Defence and Security Forces (38), Operation Barkhane (36), in joint operations of the
Malian armed forces and Barkhane forces (14) or were apprehen ded by GATIA, MSA
and joint GATIA/MSA forces (1 each) and by MINUSMA (3) for their alleged
association with armed groups. Among those captured were 10 boys captured and
handed over in 2019 by Barkhane forces, who had identified them as adults, to the
anti-terrorism prosecutor in Bamako. The boys were captured in 2017 (7), 2018 (31)
and 2019 (56). Of the total, 79 boys were handed over to national child protection
actors following periods of detention by national authorities of up to one year. At the
time of writing, 15 boys remained detained by the Government because they are
considered to be adults. The release of children from government detention was
hampered by the lack of valid civil documentation to prove their age. The country
task force advocated with Malian authorities for the adoption of alternative age
assessment procedures in order to prevent further delays.
6/16

20-14989

S/2020/1105

20. Children reported poor conditions in government detention facilities and, in
some cases, ill-treatment during their arrest and detention by the Malian Defence and
Security Forces, particularly in Mopti and Gao. For instance, a 12 -year-old boy
arrested on 12 December 2018 by the national armed forces in Mopti Region was
subjected to serious physical violence by those forces and was denied m edical care,
which led to the amputation of his right arm and two fingers of his left arm. Another
boy, aged 16, who was arrested on 8 July 2018 in Gao Region by the national armed
forces and was held in life-threatening conditions, was denied medical treatment
during his detention, which lasted one month. He was eventually provided with
medical care only following active advocacy by the country task force. The country
task force advocated with relevant authorities for the opening of investigations into
the cases of ill-treatment.

B.

Killing and maiming
21. A total of 495 children (135 girls, 331 boys, 29 sex unknown) between the ages
of a few months and 17 years old were killed (306) and maimed (189), representing
a sharp increase compared with the previous report (146 child casualties). Violations
were attributed to groups of Dozo traditional hunters, mainly from the Dogon ethnic
group (122), other Dozo traditional hunters, for whom ethnic affiliation could not be
clearly established (59), Fulani armed elements (44), FLM (10), JNIM (4), CMA (3),
CMFPR-II and DNA (2 each) and MSA (1). Other child casualties were attributed to
the Malian Defence and Security Forces (4), Barkhane forces (2) and four children
were maimed during clashes between an unidentified armed group and Barkhane
forces. The remaining child casualties (238) could not be attributed to a specific
armed perpetrator. Among those unattributed casualties, 148 occurred as a result of
crossfire and attacks against civilians by armed elements t hat could not be identified
and 90 were caused by unattributed incidents of explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices.
22. The highest number of verified child casualties occurred in 2019 (296), a sharp
increase compared with 129 verified during 2018 and 23 between July and December
2017, while 47 children were verified as having been killed and maimed during the
first quarter of 2020. Mopti Region was the most affected (376, or 76 per cent)
followed by Gao (69), Timbuktu (23), Kidal (17), Ménaka (8) and Ségou (2). Most
children (400) were killed and maimed during attacks against civilians or when caught
in direct hostilities between parties to conflict, during rocket attacks and crossfire.
The remaining 95 children were killed or maimed as a result of the use of improvised
explosive devices and the explosion of explosive remnants of war, including hand
grenades.
23. The lack of state authority and security forces in parts of the northern and central
regions created a vacuum in which civilians continued to face heightened security
threats. During the period under review, the leading causes of the killing and maiming
of children were crossfire and armed confrontations, with an increasing number of
children affected. For example, from July to December 2017, 13 out of a total of 23
child casualties occurred in such contexts and the numbers increased steadily from 89
out of 129, in 2018, to 260 out of 296, in 2019. From January to March 2020, there
were 47 child casualties, 38 of whom were caused by armed confrontations and
attacks on civilians.
24. Of the 95 children killed and maimed in incidents involving improvised
explosive devices and explosive remnants of war, 10 casualties occurred during the
last six months of 2017, 40 in 2018, 36 in 2019, and 9 children were injured during
the first quarter of 2020. Most of the incidents (90) were unattributed, except one
incident attributed to FLM, in which two boys were killed, and one other incident

20-14989

7/16

S/2020/1105

attributed to JNIM. In the latter, three boys were maimed when the civilian bus they
were travelling in hit an improvised explosive device. Both incidents occurred in
Mopti Region.
25. In Mopti Region, children continued to bear the brunt of the violence and
intercommunal conflict between the Dogon and Fulani communities, exacerbated by
the presence of armed groups, including those designated by the United Nations as
terrorists. The attack on Ogossogou, a Fulani village, on 23 March 2019 by Dozo
traditional hunters resulted in the killing of 85 children, among other individuals. The
village was attacked again on 14 February 2020 by armed individuals alleged to be
from the Dogon community, resulting in five children being killed. In addition, the
attackers also burned playing areas and games that had been donated. Similarly, an
attack on Sobane Da village by Fulani armed elements on 9 June 2019 claimed the
lives of more than 35 Dogon civilians, including 22 children. From January to March
2020, the country task force documented 11 attacks, consisting of attacks on Dogon
villages by alleged armed Fulani elements and attacks on Fulani villages by alleged
armed Dogon elements. Those attacks resulted in 14 children being killed, four
children being maimed and six children being abducted from both Dogon and Fulani
villages.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
26. The country task force verified that 74 children, all girls between the ages of 11
and 17, were subjected to sexual violence including rape (41), sexual harassment (20),
forced marriage (7) and attempted rape (6), compared with 95 child survivors verified
in the previous report. Violations occurred in the regions of Gao (24), Ménaka ( 22)
Mopti (17) and Timbuktu (11). As incidents of conflict-related sexual violence against
children continued to be highly underreported, the actual number of cases is believed
to be much higher. Most verified cases could not be attributed to a specific ar med
perpetrator (51), while remaining cases were attributed to GATIA (11), MNLA (9),
undetermined elements of either CMFPR-I or CMFPR-II, MSA and the Malian
Defence and Security Forces (1 each). The highest number of verified cases was
recorded during the first three months of 2020 (25), while in previous years, numbers
remained constant with 10 cases verified between July and December 2017, 20 in
2018 and 19 in 2019.
27. Among the 74 girls, 20 girls between the ages of 11 and 14 were subjected to
sexual harassment during their association with GATIA (10), MNLA (9) and MSA (1),
between 2017 and 2020, in Ménaka Commune, Cercle and Region. Sexual violence
also occurred during attacks against villages. For instance, in 2019, a 15 -year-old
internally displaced girl was abducted and raped in Goundam Cercle, Mopti Region,
by unidentified armed individuals when they attacked her village. The survivor,
abducted along with an unspecified number of other girls, was released a few hours
later and received medical care. In January 2020, four girls were abducted and forcibly
married to unidentified armed elements in a village south of Gourma Rharous in
Timbuktu Region. The area where the incident occurred is under JNIM and ISGS
influence, whose elements reportedly exert a strong pressure on the local population
through targeted killings, death threats and abductions, and who promote forced and
early marriage.
28. As indicated in the previous report, the monitoring and reporting of instances of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in Mali was severely limited owing to several
factors, including the prevailing insecurity, the fear of reprisals, the lack of protection
for survivors and witnesses, impunity, stigma, limited access to justice and
sociocultural barriers. Furthermore, owing to the lack of adequately trained staff,

8/16

20-14989

S/2020/1105

funding constraints and a limited number of service providers in certain areas, the
availability of assistance for survivors was hampered considerably.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
29. A total of 216 attacks against schools (169) and hospitals (47) were verified
during the reporting period, representing more than a threefold increase compared
with the previous report (62 attacks). The education and health systems remained
deeply affected by conflict, intercommunal violence and overall insecurity, depriving
hundreds of thousands of children of their fundamental rights to education and basic
health care. Schools and hospitals were attacked, destroyed, burned, looted by armed
groups or used for military purposes, and education and health personnel were
threatened and killed.
30. A total of 169 attacks against schools were verified in Mopti (93), Timbuktu
(33), Koulikoro (21), Gao (9), Ménaka (8) and Ségou (5) Regions. The majority could
not be attributed to a specific armed perpetrator (154), while the remaining cases were
attributed to JNIM (8), FLM (3), ISGS, DNA, Fulani and Dozo armed elements (1
each). There was a surge in attacks in 2018 (81) compared with the last six months of
2017 (19), before decreasing to 55 in 2019 and 14 during the first quarter of 2020.
31. Attacks against schools included verbal and written threats against school
personnel (45 per cent), the destruction and burning of facilities and equipment (35
per cent), incidents of the killing of education personnel (8 per cent) or of assault
perpetrated against them (4 per cent), as well as incidents of looting and abduction (4
per cent each). For instance, in 2017, one elementary school in Mopti Region was
attacked by six unidentified armed elements who beat teachers, stole motorcycles and
telephones, ransacked school equipment and subsequently forced the teachers to close
the school. In 2018, 20 schools in Koulikoro Region closed following threats directed
at them by unidentified armed elements who visited the schools and ordered the
teachers to close them, affecting the education of at least 2,351 students.
32. Since 2017, the insecurity related to attacks and threats of attacks on schools and
education personnel led to the withdrawal of teachers in the central and northern regions
and further hampered access to education for children. Alarming developments were
observed in Timbuktu and Mopti Regions in 2019 and 2020, with the burning of schools,
the killing of school directors and threats demanding the closure of secular schools and
the opening of Qur'anic schools. The closure of schools continued to increase throughout
the reporting period as the conflict intensified. While 500 schools were closed at the end
of 2017, as at March 2020, a total of 1,261 schools remained closed in Mopti, Gao,
Ménaka, Kidal, Ségou, Koulikoro and Timbuktu Regions, affecting the education of at
least 378,300 children. By mid-March 2020, all schools had closed nationwide owing
to the COVID-19 pandemic.
33. The use of schools for military purposes by armed forces and groups resulted in
the disruption of classes. The country task force verified the military use of 20 schools
during 2017 (12) and 2019 (8) by the Malian armed forces (4), CMA (4), Platform
(2), Dozo traditional hunters, HCUA, during joint operations by CJA and MNLA, and
by MAA-Platform (1 each) and by unidentified armed groups (6) in Gao, Kidal,
Timbuktu and Mopti Regions. At the time of writing, one school continued to be used
by the Malian armed forces in Gao Region despite sustained advocacy by the country
task force.
34. A total of 47 attacks against hospitals and protected personnel were verified in
Mopti (20), Timbuktu (13), Gao (13) and Ménaka (1) Regions, mostly perpetrated by
unidentified armed groups (41), followed by alleged Dozo armed elements (2), DNA,
alleged armed Fulani elements, CMA and ISGS (1 each). Seven attacks were verified

20-14989

9/16

S/2020/1105

between July and December 2017, followed by a sharp increase in 2018 (21), while
14 were verified in 2019 and five during the first quarter of 2020.
35. Incidents of attacks on hospitals involved threats and the abduction of protected
personnel, the carjacking of health centre vehicles and ambulances, attacks on
medical convoys, intrusion into premises, attempted robberies, attacks and the setting
ablaze of health centres, the looting of medicines and the killing of patients inside a
hospital. In 2017, Timbuktu regional hospital was targeted twice. It was targeted the
first time on 25 July, when unidentified armed elements carjacked the hospital’s
ambulance, which was transporting a patient. The patient was left on the side of the
road with the driver and medical personnel. In a second instance, on 16 August, two
unidentified armed individuals threatened the hospital duty nurse during an attempt
to retrieve the bodies of armed group members killed during an attack on MINUSMA
headquarters in Timbuktu. In January 2018, an ambulanc e transporting a patient and
a team conducting a vaccination campaign were carjacked by unidentified armed
elements in Timbuktu Region. In May 2019, two alleged Dozo traditional hunters
entered Bankass hospital in Mopti Region and killed two wounded Fulani patients.
Both assailants were arrested.

E.

Abduction
36. The country task force verified the abduction of 38 children (10 girls, 27 boys,
1 sex unknown) between the ages of 6 and 17 by unidentified armed perpetrators (25),
Dogon traditional hunters (7), Fulani armed elements and FLM (2 each), ISGS and
GATIA (1 each). The total represents an increase compared with the previous report
(12 children) and can be explained by growing insecurity and the intensification of
armed groups’ activities. A steady increase of abductions of children was also observed
throughout the reporting period, with no verified cases in 2017, 9 in 2018, 17 in 2019
and 12 during the first three months of 2020. Mopti was the most affected region (20
cases), followed by Timbuktu (13), Gao (3) and Ménaka and Ségou (1 each) Regions.
37. Of the 38 children, 10 were released, 5 were killed following their abduction
and the whereabouts of the other 23 children remain unknown. While the purpose of
abduction could not always be ascertained, one boy was abducted for the purpose of
recruitment, 5 children were killed by their abductors and 5 girls were subjected to
sexual violence during their captivity. For instance, a 14-year-old girl was first
abducted by a GATIA element before being sexually assaulted.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
38. The country task force verified 425 incidents of the denial of humanitarian
access, most of which were attributed to unidentified armed perpetrators (415),
followed by GATIA (3), DNA and the Malian Defence and Security Forces (2 each)
and FLM, CMA and Dogon traditional hunters (1 each). The number of verified
incidents almost doubled compared with the previous report (224). The most affected
region was Mopti (99 incidents), followed by Gao (87), Timbuktu (80), Ménaka (46),
Kidal (37), Bamako (23) and other regions (53). Incidents included carjacking (35 per
cent), physical violence against humanitarian personnel, resulting in abduction and
injuries (24 per cent), break-ins into humanitarian premises (15 per cent), the looting
of valuables and restrictions on movement, affecting non-governmental organizations
and United Nations entities (10 per cent), robberies (9 per cent), the burning of
humanitarian cars (3 per cent), threats against and the killing of humanitarian staff (2
per cent each).

10/16

20-14989

S/2020/1105

39. The majority of violations occurred in 2018 (170), followed by 2019 (129),
while 68 incidents were verified between July and December 2017 and 58 in the first
quarter of 2020. For instance, in early 2020, five humanitarian personnel were
abducted by unidentified armed elements and were later released unharmed.
40. Humanitarian access was temporarily restricted in some areas of the central and
northern regions owing to attacks by armed groups, military operations and
intercommunal clashes. These constraints on access contin ued to create challenges
for the provision of humanitarian assistance to thousands of children, who were
deprived of access to health care, vaccinations and food distribution. In addition,
some non-governmental organizations were forced to suspend their hu manitarian
activities, preventing them from delivering humanitarian assistance to children. For
instance, five international non-governmental organizations temporarily suspended
their respective humanitarian activities in Ménaka Region from December 2019 t o
February 2020, as a result of increased criminality and robbery in Ménaka city.
41. Despite those constraints, humanitarian actors were able to continue to deliver
aid to the vulnerable population, through dialogue with communities as well as parties
to conflict, and by adapting their operations where necessary.

V. Progress in addressing grave violations against children
A.

Legislative reform and combating impunity
42. Advocacy continued by the country task force, as well as by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, during their respective visits to Mali in 2019, for the revision
and adoption of the draft national law on child protection. The draft law includes
specific provisions on the protection of children affected by armed conflict and
criminalizes the recruitment and use of children under the age of 15 by armed forces
and groups as a war crime. The advocacy is aimed at ensuring the revision of the law
to include the criminalization of the recruitment and use of all children below the age
of 18, in accordance with international standards. To date, no step has been taken by
the Government towards the revision and adoption of the legislation.
43. The country task force provided technical expertise for the validation of a draft
law establishing a moratorium on the 30-day deadline for birth registration.
Applicable to children born in conflict-affected areas, including sites for internally
displaced persons and refugee camps in Mali and in neighbouring countries hosting
Malian refugees, the purpose of the legislation is to restore children’s fundamental
right to an identity and to be registered at birth by annulling the 30 -day legal deadline
for the registration of children.
44. In its efforts to include children in the transitional justice process and allow
them a critical role in processes that seek truth, justice and reconciliation in Mali, the
country task force continued to support the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission, established in 2015, in promoting children’s participation in the
reconciliation process. Since 2018, an expert appointed by the country task force has
supported the Commission in mainstreaming child rights into its work and during
training sessions, resulting in the establishment of specific procedures including a
checklist for interviewing children. Training and coaching sessions were provided to
commissioners and representatives of the Commission on the inclusion of ch ild
protection and adolescent participation. In February 2020, the Commission organized
a training on child-friendly interviewing techniques and on approaches for assessing
the physical and psychological vulnerability of child victims for personnel in char ge
of taking statements (26) and the investigation unit (9).

20-14989

11/16

S/2020/1105

45. Little progress was observed with regard to the fight against impunity in terms
of the investigation, prosecution and conviction of suspected perpetrators of grave
violations against children. Child survivors of sexual violence continued to face
difficulties in accessing justice for reasons including the absence of courts in certain
areas, understaffing and the poor training of judicial personnel, the lack of medical
services, the fear of reprisals and of stigmatization, the absence of protection for
victims and witnesses and being forced into amicable settlements.
46. As indicated in the previous report, hundreds of complaints of sexual violence
from the 2012–2013 crisis, which were attributed to MNLA, Ansar Eddine and
MUJAO, have been submitted since November 2014 before Malian courts by Malian
non-governmental organizations on behalf of women and girl survivors of sexual
violence between the ages of 9 and 55. Little progress was observed wit h regard to
the prosecution of these cases, as a limited number of victims participated in hearings
held by judicial and investigating authorities. The implementation of the Supreme
Court’s orders of February 2015, which returned jurisdiction for crimes co mmitted
during the crisis to tribunals in the north of Mali, has considerably hampered
proceedings for these cases, filed as crimes against humanity and war crimes.
47. In 2017, at least two complaints involving cases of sexual violence against
adults were transferred to the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism and
Transnational Organized Crime (Pôle judiciaire spécialisé en matière de lutte contre
le terrorisme et la criminalité transnationale organisée), established in 2013. The
Specialized Judicial Unit has exclusive jurisdiction to investigate crimes of terrorism
and serious organized crimes, such as trafficking in persons. Sexual violence cases
that could amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide that are
currently pending before other tribunals in Bamako and Gao could be transferred to
the Unit, whose exclusive jurisdiction was expanded in 2019 to include and
investigate these cases.

B.

Action plans and dialogue with parties to conflict
48. The country task force continued its engagement with parties to conflict to
prevent and end grave violations against children. In 2018, CMA, in the framework
of the implementation of its 2017 action plan, validated a chronogram of priority
activities and finalized the operationalization of a joint inter-organizational
coordination mechanism between the United Nations, CMA and the Government,
including a core subcommittee in Bamako and five regional subcommittees. Strategic
meetings and several workshops were held in Gao, Ménaka, Timbuktu and Kidal
between the country task force and 282 CMA members, in order to strengthen and
accelerate the implementation of the action plan. The workshops facilitated the
development of common regional implementation strategies, taking into
consideration local specificities, and galvanized support from government officials
and civil society for coordinated actions. An annual plan of activities was adopted in
September 2019.
49. Dialogue between Platform and the country task force continued. Three
workshops and several meetings were held in Gao, Ménaka, Timbuktu, Kidal and
Mopti, with the participation of 107 Platform political and military leaders. The
coalition reiterated its commitment, to both the Special Representative and to the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, to adopt an action plan for
preventing and ending child recruitment and use. In September 2019, a draft action
plan was prepared and the signature thereof is pending. The split within Platform may
explain the delay.

12/16

20-14989

S/2020/1105

50. Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad (MSA) reiterated its pledge to end and
prevent grave violations against children and expressed its willingness to develop an
action plan, even though the group is not included in the annexes to the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (A/74/845-S/2020/525).
51. Between November 2018 and October 2019, the country task force, in
cooperation with national authorities, conducted the screening of combatants during
the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and integration
process in Gao, Kidal, Timbuktu and Mopti Regions, in order to identify any
associated children and ensure their immediate separation. No child was released. A
few individuals presumed to be children by child protection actors presented birth
certificates or identity cards, established a few days prior to the registration of
combatants, showing their presumed adult age. The validity of the documents was
questioned, and the issue was brought to the attention of senior government officials
and armed group leaders. During the process, 1,878 combatants, including 17 women,
were sensitized regarding the six grave violations against children .
52. The country task force continued its sustained advocacy for the release of
children formerly associated with armed groups and detained by the Malian Defence
and Security Forces or held in government detention centres under the orders of
prosecutors. The task force called for the implementation of the Protocol on the
Release and Handover of Children Associated with Armed Forces and Groups, signed
in 2013 by the United Nations and the Government of Mali, which provides that
children should be immediately transferred to child protection actors and alternatives
to detention should be prioritized. The task force trained magistrates and other judicial
actors on the protection of children arrested or captured and detained for alleged
association with armed groups.
53. The Special Representative and the country task force continued advocacy with
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel to ensure that the protection of
children is kept as a priority in the planning and conduct of military operations and
that children associated with armed groups captured during operations are transferred
to child protection actors, as required by the Force’s human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework. Child protection principles were integrat ed
into working documents of the Force and modules on the protection of children were
included in training sessions for the troops. Child protection focal points within the
Force and a child protection adviser were also appointed.
54. Following the endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration by the Government
on 1 February 2018, a monitoring committee for its implementation, composed of the
Government and members of the country task force, was established. The Committee
developed a yearly plan of activities and held several meetings, including a community
workshop in Mopti in November 2018 on security in schools and on the reopening of
schools in the central regions. Priority activities were identified by the Committee,
including an ongoing mapping of schools closed owing to direct threats or insecurity.
55. The Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict visited Mali in July
2019 and engaged with the Government, and with signatory armed groups, and met
with children affected by conflict, among other members of civil society. She
advocated against gaps in the legislative framework and called for the extension of
free birth registration beyond the existing limited 30-day period. She offered support
to strengthen child protection trainings for the Ma lian Defence and Security Forces
and called upon all relevant parties to fully implement the Protocol on the Release
and Handover of Children Associated with Armed Forces and Groups. She also urged
the leaders of armed groups to release all children from their ranks and to end grave
violations. She called upon CMA to fully implement its 2017 action plan and upon
Platform to also adopt an action plan. In Mopti, she encouraged the Fulani and Dogon
20-14989

13/16

S/2020/1105

communities to help preventing violations by strengthening com munity mechanisms,
with the support of the United Nations. She also advocated the implementation of
reintegration programmes throughout the country. During the visit, a Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict was established. Co-chaired by Belgium and the
Niger, the Group is focused on raising awareness and advocating with relevant
stakeholders for in-country action on issues relating to children and armed conflict.
56. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict undertook a visit to Mali
in December 2019 and engaged with the Government on opportunities to advance the
children and armed conflict agenda. The Working Group members met, among others,
with CMA and Platform representatives and urged them to take immediate action to
improve the protection of children, including through the adoption of an action plan,
in the case of Platform, and the swift implementation of actions plans to prevent and
end grave violations against children.

C.

Release of children and programmatic response
57. The Ministry for the Advancement of Women, Children and the Family worked
in close collaboration with the country task force and other partners to reinforce
community-based mechanisms focused on the prevention of grave violations, and the
identification and provision of care to children released from armed forces and
groups, as well as to children at risk of violence, including recruitment or
re-recruitment.
58. The country task force supported the establishment and the functioning of two new
transit and orientation centres for children released from armed forces and armed groups
in Kidal and Mopti and continued to support the centres already established in Bamako
and Gao. From July 2017 to March 2020, 593 children (49 girls, 544 boys) were
provided with care services and psychosocial assistance while in transit centres. Of
those beneficiaries, 114 children received holistic care in the second semester of 2017,
75 children in 2018, 249 in 2019 and 155 children in 2020. A total of 382 of the children
benefited from socioeconomic reintegration support, including education, vocational
training and income-generating activities, which allowed them to return to normal life.
The remaining 211 children could not be provided with reintegration services owing to
a lack of access to the areas where they were reunited with their families.
59. Insecurity in some of the conflict-affected areas, such as Kidal and Ménaka
Regions and some localities of Gao, Mopti and Ségou Regions, made it difficult to
provide durable reintegration and monitor the quality of reintegration services
provided to children. Another challenge was the inability for some children to return
to their communities owing to persistent violence and the nomadic character of their
families, especially for those coming from cross-border areas in the Niger and
Mauritania. The country task force has been exploring alternative ways such as family
care systems, to host and support children whose families could not be found.
60. Some 372 girl survivors of sexual violence received multisectoral assistance
through UNICEF partners in Mopti and Gao Regions. In coordination with Malian
authorities, the United Nations set up four integrated service centres to support
multisectoral services for survivors of gender-based and sexual violence in Bamako,
Gao and Mopti.

D.

Awareness-raising and mainstreaming of child protection
61. The country task force conducted training and awareness-raising initiatives to
end and prevent grave violations against children. Some 337 officers of the Malian

14/16

20-14989

S/2020/1105

Defence and Security Forces were trained, in Bamako, Gao, Ménaka, and Mopti, on
the protection of children in armed conflict, including on the roles of the national
armed forces in protecting children. Training sessions were also conducted in favour
of 82 representatives of the judiciary, police and gendarmerie, in Bamako and Gao,
with a particular focus on the protection of children detained for alleged association
with armed groups and their transfer. Furthermore, the country task force trained 30
senior officers of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel on legal
instruments related to protecting children in armed conflict, as well as on the Force’s
role in ensuring the protection of children encountered during military operations.
62. Regular meetings were held between Barkhane forces, the country t ask force
and the National Directorate for the Advancement of Children and Families on the
protection of children during military operations and to ensure the swift handover to
child protection actors of children captured by Barkhane during their operation s.
63. The “Act to Protect Children Affected by Conflict” campaign, launched by my
Special Representative at the global level, in New York, in April 2019, and in July
2019, in Bamako, was rolled out by the country task force in collaboration with
Malian authorities in Kidal, Mopti and Ménaka Regions. The awareness-raising
activities brought together regional authorities, representatives of armed groups, civil
society, traditional and religious leaders, non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations to catalyse in-country attention and efforts to end the six grave
violations, as well as to prevent future violations. In August 2019, UNICEF launched
the “Children under attack” initiative, with the objective of raising awareness among
international and national partners of grave violations against children in Mali.

VI. Observations and recommendations
64. I am extremely concerned by the sharp increase in the number of verified
grave violations committed against children in Mali, in particular the
recruitment and use of children, the killing and maiming of children, attacks on
schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access. I urge all parties to
conflict in Mali to immediately halt grave violations, release all children in their
ranks and abide by international humanitarian and human rights law.
65. I am alarmed by the rise in the number of child casualties and of
intercommunal conflict, which takes a heavy toll on children. I urge all parties
not to target civilians, including children, and to take all necessary measures to
minimize the effect of their operations on civilians, including children.
66. I am concerned by the new cases of recruitment and use of children by the
Malian armed forces. I urge the Government to work with the United Nations to
review allegations of child recruitment and use by its armed forces and to
reinforce effective age assessment procedures within the ongoing reform of the
security sector. I encourage the institutionalization of child protection training
for the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
67. I welcome the advances in the transitional justice process and the
promotion of children’s participation therein. I remain concerned, however, by
the prevalence of impunity for perpetrators of grave violations against children
and urge the authorities to swiftly hold perpetrators accountable. I further
encourage the Government to finalize the revision of the draft child protection
law, criminalizing the recruitment and use of children, including those between
the ages of 15 and 18, and to adopt the draft law establishing a moratorium on
the 30-day deadline for birth registration.

20-14989

15/16

S/2020/1105

68. Child protection provisions must be fully taken into account by all
stakeholders engaged in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. I further call upon the Government of Mali to ensure that all
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes and justice and
security sector reforms take into account the specific needs of boys and girls,
including through the development of a gender-sensitive disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
69. Sexual violence against children must end. In addition to prioritizing
accountability, I call upon the Government to ensure that survivors have access
to the required services and assistance, as well as to justice.
70. The elevated number of incidents of attacks and threats of attacks against
schools and related protected personnel remain a grave concern. Armed groups
must stop and prevent such attacks and the military use of such facilities.
71. I am concerned by the increasing number of incidents of denial of
humanitarian access to children and urge all parties to ensure safe and
unimpeded access by humanitarian actors to children in need.
72. I welcome the release from detention by Malian authorities of 79 children
and call upon authorities to fully implement the Protocol on the Release and
Handover of Children Associated with Armed Forces and Groups and to work
with the United Nations to review the cases of children whose age could not be
determined and who remained detained for alleged association with armed
groups. I further call upon national authorities and international forces to treat
those children primarily as victims and I encourage the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel to fully implement the child protection aspects contained in
its compliance framework.
73. I commend the continued collaboration between CMA and the United
Nations to accelerate the implementation by CMA of its action plan. I encourage
CMA to swiftly implement the plan and to facilitate United Nations access to the
areas under its control for the purpose of delivering assistance to children,
monitoring progress in the implementation of the action plan and verifyi ng
allegations.
74. I welcome steps taken by Platform to adopt an action plan on child
recruitment and use. I call upon Platform’s leadership to translate its
commitments into action by swiftly signing and fully implementing the action
plan.
75. I urge the donor community, together with the Government of Mali, to
increase funding for sustainable, timely and appropriate socioeconomic
reintegration for children so as to ensure that every child affected by armed
conflict receives appropriate support.

16/16

20-14989
