United Nations

S/PV.6158

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6158th meeting
Thursday, 9 July 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-39851 (E)

*0939851*

S/PV.6158

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Somalia and Sweden, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Lidén (Sweden) took the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation to Her Excellency
Mrs. Lila Hanitra Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
to participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Ms. Susana
Malcorra. I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: We meet here today at a critical time
for Somalia. The situation in the country, particularly
in Mogadishu, remains very fragile. While there have
been some solid successes in consolidating the
Government, the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) continues to face intense pressure from
insurgent forces, backed by foreign fighters, who seek
to seize power. As the Secretary-General has reiterated
on several occasions, it is time for action on Somalia.
The choice before us is a stark one. Either we help the
Somali people overcome the current attempt to thwart
efforts towards peace or we allow the new unity
Government based on consensus and the Djibouti
accords to fall to a radical armed opposition.
Despite numerous challenges, the TFG, under the
leadership of President Sharif, has achieved some
notable accomplishments during its first six months in
office. The Government strives to maintain cohesion
despite the obvious difficulties faced by any
government of national unity.
The TFG has maintained an open-door policy to
those outside the Djibouti process by reaching out to
opposition forces and working to broaden its base of
support among community, religious and civil society
leaders. The Prime Minister has recently signed a
broad-based agreement with Ahlu Sunnah Waljama’a,
one of the major religious opposition groups in central
Somalia. This agreement, covering political, security,
humanitarian and development issues, was negotiated
within the spirit of Djibouti and underscores the
Government’s determination to invite all groups to join
in the rebuilding of Somalia. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, continues to work with the Government and
all opposition groups to facilitate dialogue in an effort
to make the peace process more inclusive.
The Government has attempted to win the hearts
and minds of the Somali people and to project a
moderate vision of Islam that is in keeping with Somali
culture. The recent pronouncements by President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed urging Somalis to reject
violence and extremism have also been helpful in this
regard. However, the Government will continue to
require more support in its public information and

09-39851

S/PV.6158

outreach programmes to ensure that this message is
widely disseminated amongst the Somali populace.
By contrast, Al-Shabaab appears to have
intensified its strategy of coercion and intimidation of
the population, using targeted assassinations of clan
elders and government officials and harsh punishments
for seemingly minor offences. Recent examples of acts
that have shocked many Somalis, who practice a very
moderate form of their religion, include the
decapitation of local community leaders and the
dismemberment of youths for theft. Reports of
resistance by local populations and community leaders
to the presence of Al-Shabaab and foreign fighters will
bolster the Government’s efforts aimed at political
mobilization.
Even in the midst of its fight for survival, the
Government has put in place more transparent and
accountable financial management measures. It has
contracted the auditing firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers
to assist with tracking and reporting on the use of
funds.
That
should
generate
greater
donor
confidence — especially on the part of those who
pledged in Brussels — by making the entire process
more transparent. This is in addition to the tracking
mechanism that has been put in place by the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), with the
support of the African Union, the United Nations
Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the Government. The TFG has developed a
budget based on revenues generated from Mogadishu
seaport, which ensured initial payments of salaries for
the police, security forces and parliamentarians residing
in Mogadishu.
The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in helping the TFG to resist this latest
assault in Mogadishu has been pivotal, even while the
mission has been operating in a very difficult and
challenging security environment. In that regard, we
would like to pay tribute to the Burundi and Uganda
contingents of AMISOM for the commendable work
they are undertaking in Somalia on behalf of the
international community. We deeply appreciate the
leadership provided by Major General Okello, Force
Commander of AMISOM, who has demonstrated a
high level of professionalism and commitment to peace
in Somalia.
In Mogadishu in particular, the ongoing conflict
between insurgent groups and Government forces has

09-39851

taken a severe toll on the civilian population,
displacing more than 200,000 people since the start of
the recent spate of fighting on 7 May 2009. Overall,
the number of internally displaced persons in Somalia
stands at 1.3 million. The humanitarian situation is
being further exacerbated by the worsening drought in
Somalia and throughout the region.
Increasing insecurity in the Jubas and Mogadishu,
coupled with drought and food insecurity issues —
including in the Gedo region, which borders Kenya —
are cited as the main reasons for a noticeable increase
in the number of arrivals in Dadaab camp, in Kenya. A
total of 6,463 more refugees were registered in June.
As of 5 July, the overall population at Dadaab stands at
284,306, an increase of 21 per cent since the beginning
of 2009. The implications of that new influx for
already congested facilities and for tense host
communities competing for resources are severe.
In this challenging context, while the
humanitarian needs for Somalia remain high, it is
critical that Security Council members encourage
donors to rapidly fund the consolidated appeal. At the
end of June, only 44 per cent of the $984 million
requested had been received, leaving a critical shortfall
in the areas of health, water and sanitation and security.
In order to consolidate the political gains of the
Djibouti accords, the Secretary-General has proposed —
and the Council has endorsed — a four-track strategy,
on political matters, security, recovery and combating
piracy. On the political track, in addition to fostering
national reconciliation and sustaining dialogue between
the TFG and opposition groups, the United Nations,
under the leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, has undertaken a series of
discussions with the Government to identify key
ministries whose capacities would need to be
strengthened in the first phase.
Having identified possible funding from
international financial institutions, UNPOS has made
several visits to Mogadishu to reach agreement with
the Cabinet and the Prime Minister on, among other
things, the modalities of this capacity-building effort.
Consultations also continue on the development of a
constitution, including a future conference on the place
of sharia law in the new constitution.
On the security track, UNPOS has reached an
agreement with the TFG to use the Joint Security
Committee as the principal mechanism for

3

S/PV.6158

coordination between the TFG and the international
community on security matters. This would include the
establishment and functioning of the national security
force and the police force. The United Nations
Development Programme continues to coordinate the
training of Somali police in consultation with
AMISOM. The payment of salaries for the trained
police is ongoing, while bilateral partners are working
on training national security forces. We continue
working on an incremental approach towards the
possible establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. That approach calls for
expeditious assistance to the TFG in building its own
security forces and institutions and the strengthening of
AMISOM to reach its mandated strength of 8,000.
On the recovery track, the United Nations country
team is initiating a series of projects to help Somalia
move beyond the current emergency and to ensure that
its people experience some benefit from the peace
process. Those projects include increasing access to
basic services, such as water, health and education;
creating livelihoods through rapid employment
generation; the rehabilitation of key infrastructure; and
other rapid-impact recovery programmes.
Finally, on piracy, the United Nations appreciates
the operations of the international maritime forces in
their anti-piracy efforts. Following the May meeting of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
the United Nations was requested to serve as the
secretariat of the Contact Group and to establish a trust
fund to address the legal and land-based dimensions of
piracy. A plan of action has been developed with the
United Nations country team to implement a series of
activities that would provide alternative livelihoods
and enhance law enforcement. The Secretary-General
has dispatched his Legal Counsel, Ms. Patricia
O’Brien, to Kenya to explore possible initiatives to
combat piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia, including the development of a legal
framework for combating piracy and armed robbery off
the Somali coast.
In our view, there are three key measures that we
can take immediately to turn around the two decades of
instability in Somalia. The first is to heed the call made
by the African Union heads of State or Government in
Sirte last week to express our full support for the
Transitional Federal Government as the legitimate
authority in Somalia and to honour the financial
pledges made to support the Government during the

4

Brussels conference in April. In order to enable the
Government to enhance its legitimacy and broaden its
base, we must invest in building the security
institutions and improve its capacity to deliver public
services and employment, which could have a positive
impact on the hearts and minds of ordinary Somalis.
Projects aimed at encouraging youth employment and
enhancing the livelihood of ordinary Somalis need to
be given priority. These are essential to wean Somalis
away from conflict, including acts of piracy, which has
been the major employer in Somalia for most of the
past two decades.
Secondly, we need to build up AMISOM and
provide it with the resources necessary to enable it to
continue to support the TFG and the people of Somalia.
As President Sharif recently stated, the TFG’s
immediate physical survival is very much dependent on
a more robust AMISOM presence. We strongly urge
Member States to support the strengthening of
AMISOM’s capacity and to enable it to reach its full
authorized strength of 8,000. The United Nations is
committed to providing support to AMISOM, as
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra will discuss in her
statement.
Thirdly, we must focus on promoting
reconciliation while, at the same time, taking measures
against armed groups and foreign elements that are
undermining the reconciliation process. As the
Secretary-General has said on many occasions, the
Somali peace process is open to all groups that
renounce violence and are willing to work with the
Government. That is the message being sent by the
TFG to all parties that remain outside the peace
process. It will be important for regional actors to work
to encourage the armed groups to work towards that
end and towards peace in Somalia.
In conclusion, we acknowledge that national
reconciliation must first begin with the Somalis, yet we
are aware of the considerable investment that the
international community has made in the future of
Somalia. We must do what we can to preserve the gains
achieved through the Djibouti Agreement. It is in the
international community’s interest to ensure not only
that the TFG does not collapse, but that it thrives.
Action now will avert the inevitable high price of
going in at a later date if we are not successful. We
believe that immediate and concerted action by the
international community can help the Somali people
turn a new page in their troubled history and create a

09-39851

S/PV.6158

conducive
recovery.

environment

for

peace,

stability

and

and humanitarian supply lines in Mogadishu, including
the airport, the seaport and other strategic locations.

The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.

Voluntary support for AMISOM remains an
essential complement to the United Nations logistics
support package. Those requirements include funding
and in-kind support to meet troop payments and
urgently needed contingent equipment. However, with
the majority of pledged donor support to the African
Union and troop-contributing countries to be provided
bilaterally, effective coordination is critical if
AMISOM is to be properly supported without gaps or
duplication.

I now give the floor to Ms. Susana Malcorra.
Ms. Malcorra: I am grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Council once again on the progress made to
strengthen the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and Somalia’s security institutions.
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009), adopted in
January, endorsed the Secretary-General’s proposed
strategy for Somalia, consisting of a United Nations
support package for AMISOM and the building of the
capacity of the Somali security sector. That support is
funded through a combination of voluntary
contributions through United Nations trust funds,
bilateral support for AMISOM and Somali security
institutions and assessed contributions for the United
Nations logistics support package. It is an integrated
strategy that recognizes the importance of each of
those components in strengthening peace and security
in Somalia and was devised by the Secretary-General
to support the political process, build security and
stability in the country, promote humanitarian
assistance and help recovery efforts in a manner that is
responsive to the prevailing conditions on the ground.
The international community’s commitment to
peace and stability in Somalia was further expressed by
the Council in its resolution 1872 (2009) which called
on the Secretary-General to, among other activities,
continue to provide logistical support to AMISOM
through 31 January 2010.
The success of the Somalia donors conference
held in Brussels on 23 April was evidenced by pledges
totalling approximately well over $200 million.
Currently, $15 million has been received by the United
Nations trust fund for AMISOM. Specific discussions
are under way with other donors, with the possibility of
soon doubling the contributions to the trust fund.
The current military strength of AMISOM in
Mogadishu stands at 4,274 troops comprising three
battalions from Uganda and two battalions from
Burundi. The African Union’s continued efforts to
bring the AMISOM force up to its full mandated
strength of 8,000 troops, reinforced with maritime and
air components, is critical to secure key installations

09-39851

To date, the United Nations has not applied any
of the funding available in the trust fund for support to
AMISOM. This has been done as part of an effort to
ensure that this funding is available to meet those
requirements that will not be supported by major
bilateral contributors. I urge all Member States and
regional organizations, including the European Union
and the League of Arab States, to redouble their efforts
to expedite the disbursement of pledges and to work
closely with the United Nations to ensure that the
combined support for AMISOM can be identified and
prioritized. On the ground, we are gathering
momentum.
I would like to take this opportunity to brief the
Council on key support achievements and specific
actions taken to date. Of the initial funding of
$72 million provided up to 30 June 2009 for United
Nations logistical support to AMISOM, approximately
95 per cent was committed. With a focus on initial
start-up equipment requirements, the available funding
has been used to initiate the procurement of equipment
and supplies for both direct support to AMISOM and
necessary requirements of the new United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA).
Interim “life support” supplies for AMISOM
continue to be provided by a Member State with its
own vendor. The commercial supply arrangements of
the United Nations, sourced to United Nations
procurement and supply standards, are expected to
come into effect in a phased manner beginning next
month. In the meantime, the United Nations has
enhanced AMISOM’s existing supply arrangements
where possible, including by providing additional
rations, medical supplies, specialized equipment and
field defence resources.

5

S/PV.6158

On rations, UNSOA has commenced the weekly
delivery of combat ration packs to supplement
AMISOM’s current fresh food supplies and to raise the
daily caloric count to United Nations standards. Over
6,500 ration packs have been airlifted into Mogadishu
to date, with the objective of delivering 12,000 ration
packs per week until the United Nations support
package is fully implemented. Arrangements were also
put in place to provide AMISOM with strategic
reserves of rations to mitigate risks to AMISOM’s
supply chain. An initial United Nations rations contract
is expected to be operational in August.
With regard to air support, in the light of the
security conditions in Mogadishu, short-term
arrangements for commercial MEDEVAC capacity
have been enhanced. The Department of Field Support
is working closely with the Department of Safety and
Security to assess the feasibility of supply flights to
AMISOM.
On the subject of fuel, a fuel contract is expected
to be awarded in August.
Regarding sea freight, options for services —
chartering a vessel or using a freight forwarding
vendor — are being established to enable UNSOA to
commence sea delivery services to Mogadishu in
August.
Field defence stores, medical and pharmaceutical
supplies and a mobile airfield lighting system have
been deployed to Mogadishu. Training for those
capacities is being conducted in Entebbe. Additional
training requirements have been identified by
AMISOM troop-contributors to operate specialized
equipment for strategic communications systems,
firefighting, first aid and trauma care and movement
control and property management, which is also
ongoing.
The ex-UNMEE — United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea — donation is now starting to be
used. I can report that, following training in Entebbe,
containers and prefabricated buildings are now being
erected and that about 50 vehicles are also in use
within the airport defensive area.
A remaining priority is the construction of a force
headquarters and level II hospital in Mogadishu, to
provide facilities for a United Nations presence in
country and to allow AMISOM to expand from a
military mission to an integrated civilian, police and

6

military operation. The construction requirements have
been released to vendors and a contract award is
targeted for August.
Much of the required equipment mobilized to
date has been sourced through the strategic deployment
stocks located at our logistics base in Brindisi,
highlighting the importance of the readiness of the
United Nations to quickly respond to Security Council
mandates. Although a number of critical items have
already been moved by air, the first significant United
Nations consignment of support assets, worth over
$15 million, is expected to arrive in Mombasa this
week. These assets will provide essential capabilities to
AMISOM in Mogadishu. They include prefabricated
buildings, medical equipment, workshops, sanitation
systems, refrigeration units for food storage and
armoured vehicles.
This consignment from Brindisi is being
transported by a United Nations-chartered ship, and I
wish to acknowledge and extend our appreciation to
the international maritime task force, especially
Operation Atalanta, for the escort and security
assistance that is being provided to our consignment.
We have recently received confirmation that the
Government of Kenya has given its approval for
UNSOA to establish a logistics support base in
Mombasa. We welcome this development, which paves
the way for immediate and long-term support and
improved means of delivery.
The memorandum of understanding between the
United Nations and the African Union for the provision
of support to the African Union Mission in Somalia,
which establishes appropriate internal controls to
ensure that all equipment and services provided by the
United Nations are provided in a transparent manner,
has been endorsed by the United Nations Controller
and submitted to the African Union for final approval
and signature. It includes payments and other support
provided through the United Nations Trust Fund. We
expect the memorandum will be signed by the African
Union shortly.
Further funding of $139 million has recently been
approved by the General Assembly for the start of the
new budget period effective 1 July. Under existing
plans, this level of funding effectively provides for
logistics support operations to continue for
approximately four months. The Assembly is scheduled

09-39851

S/PV.6158

to consider funding for the full 2009-2010 budget cycle
this October.

for implementing the strategy endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 1872 (2009).

The start-up phase of any field operation,
including logistics support for AMISOM, requires
certainty of resources. Permit me to offer an
observation here. This short-term approach to funding
limits the field mission in undertaking longer-term
strategic planning critical to its core objectives, has
implications for procurement arrangements and can
hamper efforts to attract experienced staff. Member
States’ support for stable, full-year funding will ensure
that UNSOA can continue its operations in a manner
more conducive to its fully meeting its mandate.

In this regard, a fully functioning UNSOA and
established supply arrangements will enhance the
operating standards of AMISOM troops towards United
Nations standards. Although valuable gains are now
being made in this effort, it will be some months,
probably only in early 2010, before the logistics
support package is fully rolled out. However, its
effectiveness in supporting AMISOM’s implementation
of its mandate also depends on increasing the numbers
of AMISOM troops on the ground.

We continue to make systematic progress in the
implementation of the support package to AMISOM.
We are pleased to report our continued close
partnership with the African Union in supporting the
Somali peace process and our close cooperation with
AMISOM on the ground in the delivery of the support
package.
The establishment of UNSOA in the premises of
the United Nations Office in Nairobi has been
achieved. Recruitment of international and national
staff is ongoing. The proximity of AMISOM
headquarters, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia and UNSOA in Nairobi, as well as United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, continues to
promote collaboration, information sharing and
responsiveness among all of the key players in the
support effort.
Important progress has also been made with
respect to access for missions to Mogadishu. Working
closely with the Department of Safety and Security,
UNSOA representatives have recently undertaken three
visits to AMISOM, and preparations are underway to
build up essential security aimed at enabling the
establishment of a small rotating permanent presence
in the capital. The deployment of international staff is
instrumental in enabling the delivery of the required
level of support associated with a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. Until security conditions
permit UNSOA to establish this small footprint in
Mogadishu, interim oversight mechanisms will
continue using United Nations, AU and contracted
personnel in order to achieve our objectives.
When the required capability is fully
implemented, UNSOA and the logistics support
package for AMISOM will provide one of the key steps

09-39851

Finally, allow me to pay tribute to the Ugandan
and Burundian battalions, led by Force Commander
Major General Okello, and their efforts on very
difficult terrain.
Mr. President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief
the Security Council. I very warmly congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and wish you success. I also wish to express
my appreciation to last month’s Council President, His
Excellency Mr. Baki İlkin of Turkey. Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, Ms. Susana Malcorra, who have just
briefed us. I very much appreciate their briefings.
I wish to also thank and express our appreciation
for the efforts of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU), as
well as other international regional organizations that
are currently supporting Somalia and whose continued
support is urgently required.
I would like to begin my presentation with some
salient points from the address of His Excellency
Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, to the
13th African Union Summit, held from 1 to 3 July 2009
in Sirte, Libya.
His Excellency the President stated that following
approximately 20 years when there were no
functioning
governments,
the
long-awaited
breakthrough in the tragedy experienced by the people

7

S/PV.6158

of Somalia came when the National Reconciliation
Conference was held in Djibouti under the auspices of
the United Nations, the international community and
regional and local organizations. It led to a peace
agreement between the then interim Somali
Government and the opposition at the beginning of this
year, and the new joint parliament was formed. His
Excellency the President was elected and then a
Government of National Unity was appointed and
gained the confidence of the parliament and the
majority of the Somali people.
Unfortunately, during the long period of chaos in
the country, Somalia became a safe haven for militants
and terrorists who continue to obstruct peace efforts
and pose a threat not only to Somalia but to the region
as well. The situation is now very critical, as was
mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs. Now the situation is taking on a new
dimension since the emergence of the extremist
movements which are linked to Al-Qaida and some
State sponsors of terrorism which always maintain
agendas that do not promote the interests of peace in
Somalia.
The presence of Al-Qaida in Somalia is not
merely a claim; it is a reality. On 19 March 2009,
Usama bin Laden declared war against the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and incited foreign fighters
to help overthrow it by mobilizing financial and human
resources for that purpose. In the past month, groups of
extremists, along with foreign fighters backed by the
Eritrean Government, launched attacks on the
Government. As a result, hundreds of thousands of
innocent people were displaced from Mogadishu.
During this brief period of about five or six
months, as mentioned by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, the
achievements of the Transitional Federal Government
have included the following. Immediately after its
formation, the Government, including the Parliament,
was moved to Mogadishu, the capital. The Government
opened peace and reconciliation negotiations and
welcomed all efforts by tribal leaders, businessmen,
religious leaders and members of civil society to bring
about reconciliation between the Government and the
opposition. These efforts resulted in some success,
including some of the opposition groups joining the
Government. Other achievements include: the
preparation and implementation of a temporary budget;
the establishment of a central bank and financial
institutions and the appointment of an Accountant

8

General; the formation of an anti-corruption
commission; the establishment of the Military High
Court with the objective of disciplining the Somali
forces and preventing human rights violations; the
integration of the former transitional Government
forces and the forces of the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia; and the appointment of a
chief of staff, a land force commander, a commander of
the navy and coast guard and a commander of the air
force.
In order to enable the Transitional Federal
Government to take control of the situation in the
country and deliver on its mission, His Excellency
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed appealed to
heads of State or Government at the just-concluded
African Union summit to provide the necessary support
to his Government as soon as possible, especially in
the following areas: bringing the number of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to 8,000, as
promised; broadening the African Union Mission in
Somalia and following up on the full participation in
the peacekeeping process; and accelerating the
strengthening of the Somali national forces by
providing training, equipment and funding.
The current situation in Somalia is so serious that
it cannot wait for a long period of deliberations, as our
President has stated. That is why he has said that we
urgently need support as soon as possible. The
approval of the implementation of the communiqué of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) was also requested, as were contributions for
building up the Somali security forces, for providing
humanitarian relief for the affected population, which
was also mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General
Ms. Malcorra, and for building infrastructure and
implementing development projects in the country.
In conclusion, let me refer to paragraph 16 of the
communiqué of the just-concluded African Union
summit in Sirte, which calls on
“the United Nations Security Council, in line
with the AU Peace and Security Council and
IGAD communiqué, to take immediate measures,
including the imposition of a no-fly zone and
blockade of seaports, to prevent the entry of
foreign elements into Somalia, as well as flights
and
shipments
carrying
weapons
and
ammunition”.

09-39851

S/PV.6158

It is these foreign elements which are
continuously attacking the Government, AMISOM and
the population in general.
The communiqué also requests the imposition of
sanctions against all those foreign actors, both within
and outside the region, specially Eritrea, providing
support to the armed groups engaged in destabilization
activities in Somalia, attacks against the Transitional
Federal Government, the civilian population and
AMISOM, as well as against all the Somali individuals
and entities working towards undermining the peace
and reconciliation efforts.

(AMISOM) that the Council requested and approved.
However, fighting in Somalia has increased over recent
weeks, and the humanitarian situation has further
deteriorated. We have seen a spate of attacks against
the Transitional Federal Government and the civilian
population by armed groups, apparently set on
undermining the Djibouti Agreement, the reconciliation
process and Somalia’s stability.
There are four main areas where the United
Kingdom believes action is needed on Somalia, which
should be the focus of the Council’s attention over the
coming period.

In view of the critical situation in Somalia, I have
the honour to reiterate the appeal made by His
Excellency Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed for urgent
action by the Security Council and the international
community. I wish also to thank all those who have so
far supported the fight against piracy in Somalia, those
who are supporting us now and those who will be
supporting us in the future.

First is to tackle the humanitarian crisis. More
than 3 million people are now in need of assistance.
That is a staggering figure. I understand that the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees estimates that over 150,000 people have been
displaced from Mogadishu just since 7 May. The
international community must continue to support the
TFG in delivering basic security, food and health care.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia. Although my
President did not mention this, it was requested that I
should mention that a United Nations peacekeeping
force should also be provided and that AMISOM
should become part of that peacekeeping force as soon
as possible.

Second is the political track. Ultimately, we need
Somali solutions to Somali problems. The Djibouti
Agreement provides the basis for that. The
international community has to continue to support the
TFG and President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed,
including by living up to the pledges we all made in
Brussels in April. The TFG must continue its efforts at
reconciliation and in providing security to the
population of Somalia.

The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Security Council.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Away from
any media cameras, the suffering of the people of
Somalia too often fails to get the attention from the
international community that it should. At the African
Union summit last weekend, African leaders asked the
Security Council to take action. So this debate is timely
in considering our next steps. My delegation is grateful
to you, Mr. President, for organizing it today. I thank
Under-Secretaries-General Pascoe and Malcorra for
their briefings today. I also thank our colleague the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
contribution.
As the briefings have underlined, progress has
been made by the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) to establish itself in Mogadishu, and the United
Nations has moved quickly to deliver the support
package for the African Union Mission in Somalia

09-39851

Thirdly, we need to do all we can to bring to an
end the attacks against the TFG, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the civilian
population by armed groups, and to provide a secure
environment in which the Federal Government can
work.
AMISOM has played a critical role in supporting
President Sharif’s Government and in securing key
installations in Mogadishu. The United Kingdom pays
tribute to the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for
their continuing commitment to that difficult operation.
AMISOM needs further strengthening, and further
contributions are needed. The United Kingdom has
donated £10 million to the United Nations Trust Fund
for AMISOM, as well as £5 million directly to the
African Union for the Somalia operation. We
encourage others to also contribute. As I have said, we
welcome the excellent work by the Department of
Field Support, as described by Under-Secretary-

9

S/PV.6158

General Malcorra, to ensure the rapid delivery of the
United Nations logistical support package to
AMISOM.
The Council should also seek to halt the illegal
flow of weapons and ammunition entering the country
and being provided to rebel groups. We should demand
that both internal and external actors responsible for
carrying out and supporting attacks on TFG and
AMISOM forces immediately cease their actions. In
line with the request from the African Union, the
Security Council should stand ready to take action
against any individuals, entities or Governments shown
to be arming or supporting those who are carrying out
those attacks. The United Kingdom looks forward to
receiving shortly the report of the sanctions Monitoring
Group and any other evidence submitted to the Somalia
sanctions Committee.
The long-term solution to Somalia’s security
remains the training of the Somali security forces. The
United Nations Development Programme has done
some good work in training the police, but there is still
much to do to strengthen the Joint Security Forces.
Several United Nations Member States are providing
training, and the United Kingdom welcomes that. We
should all consider how we can help.
The fourth issue is piracy. The Security Council
needs to continue to work to ensure security on
Somalia’s seas as well as on land. We must tackle both
piracy and its root causes. We welcome the work of the
international Contact Group on Piracy. On the
operational front, the United Kingdom is providing the
command and headquarters of the European Union’s
naval mission.
The Council should stand behind the call made by
African Union leaders last the weekend for an end to
the recent fighting in Somalia and for all groups to
respect and cooperate with the Transitional Federal
Government. Following consultations with other
delegations, including Uganda in particular, the United
Kingdom yesterday circulated a draft presidential
statement backing the African Union’s call. The
statement also calls for greater international support to
AMISOM and makes it clear that the Council will
consider the imposition of sanctions on anyone
engaged in undermining the stability of Somalia.
Reaction to our draft has been very positive. Right
now, we are working to iron out some minor changes
that colleagues have asked. I hope that we might be in

10

a position to adopt the draft presidential statement at
the end of our debate this morning.
After a period of progress earlier this year
following the formation of a new Government under a
new President, the security and humanitarian situation
in Somalia is once again worsening. The Security
Council and the international community have to do
what they can to provide practical support to both the
TFG and AMISOM so we can help to bring about the
stability and security that the people of Somalia
deserve.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank Under-Secretaries-General Pascoe and Malcorra
for their comprehensive briefings today, as well as the
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU) and
Ambassador Duale, Permanent Representative of
Somalia, for being with us today.
The United States remains committed to several
goals in Somalia: first, supporting Somalia’s
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) in its battle
against al-Shabaab and other violent extremists;
secondly, bolstering the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM); thirdly, helping the TFG to
establish itself as a legitimate and stable Government
that can control its territory and provide basic services
to its citizens; fourthly, partnering with the
international community to ease the suffering of the
Somali people; and fifthly, battling the scourge of
piracy off the Somali coast.
The United States condemns in the strongest
possible terms the recent military offensives designed
to topple the TFG that were launched by al-Shabaab,
which the United States has designated as a foreign
terrorist organization. We are particularly concerned by
the recent influx of foreign fighters into Mogadishu’s
already precarious security environment. Such
extremists aim to prolong the cycle of violence and
poverty that has ravaged Somalia for almost two
decades. The international community must stand
united in its support for the TFG.
If the extremists are successful, we could lose yet
another generation of Somalis to war, disease and
desperate poverty. The people of Somalia have suffered
far too much for far too long. The international
community must support their efforts to improve
security and extend the reach of their Government
institutions, as well as provide life-saving humanitarian
assistance. Without our support, Somalia risks

09-39851

S/PV.6158

becoming a lasting safe haven and training ground for
those plotting terrorist attacks around the world.
AMISOM is playing an indispensable role in
helping to stabilize the security situation on the
ground. In particular, we salute the dedication of the
Ugandan and Burundian forces. But their bravery alone
is not enough. AMISOM needs the support of the
United Nations and its Member States to achieve its
objectives. That is why the United States continues to
support the provision of a United Nations support
package to AMISOM, as approved by the Council in
resolution 1872 (2009).
My Government has also provided more than
$135 million in training, equipment and logistical
support to AMISOM since the Mission’s creation. But
more still must be done. We call on the States of the
African Union to consider sending more peacekeepers
to this vital Mission. We also call on United Nations
Member States to extend generous support for
AMISOM’s activities.
We have to do more than support the TFG and
AMISOM. We must also bring immense pressure to
bear on those working to subvert the TFG and the
Djibouti process and to undermine efforts to stabilize
Somalia. It is no secret that al-Shabaab has been
bolstered by Al-Qaida operatives and by the hundreds
of foreign fighters who have been pouring into
Somalia. We must all do a better job of stemming the
flow of extremists, arms and financial support into
Somalia.
The United States is particularly concerned about
the financial, military, logistical and political support
that the Government of Eritrea is offering to alShabaab and other extremists in Somalia. The United
States and others have tried repeatedly to engage the
Eritrean leadership, including with the aim to convince
them to stop, but to date the Eritreans have rebuffed
attempts to open a substantive dialogue. But even now
it is not too late. The United States calls on the
Government of Eritrea to seize this window of
opportunity to change course.
The United States is extremely concerned about
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Somalia, as
described by Under-Secretary-General Pascoe here
today. To date, nearly 500,000 Somali refugees have
fled the country, and more than 1.5 million people have
been internally displaced. In January 2009, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

09-39851

(FAO) reported that 3.2 million people needed
humanitarian assistance in Somalia, roughly 43 per
cent of the population.
To help meet these needs, the United States
Government has provided more than $149 million in
fiscal year 2009 for humanitarian assistance
programmes in Somalia, including more than
$9 million to support agriculture and food security,
economic and market systems, health and nutrition
protection and clean water, sanitation and improved
hygiene.
Security in Somalia properly tends to be the
international community’s main focus — and it should
be, as the security situation severely exacerbates the
humanitarian crisis. But even so, the international
community must redouble its aid efforts to avoid a
wider humanitarian catastrophe.
We are also quite concerned about the large
influx of refugees into Kenya. Geography will continue
to make Kenya, along with Ethiopia, Djibouti and
Yemen, a primary destination for Somalis fleeing their
country. But we urgently need to expand refugee camp
capacity in Kenya. The three primary camps near the
border are terribly overcrowded, with more than
275,000 refugees crammed into a space designed for
90,000 people. The United States and others are
supporting the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to acquire
more land for new camps and to ease the burden that
Kenyan communities bear from hosting so many
refugees.
Finally, let me say a few words about piracy. As
we all know, piracy off shore is but a symptom of the
larger problems facing Somalia on shore. But even as
we work to cure the disease we must continue to treat
the symptoms. The international response to the piracy
problem has been impressive, but we still face
significant legal, logistical and political problems over
one key component of an effective deterrence strategy.
That is the prosecution of suspected pirates. My
Government believes that States victimized or affected
by piracy bear the primary responsibility for
prosecuting pirates. These States must step up and
shoulder their share of the burden of the prosecutions,
as France, the Netherlands and others have done. In the
rare cases in which a State truly cannot prosecute, we
applaud the willingness of regional States, such as
Kenya, to let themselves be considered as alternative

11

S/PV.6158

venues. But in such cases we believe that the affected
States should be responsible for helping to defray the
trial’s costs.
In conclusion, let me say that all of us can see
that paying ransom perpetuates acts of piracy. The
United States does not offer concessions to hostagetakers, whether they are driven by political or financial
motives, and we encourage other States to take a
similar position. We would, in particular, be interested
in forming a group of so-called non-concession States
to work together to help slow the rise of piracy off the
Somali coast.
The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with the United Nations and all Member States to
finally forge a stable, secure and more prosperous
Somalia.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Pascoe and Malcorra for their briefings this morning.
My thanks go also to the Permanent Representative of
Somalia for his statement.
The Security Council is meeting once again to
discuss the situation in Somalia. That situation
constitutes a tragedy that has persisted for nearly two
decades. During those two decades we have seen
fighting among brothers and unjustified bloodshed.
They have been two decades of chaos, with ordinary
Somali civilians dying either from weapons or from a
lack of food and medicine. They have been two
decades of continuous displacement and lack of
security, two decades of fighting fuelling further
fighting and of growing hatred among tribes, with
those able to work facing no alternative but to join the
ranks of the fighters.
These have been long years marked by human
rights violations and by the international community’s
inability to intervene effectively and firmly.
Unfortunately, they have also been marked by
interference — whether with good or bad intentions —
from international and regional forces, which has
served only to intensify the conflict and increase the
number of victims.
What is happening in Somalia makes us wonder
why the international community has taken no effective
action. Where is the responsibility to protect, which
was endorsed by the 2005 World Summit? Does the
Somali people not deserve protection from its

12

tormentors? Does the legitimate Government resulting
from the Djibouti agreement not deserve the support it
needs from the international community? Does the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) not
deserve financial support and equipment from the
United Nations budget? How can the United Nations
fail to allocate the funds and equipment necessary to
help African States that are willing to contribute troops
to bring AMISOM up to its goal of 8,000 troops? Why
do some States oppose this, even though they rushed to
deploy their warships to the waters off the Somali
coast — at a cost of hundreds of millions of dollars —
when they felt that their own interests were being
threatened, while no State has acted to protect Somali
fish stocks, which continue to be plundered under the
protection of international naval forces for the
enjoyment of restaurant-goers in wealthy countries?
What is happening in Somalia cannot be resolved
through small measures; these might salvage the
Government headquarters or repel an attack by the
opposition. No, this requires full and robust United
Nations engagement in support of the Government in
order to confront those seeking to undermine that
Government. That can be achieved only through the
Organization’s regular budget, because the Government
and AMISOM cannot wage this war on the basis of
voluntary contributions alone.
The international community had a golden
opportunity to resolve the problem of Somalia and
restore peace following the election of Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed as President of Somalia and the
formation of the Transitional Federal Government. But
unfortunately, hesitation in supporting the new
Government only encouraged the opposition to work to
topple it, and they almost succeeded in doing so.
The time has come for us to learn the lesson and
take the opportunity to restore peace to Somalia. To
achieve this, the Security Council must take the
necessary measures to prevent access by Somali
opposition forces to weapons, funds and foreign
fighters. Support must also be offered to the
Transitional Federal Government in order to establish a
national army and capable security forces and to help
the Government impose State control throughout the
country. We believe that this goal can be achieved only
by offering support to AMISOM and transforming it
into a United Nations mission as soon as possible. At
the same time, we must continue with the political
process within the framework of the Djibouti

09-39851

S/PV.6158

Agreement and draft a permanent constitution for the
country.

Intergovernmental Authority on Development for
regional security.

As for the issue of piracy, in order to eliminate
this phenomenon and enable the Somali people to
benefit from their marine wealth, the international
forces deployed off the Somali coast must protect
Somali marine wealth and combat illegal fishing
operations carried out by foreign companies in areas
under Somali sovereignty. These forces must help
Somali fishermen to carry out their marine activities
freely. There is no doubt that this would contribute to
resolving the hunger problem in Somalia.

We believe that it is vital that the Security
Council discuss the appeal of the Assembly of the
African Union that the Council impose a no-fly zone
and a blockade on Somali ports to halt the entry of
mercenaries and weapons, as well as issue sanctions
against Eritrea for providing support to insurgents. We
believe that the Council has a responsibility to take
action, given the worsening situation on the ground in
all areas and the challenges the country is facing in
increasingly critical conditions.

In closing, I commend the great efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, in facilitating
the political process within the framework of the
Djibouti Agreement. I would also like to commend the
role being played by AMISOM and to thank the troopcontributing countries, namely Uganda and Burundi,
for their sacrifices and their continued commitment to
maintaining the presence of AMISOM in Somalia.

Instability and increased fighting in recent weeks
underscore the fragile nature of the situation in the
country. The violent deaths of the Minister for National
Security and the Chief of Police of Mogadishu are also
proof of the disturbing reach that Al-Shabaab and
related groups have in terms of the indiscriminate use
of violence. Raids by foreign fighters, insurgents’ links
to Al-Qaida and the radicalization of their forms of
combat are also disturbing.

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Lynn
Pascoe and Susana Malcorra for their briefings today
and Ambassador Elmi Ahmed Duale, the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, for his statement. We
welcome the presence here among us of the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.

As result of violence and fear, there continues to
be a growing number of deaths among civilians, forced
displacements of the population, renewed shortages
and an increase in illnesses, in particular in camps for
internally displaced persons and refugees. It goes
without saying that the substantial political and
economic costs of this crisis are unsustainable. The
United Nations must provide assistance to the
Transitional Federal Government in order to promote
national reconciliation between the Government itself
and opposition groups within the framework of the
Djibouti peace process. We call for a rapid
implementation of the support shown at the donor
conference held in Brussels in April, in accordance
with national priorities.

Mexico recognizes the important efforts made by
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia
in its struggle to stabilize the country. We also
welcome the work of Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, in the difficult circumstances he is facing.
Similarly, we would like to recognize the efforts of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to
achieve peace and stability in the country and the
commitment showed by the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi. We hope that the financial situation, the
stable situation on the ground and the support pledged
by other African countries through the provision of
troops will, together, bring about the complete
deployment of AMISOM and enable the Mission to
fully meet the political, security and humanitarian
objectives of its mandate.
Mexico has noted the agreements and statements
made by the African Union as a result of the Sirte
summit in recent days, as well as the efforts of the

09-39851

My delegation is convinced that only by
reinforcing the capacity of the Government in the
security sector and the rule of law and ensuring full
compliance with international law will long-term
stability in the country and secure living conditions for
the Somali population be assured. Mexico believes that
the gradual approach that we adopted in resolution
1872 (2009) is the best way to coordinate the work of
the Government of Somalia, agencies of this
Organization and the support of AMISOM. We need to
ensure the successful implementation of that
resolution, with the objective of determining, at the

13

S/PV.6158

right time, the possible deployment of a peacekeeping
operation, in the best possible conditions.
However, given the current difficult conditions
and the history of chronic crisis and instability,
minimal security conditions on the ground must be
urgently established in order to ensure an ongoing
climate of stability. We believe we must continue to
explore options for finding the most appropriate
approach and strengthening the authority of the
Transitional Federal Government and promoting its
consolidation in terms of its ability to govern and
protect the civilian population. The implementation of
resolution 1872 (2009) depends on this primary task. It
is essential for safeguarding the survival of government
functions and the life and dignity of the population by
meeting their basic security, health and food needs.
The forced displacement of approximately
200,000 individuals as a result of the most recent wave
of violence has worsened the already critical
humanitarian situation and affected the survival of
some hundreds of thousands of Somali people, some of
them for entire generations. My delegation is deeply
concerned about the humanitarian situation, including
the situation of hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees, and we regret the
deaths, primarily of children, brought about by
malnutrition. Another crucial aspect is the situation of
insecurity in which humanitarian staff find themselves
and which has made it impossible to gain access and
entry into some areas. That has led to greater loss of
life.
Moreover, we condemn all actions against
AMISOM staff and attacks that threaten the safety of
civilians and international staff, and the forced
recruitment of children. We endorse an appeal for full
respect for international humanitarian law, human
rights and the rights of refugees by all actors in the
conflict. We also call for respect for resolution 1738
(2006) on the protection of the media reporters and
associated personnel, and for resolution 1502 (2003)
on the protection of United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones. Similarly, we reaffirm the importance of
combating impunity through the most appropriate
mechanisms, be they at the national or international
level.
We firmly believe that only through a
comprehensive approach to the conflict will it be

14

possible to achieve conditions that will allow for peace
in Somalia, the end of the generalized violence and the
return of hundreds of thousands of internally displaced
persons and refugees to their homes. On that premise
we must conceive any effort to combat the
phenomenon of piracy, armed robbery and acts of
violence against the safety of navigation in the Gulf of
Aden, as well as the need for those responsible for
those acts to be tried in accordance with the applicable
legal regime.
We support the work of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, established in
accordance with resolution 1851 (2008), and we
recognize the importance of multinational operations
along the coast to combat piracy. That continues to be
an essential element for guaranteeing the entry of
humanitarian assistance to the population.
Mexico, as Chair of the sanctions Committee on
Somalia, is convinced that the sanctions regime has
had a direct impact on security conditions in the
country and has strengthened the peace process. We
have paid particular attention to the work of the
Committee’s Monitoring Group with regard to
investigations on the illicit flow of arms from Eritrea in
support of insurgents. Similarly, in the coming days,
within the framework of resolution 1844 (2008), the
committee will be in a position to consider a first draft
of the list of individuals and entities that are acting
against peace and security in the country and that may
be subject to sanctions such as travel restrictions and
assets freezes.
We urge the countries of the region and the
international community as a whole to cooperate with
the committee’s efforts to combat the illicit trafficking
of arms to armed groups in Somalia. Only through a
coordinated regional approach will it be possible to
establish the minimum conditions required for
generating the stability so needed in that country.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): We thank UnderSecretaries-General Malcorra and Pascoe, as well as
the Permanent Representative of Somalia, for their
presentations.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
taking the initiative to convene this important and
timely meeting. The Horn of Africa is once again at a
critical juncture. The future of Somalia proper and of
peace and stability in the region as a whole rests in the
balance. The Transitional Federal Government (TFG),

09-39851

S/PV.6158

the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
all civilians in Somalia today are together faced with
an extremist armed threat that is determined to remove
any remnant of stability, normalcy and prosperity and
to remodel this already wartorn country in its own
narrow mindset.
At this delicate time, it is crucial for the Security
Council to keep abreast of developments and apply
pressure in order to help ensure that peace and stability
in this fragile region are restored. In this context, I
would like to underscore that all the elements
contained in the Council’s presidential statement of
18 May 2009 (S/PRST/2009/15) are equally valid and
relevant today and have the full support of Turkey.
While important progress has been made in the
implementation of the Djibouti peace process over the
past six months, the TFG is still faced with an
existential challenge. Moreover, to a large degree the
conflict has lost its Somali identity, as outside forces
are taking the lead in efforts to destabilize the country.
It is clear that the extremist armed groups and foreign
elements that are targeting both the TFG and AMISOM
are aiming essentially to undermine the reconciliation
process and bring about the collapse of the TFG and
the Djibouti peace process. This cannot be allowed to
happen.
AMISOM has a pivotal role to play in the days
and months ahead. Turkey welcomes the ongoing
commitment of the African Union (AU) to AMISOM,
and we applaud those nations that contribute to
AMISOM for their valour. Turkey believes that once it
reaches its authorized strength, AMISOM will be able
to help turn the tide and assist the TFG in expanding
the areas it controls. In this context, it will be
important for those nations that have expressed their
intention to provide troops to AMISOM to follow
through on their promises and for the United Nations to
keep providing its support, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1872 (2009).
Turkey attributes great importance to the calls
made by the African Union and other regional
organizations with regard to Somalia. The statements
and decisions issued at the 13th AU Summit in Sirte,
Libya, have made the commitment of African leaders
to Somalia abundantly clear, and that is crucial.
Ultimately, while international support is crucial and
must continue unabated, the comprehensive solution to

09-39851

the conflict in Somalia must be an African one, with
the AU as its main pillar.
In moving forward, the effective implementation
of the arms embargo on Somalia and preventing the
entry of foreign elements into Somalia are clearly an
urgent priority. If Somalia is to cease being a source of
instability for the Horn of Africa, all regional actors
need to become a part of the solution and not the
problem.
On the other hand, while evaluating possible
options on how to develop a pragmatic and concrete
framework for further helping Somalia, Turkey
believes that a results-oriented approach that takes into
consideration past experiences with regard to this
country and the region will be the most effective one.
The Transitional Federal Government has and
will continue to enjoy the full support of Turkey as the
only legitimate authority in Somalia. We recently
contributed to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Somalia and stand ready to train AMISOM troops in
Turkey. We are also in the process of evaluating how
we can help train Somali national forces.
On the other hand, the scourge of piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia continues to be
a serious threat to international maritime safety, in
particular to seafarers and international trade, as well
as to the security and prosperity of the countries in the
region. Suffering from this scourge, Turkey deplores
and condemns these illegal acts and continues to
contribute to counter-piracy efforts at sea with two
frigates deployed in the region through Combined Task
Force 151 and Standing NATO Maritime Group 2.
Turkey also fully supports the work of the
Contact Group on Somali Piracy, which was
established pursuant to resolution 1851 (2008). Yet, we
fully recognize that a lasting solution to the problem
can be found only if anti-piracy efforts are supported
and complemented by concrete policies and measures
that will contribute to the establishment of law and
order in Somalia, as well as to sustained economic
development in the region.
Needless to say, as in the past, our significant
commitment to Somalia will continue.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for their
briefings on the situation in Somalia.

15

S/PV.6158

That situation continues to be unstable. The
recent increase in bloodshed in Mogadishu and the
continued attacks by radical Islamists against the
Somali army and police forces and the peacekeepers of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
constitute yet another alarming wake-up call regarding
the situation not only in Somalia, but throughout the
region.
Russia resolutely advocates achieving sustained
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia on the
basis of the Djibouti Agreement and in the interest of
strengthening regional stability. We support the efforts
of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and of the
Transitional Federal Government. Clearly, it is only
joint efforts on the part of all constructive political
forces in Somalia that will consolidate society and
restore State authority and lasting peace.
Intensifying international efforts and working to
achieve a Somali settlement, together with
humanitarian assistance, are crucial at this stage. In
that regard, we note the practical steps undertaken by
the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union to build the capacities of the Somali
Government both in the area of security and in terms of
strengthening federal authority.
AMISOM is playing an important role in
stabilizing the situation in the country, strengthening
the national security sector and advancing the political
process. The logistical support package and other
assistance to AMISOM from the United Nations, in
accordance with resolution 1872 (2009), continue to be
important. We commend the contribution made to a
Somali settlement by Uganda and Burundi, which are
troop contributors to AMISOM. We call upon all
States, in particular the States of the region, to pursue
sound policies aimed at assisting the peace process in
Somalia.
We believe it is essential that States comply fully
with the established arms embargo. We advocate the
prompt launching of the sanctions regime against
individuals and entities, in accordance with resolution
1844 (2008).
Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious
destabilizing factor in the subregion. There is also a
growing risk that it will spread to other vulnerable
areas off the African coast. We believe that we need to
continue to provide the Somali authorities with
comprehensive assistance to counter that scourge. The

16

key to overcoming the dangerous trends in the area is
to remedy the situation in Somalia itself. Of equal
importance are efforts to provide naval escorts for
vessels and to destroy the piracy infrastructure,
particularly its financial component. Russia is taking
an active part in that collective effort.
Military measures to prevent the piracy attacks
will not alone produce the desired results. There is also
a need for preventive efforts to bring perpetrators to
justice, and the Russian Federation sees this as key in
the anti-piracy strategy. Here, both short- and longterm measures are required. We believe that, in
addition to building the criminal justice capacities of
the State and the subregion, we need to consider the
establishment of international mechanisms for
prosecuting persons involved in piracy and armed
robbery at sea.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this public debate on the
situation in Somalia. We would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe and UnderSecretary-General Susana Malcorra for their briefings
on the most recent developments in that country and
for their related work in the Secretariat. We welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union and thank them for participating in today’s
meeting.
China is following very closely the serious
situation in Somalia and in the Horn of Africa. The
protracted problems in Somalia have caused serious
difficulties for the country’s people, pose a serious
threat to the situation in the Horn of Africa region and
have now become a serious challenge for the
international community. Stabilizing the situation in
Somalia as soon as possible and achieving peace and
stability in the country would not only meet the
expectations of the people of Somalia but also serve
the common interests of the Horn of Africa region and
of the international community at large.
In addressing the situation in Somalia, the top
priority is to stabilize the security situation in the
country. We condemn the recent armed attacks against
the Transitional Federation Government and against
Somali civilians. We urge all parties in Somalia to
observe a ceasefire throughout the national territory as
soon as possible and to seek a political settlement to

09-39851

S/PV.6158

their disputes. We support the early establishment of
robust security forces in Somalia and call upon the
international community to provide support in that
regard.
We commend the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for its important contribution to
stabilizing the situation under very precarious
circumstances. We call on the United Nations to
intensify its efforts to implement the support package
for AMISOM.
The key to achieving peace in Somalia is for all
political parties in the country to forge a consensus for
peace. Only when a genuine political foundation for
peace is laid in Somalia will the international
community’s external assistance truly be able to play
an effective role. At this time, it must be pointed out in
particular that all parties in Somalia must reach a
consensus regarding the urgency of resolving the
Somali issue.
The countries in the Horn of Africa must be fully
aware that they are all in the same boat regarding the
question of Somalia, that a win-win situation can be
achieved only through peace and that fighting can only
be disastrous for all. We sincerely hope that all
countries in the Horn of Africa can make full use of
their influence and do their utmost to promote
negotiations to move the peace process forward in
Somalia in order to make swift and substantive
progress.
China has always maintained that the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, should play
a more active role on the question of Somalia. We call
on the Organization to intensify its efforts to fulfil its
commitment to providing assistance to Somalia, the
Somali Government and AMISOM. The Chinese
Government has already provided AMISOM’s two
major troop-contributing countries, Uganda and
Burundi, with 5 million renminbi each in logistical
assistance. In addition, it will soon provide the African
Union with another $400,000 in cash for assistance to
support AMISOM.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Lynn Pascoe and Susana Malcorra for their
presentations, as well as our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.

09-39851

Two months ago almost to the day, the insurgents
of Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam rejected the path of
dialogue and launched a major offensive. This was and
is aimed against the Transitional Federal Government,
which has the support of the international community,
and also against the positive political process that
President Sherif is leading by calling upon all parties to
join in the Djibouti process.
The fighting goes on, as recalled by UnderSecretary-General Pascoe, with its violence and
suffering. The cost of the attacks is high, and the
victims always the same: women, children and other
vulnerable people. Two hundred thousand more people
have had to leave Mogadishu — and some families had
just recently returned. These latest victims are added to
the 2 million people who are surviving in makeshift
shelters and the more than 3 million who already rely
on international assistance.
The conditions in which the humanitarian
workers are operating have worsened even further. It
must be recalled that last year more than 30 of them
were killed. The same is true for journalists, who often
give their lives to carry out their profession. The
number of refugees in neighbouring countries is
growing, in particular in Kenya, where the sites hosting
them are overwhelmed. France joins the international
community in firmly condemning the attacks and the
violence.
We note with the greatest concern reports
indicating that the insurgents are benefiting from
reinforcements of extremist foreign fighters and the
support of foreign Governments, specifically Eritrea, in
the form of weapons, which is in violation of the arms
embargo imposed by the Council.
France carefully noted the decisions taken at the
African Union summit in Sirte and is prepared to
continue to follow the path of sanctions against all
those who jeopardize the Djibouti Agreements. In that
respect, we look forward to the report the Security
Council has requested from the Monitoring Group. As I
cited the Djibouti Agreement, let me also underscore
the very positive role played by Djibouti in dealing
with crisis in Somalia, despite the challenges that
country has faced since the June 2008 military attack
against it by Eritrea.
The Transitional Federal Government is under
attack, but it is resisting those continued attacks. The
international community must continue to provide full

17

S/PV.6158

political support and strengthen its technical and
material assistance. The training of Somali security
forces is key to building the country’s military
capacity. For that reason France, as it pledged at the
Brussels conference, will begin to train 500 Somalis
this month in Djibouti.
European Union ministers meeting in Brussels
have begun to consider how the Union could combine
our initiative with a possible training mission under the
European Security and Defence Policy.
Here, we wish to highlight the courage of
AMISOM’s troops, in particular those from Uganda
and Burundi, who are resolutely providing support to
the Transitional Federal Government. We pay tribute to
them at a time when they are regularly targeted by the
insurgents.
The international community must provide firm
support for the African force. In Sirte, the African
Union decided to strengthen the number of troops
deployed on the ground in order to reach the mandated
goal of 8,000 troops requested by the Somali
Government. We are pleased by and welcome that
commitment. France has contributed to the training of
four contingents for AMISOM. The European Union,
which is the leading contributor to the United Nations
budget and the leading financial partner of the African
Union, including through the Peace Facility for Africa,
provides resolute support to AMISOM. Here, I would
endorse
the
statement
that
the
Permanent
Representative of Sweden will make shortly on behalf
of the European Union.
The United Nations too has an important role to
play to facilitate strengthening AMISOM. I thank
Ms. Malcorra for her information on the United
Nations logistical support package. More than ever
before, we need to respond rapidly and in concrete
ways to the most urgent operational needs of the
African forces.
All of this makes action to fight piracy off the
Somali coast even more necessary. Since the initial
operations to protect World Food Programme (WFP)
vessels launched by France in November 2007, the
fight against piracy has grown in scope. The European
Union, in launching Operation Atalanta, is playing a
very active role in fighting piracy, protecting
vulnerable shipping and providing security for the
increasingly significant international aid shipments on
which millions of Somalis depend. The money spent to

18

keep the European Union naval forces afloat permits
the transport of that aid. Those efforts are far from
useless; here I would point out that WFP food
shipments have quadrupled from 2007 to 2008. Those
efforts must continue.
Just yesterday a Turkish ship was attacked by
pirates off the Somali coast. It must be remembered
that in the past two years French forces have arrested
more than 200 pirates in the course of more than
80 maritime operations. For that reason, the European
Union has extended the mandate of Operation Atalanta
for one more year and is considering a full range of
measures that will make it possible to take better
account of the various dimensions of counter-piracy
operations on the sea and on land. Here I stress the
particular importance of capacity-building for States of
the region so that they can try and imprison pirates
who have been arrested. United Nations support will be
crucial.
Because of the gravity of the situation, it is
reasonable to give priority in this debate to short-term
measures, while bearing in mind more long-term
measures such as the fight against impunity, because
the culture of impunity that prevails today in Somalia
is a major hurdle to peace. There is also a need, once
the situation allows, to resume political dialogue,
without which there will be no lasting peace in
Somalia. In that regard, let me commend the role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, and assure him of
France’s full support.
In conclusion, I would like to state my
delegation’s support for the draft presidential statement
prepared by the United Kingdom, for which I express
my thanks.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
and Under-Secretary-General Malcorra for their
briefings. I would also like to thank Ambassador Duale
for his statement and to recognize the presence among
us of the Permanent Observer of the African Union.
Once again the Council is meeting to review the
situation in Somalia. The present situation calls for
action by the international community to back up
decisions already taken to support a Government that is
arduously working to build a viable State in Somalia.
The cost of inaction would be anarchy imposed by
those who lack any defined political agenda and who

09-39851

S/PV.6158

are prepared to attack regional stability and jeopardize
international peace and security.
The Government of Somalia requires cooperation
from all parties of Somali society who are committed
to national reconciliation, along with the support of the
international community, so that it can be the natural
partner in inclusive negotiations within the Djibouti
peace process. In particular, we recognize the decisive
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who is committed
to making progress in this political process.
The strategy to overcome the crisis in Somalia
must be led by the Somalis themselves. National
ownership of the process is in this case an absolute
imperative. The role of the international community is
to support and strengthen the capacity of the
Government to demonstrate the advantages of peace
and to take advantage of secure spaces in order to lay
the foundation for sustainable reconstruction and
development.
Costa Rica reaffirms its support for the SecretaryGeneral’s political strategy for Somalia, as well as his
three-phase approach to meet the security challenges of
the country. We are pleased to note the decision to
make move forward in this area, in particular the
announcement that, in the very near future, we may see
an initial United Nations presence in Mogadishu. It is
now a question of strengthening the Somali security
institutions as well as AMISOM. These are critical
elements for the achievement of stability in Somalia.
In this regard, we call for prompt fulfilment of
the commitments made at the Brussels donors
conference and of other pledges to the United Nations
trust fund. With regard to transparency and the
achievement of objectives, we welcome the progress
reported on the memorandum of understanding
requested in resolution 1863 (2009).
Costa Rica also recognizes the contributions to
AMISOM made by the Governments of Burundi and
Uganda and welcomes the recent decision of the
African Union to raise the military and police
components of the Mission to the troop levels provided
for in its mandate.
The worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia
is a matter of concern to Costa Rica. We condemn the
attacks against the civilian population and obstacles to
free access for humanitarian assistance. In this regard,

09-39851

the fight against piracy has yielded praiseworthy
benefits in terms of access for such humanitarian
assistance.
I would conclude by reminding all parties of their
obligation to respect international humanitarian law
and by stressing that combating impunity is a priority
for peace and reconciliation in Somalia.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first thank
Under-Secretaries-General Pascoe and Malcorra for
their briefings today. Let me also add that we highly
welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union.
Austria aligns itself with the statement that the
representative of Sweden will deliver in the course of
this debate on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.
Austria fully supports the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). In the first half of this year,
important progress in the Djibouti peace process has
been achieved. However, the security situation has
deteriorated considerably since then. While the focus
of our efforts needs to be on stabilizing the situation, it
is also important that efforts continue at reaching out to
opposition groups which are not part of the Djibouti
process.
The Djibouti Agreement constitutes the only
viable and legitimate framework for achieving lasting
peace in Somalia. We therefore urge all parties in
Somalia to join this process and its structures and, by
doing so, to contribute to the stabilization and
development of the country. A renegotiation of the
Djibouti Agreement cannot be an option.
Austria condemns the attempts of extremists to
overthrow the TFG. We are deeply worried by reports
about foreign support to the insurgency. We also note
the deep concern expressed by the heads of State or
Government of the African Union during their recent
summit in Sirte concerning arms supplies to insurgent
groups in Somalia.
As others have already said, we will have more
information on this issue when the Monitoring Group
of the Somali sanctions Committee reports to the
Security Council at the end of this month. That report
will give us a very important opportunity to further
discuss this issue as well as to discuss possible action
by the Council.

19

S/PV.6158

With reference to the comments made by the
Permanent Representative of Somalia about the
presence of foreign fighters in his country, let me add
that substantiated information on this issue may also be
of interest to the Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
Those who suffer most in the situation are
civilians, including internally displaced persons
(IDPs), especially women and children, who are the
most vulnerable. We have seen a surge in the number
of IDPs in the past two months. More than 200,000
people have fled Mogadishu alone, increasing the
number of IDPs in the country, as others have already
noted, to over 1.2 million. We are deeply concerned by
their catastrophic humanitarian and human rights
situation. Extrajudicial and arbitrary executions, arrests
and torture, as practiced by Al-Shabaab, must stop
immediately.
We also call on all parties to allow unhindered
access to humanitarian aid for those in need and to
ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel in
Somalia. We condemn recent attacks on aid
organizations. We pay tribute to humanitarian workers,
who continue to deliver much-needed humanitarian aid
in this very difficult environment.
We applaud the establishment of the Justice and
Reconciliation Working Group as a vehicle to
addressing impunity for human rights violations in
Somalia. We encourage the parties represented in the
Working Group to work closely together to address this
problem vigorously.
We express our deep appreciation to the African
Union, and to Uganda and Burundi as AMISOM troopcontributors, for the efforts and risks they are taking to
improve the situation in and around Mogadishu.
Austria also strongly supports the United Nations
logistics support package for AMISOM. Moreover,
Austria stressed the need for close cooperation between
the United Nations, the African Union and donors, such
as the European Union, in addressing the most pressing
needs of Somalia and the wider region of the Horn of
Africa.
Concerning the scourge of piracy, we attach high
importance to addressing its root causes and ensuring
accountability. Operation Atalanta, the European Union
mission to fight piracy, is undoubtedly the most visible
and most recent contribution of the European Union in
Somalia. Of course, it is not the only one.

20

The European Union’s contribution in the form of
humanitarian aid and development programmes is also
considerable. Like all other members of the European
Union, Austria attaches high importance to support for
the Somali security sector and AMISOM, thus
contributing to a climate conducive to achieving peace
and development.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing appreciation to Mr. Pascoe and
Ms. Malcorra for their briefings. I would also like to
welcome the presentation made by Ambassador Duale
this morning. The situation in Somalia calls for an
urgent response by the Security Council, so Japan
commends you, Mr. President, for holding this timely
debate.
Japan shares the serious concern over the
worsening security situation in Somalia. We condemn
the attacks by rebel groups against the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), which have been
intensifying since early May. As the security situation
deteriorates, the humanitarian situation also worsens,
with growing numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons, as Mr. Pascoe reported.
In order to respond effectively to the security
situation, we should make an urgent effort to
strengthen, first of all, the Somali security institutions
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The pledges made at the donors conference in Brussels
need to be disbursed in an expeditious manner. As a
part of its pledges, Japan will soon disburse $9 million
to the trust fund in support of AMISOM.
AMISOM plays an indispensable role in support
of the TFG. We sincerely appreciate the troop
contributions made to date by Burundi and Uganda,
and we thank other countries that are actively
considering providing troops. We commend the African
Union for its decision to extend the mandate of
AMISOM until 31 January 2010.
Japan believes it is essential to make the utmost
effort to increase AMISOM troop levels to the full
strength of 8,000, as requested by the SecretaryGeneral. To realize this target, speedy implementation
of the United Nations logistics support package is
vitally important. We commend the work done by the
Department of Field Support. We fully support those
efforts.

09-39851

S/PV.6158

The instability in Somalia is caused by internal as
well as external factors and affects stability in the
region as a whole. It is essential and urgent to cut off
external military and economic assistance to the rebel
groups. The countries in the region need to come
together to assist the TFG.
Japan is closely following the ongoing discussion
among
the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development and the African Union member States,
including at the recent summit in Sirte, on strengthened
measures to support Somalia. The international
community must enhance its support to the TFG,
including through diplomatic efforts. It is our belief
that, before any action is taken, the full implications
and effectiveness thereof must be carefully considered.
Japan is ready to take active part in the discussion in
the Council on the way forward.
The top priority is to address and improve the
worsening security situation in central and southern
Somalia. Humanitarian and reconstruction needs must
be met in parallel. The importance of speedy
disbursement
of
earlier
pledges
cannot
be
overemphasized in this context.
Anti-piracy measures are another high priority,
which are closely related to the security situation on
land. Longer-term solutions will require restoring
stability and governance inside Somalia. Meanwhile,
international cooperation is essential to protect one of
the most important transport routes. Japan, for its part,
has sent two destroyers and two P-3C maritime patrol
aircraft to the Gulf of Aden as part of the anti-piracy
measures. We also enacted a new Law on the
Penalization of Acts of Piracy and Measures against
Acts of Piracy. We extend support to the piracy-related
centres in the region and for a training and job creation
programme for young people, who may be potential
candidates for future pirates.
Japan will chair the next plenary meeting of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia in
September at Headquarters in New York. We hope that
the coordinated efforts of the international community
will have a positive influence on the security situation
on land. It is important to provide the Somali people
with the tangible benefits of the assistance of the
international community and to create the necessary
conditions for them to achieve stability in the country.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Let me begin by joining
others in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for

09-39851

Political Affairs, Mr. Pascoe, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support, Ms. Malcorra, for providing
us with an update on the political and security situation
in Somalia as well as on the steps taken to strengthen
its security institutions and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). We are also thankful for the
remarks of the Permanent Representative of Somalia,
and we welcome the Permanent Observer of the
African Union, whose statement we are looking
forward to hearing.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union. Allow me now to make
some short remarks in my national capacity.
Croatia is encouraged by the progress that has
been made on the political track, particularly the
actions of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG),
towards a more inclusive political process and genuine
national
reconciliation.
We
commend
such
determination and firmly believe it warrants the
unrelenting and concrete support of the international
community. We reiterate our full support for the
Transitional Federal Government and President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed. Their hard-won political gains
must be preserved and further built upon. That being
said, we add our voice to the calls for all Somali
stakeholders to opt for dialogue and join the Djibouti
peace process, which continues to be the best option
for lasting peace in Somalia.
We strongly condemn all attempts to halt the
current political momentum, destabilize the transitional
federal institutions and undermine the Djibouti peace
process. The armed insurgency by hardliners thus
continues to be of utmost concern. We call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities and deplore the toll
that the insurgent attacks have had on both the civilian
population and the already dire humanitarian situation
in the country. In the light of that, we urge all parties
involved in the conflict to adhere to international
humanitarian law and to respect human rights.
Croatia is also alarmed and extremely concerned
about reports of foreign or outside interference with
regard to insurgent attacks and other violence taking
place in Somalia, in particular reports concerning
support to insurgents being provided by neighbouring
countries, namely Eritrea, and the destabilizing
potential of such actions in the whole region.

21

S/PV.6158

We would like to recall the obligations that all
States Members of the United Nations have with regard
to respecting the resolutions and decisions adopted by
the Security Council and also to reiterate that the
Council already has at its disposal tools for dealing
with all inside and outside spoilers of the peace
process. In that light, we particularly look forward to
the forthcoming report of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia.
Croatia greatly appreciates the unerring efforts of
AMISOM, whose troops are operating in an extremely
difficult environment. While echoing the calls to
strengthen its capacities, we commend the troopcontributing countries, in particular Uganda and
Burundi, and we hope that others will follow suit in
fulfilling their pledges.
We welcome the pledges made at the
international conference in support of Somalia’s
security institutions and AMISOM held in Brussels on
23 April. We hope today that the materialization has
already begun and that it will continue at a fast pace.
We also appreciate all other efforts and initiatives
aimed at improving the capacity of Somalia’s security
sector, especially as an accountable and capable
security and police force represents the backbone of
efforts to achieve stability in the country. It also
enables the United Nations to further its involvement
and assist Somalia to the best of its abilities.
That being said, we are pleased to hear about the
possibility of establishing a light United Nations
presence in Mogadishu in the near future, as stated by
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra during her briefing.
We are also pleased to hear about the implementation
of the support package by the United Nations.
Concerning piracy, we support the work that has
thus far been done to tackle the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia, including, in particular but not
exclusively, Operation Atalanta. We are aware of the
need for the continuation of the efforts to ensure the
safety of maritime routes.
My delegation would especially like to express its
full appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for
his relentless efforts and valuable contribution in
promoting dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia.

22

Finally, I would also like to express our support
for the draft presidential statement that we are about to
adopt.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Let me thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Ms. Susana
Malcorra for the briefings they just gave us. I would
also commend the participation in this debate of our
colleague from Somalia.
Burkina Faso is very concerned over the current
situation in Somalia, which is marked by a very serious
deterioration in terms of security, particularly in
Mogadishu, as a result of the clashes between illegal
armed groups and Government troops, and this despite
for the calls for calm and restraint issued by the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
Attributed to the militia of the Al-Shabaab
movement, assisted by foreign fighters, these attacks
have caused many victims, particularly among the
civilian population. Political officials, including the
Minister of the Interior, have been assassinated. The
magnitude of the attacks and the intensity of the
fighting corroborate the thesis of the involvement of
the foreign forces that support the insurgents in terms
of weapons, fighters and logistics. All of that once
again confirms the fact that the settlement of the
Somali crisis will depend to a great extent on the
position of its neighbours. That is why it is absolutely
indispensable that all States of the region, without
exception, fully comply with the arms embargo and
refrain from provided military, logistical or any other
kind of support to the illegal militias active in Somalia.
Given the seriousness of these events, the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in its communiqué
of 15 June 2009, reiterated its deep concern over the
growing presence of foreign elements in Mogadishu
and in other parts of Somalia and therefore urged the
Security Council to impose sanctions against those
individuals or States who oppose the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia.
That recommendation was ratified in a decision
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, held from 1 to
3 July 2009, which called on the Security Council
“in accordance with the communiqué of the Peace
and Security Council and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to take the necessary

09-39851

S/PV.6158

immediate steps ... to prevent the entry of foreign
combatants into Somalia, as well as to impose
sanctions against any foreign actor, whether in
the region or outside it, in particular Eritrea,
which is providing support for armed groups
involved in destabilizing activities in Somalia”.

attacks against Somali leaders and civilians alike.
AMISOM troops and humanitarian personnel are not
immune from threats and attacks, either. We condemn
all violence against them and call on the Security
Council to take the necessary steps to ensure their
protection.

My country, which recognizes as legitimate only
the Transitional Federal Government, certainly
supports that decision. We therefore call on the
Security Council to take full note of it. I would also
like to call on the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) to speed up its work, in
cooperation with the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to establish a
list of individuals opposed to the peace process in
Somalia.

We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretariat
to help Somalia. In particular, we commend the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who despite the huge
difficulties
continues
to
display
unrelenting
determination and commitment to peace in Somalia.

We must also note that peace is receding daily in
Somalia. The responses to date appear to have served
merely as stop-gap measures. Without minimizing the
difficulties such an endeavour would entail, it seems
that deploying a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to join AMISOM would be the last recourse.
In the meanwhile, it seems to us that the current
situation calls for two different steps, namely, the
provision of direct emergency assistance to Somalia to
help it to re-establish security in Mogadishu and
throughout the rest of the country, and the speeding of
the deployment of the United Nations support package
for AMISOM.
We would like to thank Uganda and Burundi for
the commendable efforts they continue to make. Given
the seriousness of the situation, we call on African
countries that have already promised troops for
AMISOM to honour their commitments as soon as
possible in order to be able to strengthen the Mission.
With regard to the political situation, we reiterate
our commitment to the implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement, which we believe to be the sole framework
for a resolution to the Somali crisis. The efforts already
made as part of that framework are encouraging and
merit ongoing support, in particular in order to bring
all political factions into the political process. Burkina
Faso also encourages the new Somali leaders to
continue their policy of openness in order to strengthen
the trust of partners.
With regard to the human rights situation, it
undoubtedly continues to be a source of concern, given
the ongoing occurrence of assassination attempts and

09-39851

We have no doubt that a stable and prosperous
Somalia will one day emerge, so long as there is
ongoing support from the international community,
continued commitment on the part of all Somali
stakeholders and the support of the States of the region.
Lastly, we support the draft presidential statement
that has been submitted by the delegation of the United
Kingdom.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
for their insightful briefings. I would also like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
statement. My delegation also welcomes the
participation of the Permanent Observer of the African
Union at this meeting.
Taking stock of the gravity and complexity of the
current situation in Somalia, my delegation remains
deeply concerned about the ongoing violence in and
around Mogadishu, as reflected by intensified attacks
by insurgent groups, most notably Al-Shabaab and
Hizb al-Aslam, against the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). Those armed attacks have led to
the deaths and injuries of many peacekeepers and
civilians. We are also gravely concerned about the
extremely alarming humanitarian situation, with over
1 million people internally displaced and more than
3 million on the verge of starvation.
Given the suffering that is being visited upon the
civilian population and the continuing deterioration of
the security and humanitarian situation in the country,
there is obviously an urgent need for immediate and
vigorous international support for the TFG’s

23

S/PV.6158

endeavours to repel the onslaught of extremist forces,
which are intent on destroying the Djibouti peace
process and spoiling the efforts to bring peace and
stability to Somalia through political reconciliation.
Member States of the United Nations are urged to fulfil
the pledges they made in Brussels last April to provide
the TFG with adequate assistance, in particular muchneeded funds and assistance to rebuild Somalia’s
security institutions and to train its security forces.
Viet Nam supports the TFG’s call for the
mobilization of additional troops for AMISOM in order
to enable it to withstand insurgent attacks. We highly
appreciate the efforts made by the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi in contributing to the maintenance
of the security in Mogadishu. In that connection, we
welcome the pledges made by the Governments of
Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Ghana and other African Union
countries to contribute troops to AMISOM. We hope
that those precious commitments will be realized in a
timely and fruitful way.
For its part, the Security Council has decided to
provide logistical support to AMISOM. We are
encouraged that, on 25 June, the Fifth Committee of
the General Assembly approved that decision in the
amount of over $138 million. We see reasons for hope
coming from the common interest and concerted efforts
of the Security Council in the current situation in
Somalia.
Further deterioration in Somalia, with Al-Shabaab
fighters and fighters linked to Al-Qaida controlling
much of the southern and central parts of the country,
would have regional implications and could escalate
the conflict. More dangerously, it could run the risk of
turning the region into a safe haven for international
terrorists. We must work together to prevent the spread
of that danger, end the scourge of violence and advance
the cause of peace and stability.
For that effort to succeed, it is necessary to work
for closer cooperation and a more effective partnership
among the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the League of Arab States to
address the challenges that confront Somalia and to
bring about lasting peace and security in the region.
The United Nations should continue to be a strong
partner in that endeavour.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.

24

I wish to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
for their briefings this morning. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Somalia, Mr. Elmi Ahmed
Duale, for his statement. I welcome the participation in
this debate of the Permanent Observer of the African
Union (AU) and of the Permanent Representative of
Sweden, representing the presidency of the European
Union.
The Security Council has spent a great deal of
time discussing the situation in Somalia. In the past six
months alone, the Council has adopted two
resolutions — resolutions 1863 (2009) and 1872
(2009) — and has issued one presidential statement —
S/PRST/2009/15 — and four statements to the press. In
spite of the attention paid to the situation in Somalia,
the conflict in the country continues to destroy lives
and to have a negative impact on the whole region. The
situation also continues to disrupt international trade,
through piracy, and poses a threat to international
peace and security.
The Djibouti peace process represents the best
opportunity to achieve lasting peace in Somalia. We
commend the efforts made by the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) to advance the political process in
the country. At the same time, we are concerned about
the fact that, despite the efforts at reconciliation made
by President Ahmed’s Government, there are still some
elements within and outside Somalia that are bent on
taking the path of violence. Uganda condemns the
attacks on the TFG, the civilian population and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) by
violent opposition groups and foreign elements, in an
attempt to undermine the political process and
reconciliation efforts.
Uganda welcomes the support given to ease the
humanitarian situation in the country and the support
extended to the TFG and to AMISOM. We call upon
the United Nations and other partners to expedite the
support necessary to enable AMISOM effectively to
implement its mandate. We also call upon AU member
States to provide the personnel required to enable
AMISOM to reach its authorized capacity of 8,000
troops. As provided for in Security Council resolution
1863 (2009), the presence of AMISOM in Somalia is a
transitional step towards the envisaged United Nations
peacekeeping operation. Therefore, the Security

09-39851

S/PV.6158

Council should continue to make the necessary
preparations for the eventual rehatting of AMISOM.
The African Union Assembly, meeting in Sirte,
Libya, a few days ago, called upon the Security
Council to take urgent measures to address the grave
situation in Somalia. Uganda calls upon the Security
Council to respond accordingly.
Finally, we thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the draft presidential statement, which
Uganda supports.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Lila
Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations.
Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): I
am pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the Security
Council. We are sincerely grateful to you for initiative
in convening this debate on the situation in Somalia. I
also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Ms. Susana Malcorra
for their very thorough and authoritative briefings. I
pay tribute to their respective departments for their
activities and for their efforts with respect to Somalia.
Having just returned from African Union summit,
which on 3 July completed its work in Sirte, Libya, I
am duty-bound to describe some of the African Union’s
recent action on Somalia as well as the related decision
adopted by African heads of State or Government.
Our thanks go to the Permanent Representative of
Somalia for his statement; through him, we express our
appreciation for the significant progress achieved by
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and his
Government. In that regard, I would mention the
rebuilding of State institutions, the restoration of
revenue collection mechanisms, the reorganization of
the security forces, capacity-building and efforts aimed
at bringing clan and religious leaders into the peace
process.
But, as we know, intensified attacks by insurgents
since the beginning of May have unfortunately
hampered and jeopardized those considerable
achievements. Clashes have led to heavy loss of
civilian lives and have resulted in an estimated 200,000
or more displacements, as Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe stated this morning. As all Council members
have noted, the situation remains extremely fragile.

09-39851

However, thanks to the continued support of the
international community for the Government and the
people of Somalia, the Djibouti peace process has held.
Members will recall that, on 22 May 2009, in support
of the recommendations of the Council of Ministers of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
requested that the United Nations Security Council
impose sanctions against all foreign elements
providing support for armed groups responsible for
destabilization in Somalia. That request has the support
of the International Contact Group on Somalia and was
reiterated at the Sirte summit.
As noted by Under-Secretary-General Malcorra,
the present military force of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) in Mogadishu stands at 4,274
troops, comprising three battalions from Uganda and
two from Burundi. But AMISOM still lacks four of the
nine battalions it needs, along with maritime and air
components. The present AMISOM police force
consists of a team of six police officers and 89 trainers,
advisers and mentors for deployment to Mogadishu in
the coming weeks to begin the crucial task of training
10,000 members of all Somali police forces, in
accordance with the Djibouti Agreement.
As part of the troop-generation effort, the African
Union Commission has called upon Member States and
other partners to bring about the rapid deployment of a
battalion from Sierra Leone and one from Malawi.
Work is also under way to make it possible to deploy a
third battalion from Burundi and to begin the
relocation of AMISOM’s civilian headquarters from
Nairobi to Mogadishu.
We are particularly grateful to the United Nations
for establishing a special trust fund; the first phase has
been approved by the General Assembly, amounting to
$71.6 million. A memorandum of understanding
defining the modalities for implementing the support
package is being finalized by the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission. However, in addition to
the special trust fund and to the African Peace Facility
established by the European Union and made available
to the African Union, in addition to all of these
considerable efforts, we believe that AMISOM, which
was duly authorized by the Security Council, deserves
continuous financing through regular contributions
from United Nations Member States.

25

S/PV.6158

(spoke in English)
In its decision adopted during its just-completed
13th session, the Assembly of the African Union
welcomed the significant progress made in the political
process in Somalia and urged all Somali stakeholders
yet to commit to the dialogue to do so and join the
peace process. The Assembly strongly condemned the
recent attacks on the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) of Somalia and the civilian population by armed
groups and foreign elements bent on undermining the
reconciliation process and regional stability, and
demanded that they put an end to such attacks, which
are tantamount to attempts at an unconstitutional
change of government.
The African Union (AU) Assembly further
expressed its full support for the TFG as the legitimate
authority in Somalia and urged the countries of the
region, other AU member States and the international
community as a whole to provide all the necessary
support to the TFG to enable it to face up to the
situation.
The AU Assembly appealed to AU member States
to provide the necessary military and police personnel
to enable AMISOM to reach its authorized strength. It
paid tribute to the troop-contributing countries, namely
Burundi and Uganda, and further expressed gratitude to
all the member States and partners providing support to
AMISOM.
The Assembly called on the United Nations
Security Council to take immediate measures,
including the imposition of a no-fly zone — as already
pointed out by a number of members of the Council —
and a blockade of seaports to prevent the entry into
Somalia of foreign elements and of flights and
shipments carrying weapons and ammunition to armed
groups inside Somalia. It also called on the Council to
impose sanctions against all those foreign actors,
especially Eritrea, providing support to the armed
groups engaged in destabilization activities in Somalia
and in attacks against the TFG, the civilian population
and AMISOM. I would also like to stress the need for
the Security Council to take rapid action accordingly.
Also, since the question of ransom to terrorists
was raised here by the Permanent Representative of the
United States, I am pleased to share with this Council
that the Assembly of the African Union took the
important decision to combat the payment of ransom to
terrorist groups. By this decision, the AU Assembly

26

requested the Council to adopt a restrictive resolution
against the payment of ransom in order to consolidate
the provisions put in place by resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1267 (1999).
Because AMISOM can only do so much, I should
like at this juncture to renew the call for its takeover by
the United Nations, in accordance with the express
wish of the Somalis, as contained in the Djibouti
Agreement, in order to achieve an accelerated end to
the ongoing hostilities. We all have a duty to bring an
end to this tragedy in Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.
The main challenge facing the Somali
Government and the international community is to
maintain the political momentum that started a few
months ago. That momentum is now being sabotaged
by hard-line insurgents, who deliberately seek to
undermine a political solution by targeting the
Transitional Federal Institutions and the Djibouti peace
process. The European Union strongly condemns the
recent killings of the Minister of Security, the police
chief in Mogadishu, a member of the parliament and
the attacks against civilians in south and central
Somalia.
The European Union calls for an immediate
cessation of hostilities to avoid further civilian
casualties and deplores the humanitarian consequences
of recent attacks. Some 200,000 people have been
forced to leave Mogadishu in recent weeks, adding to
the 1 million previously displaced. We urge all parties
to abide by international humanitarian law, respect
human rights and protect the civilian population.
The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
African Union to bring urgent attention to the situation
in Somalia and to consider options for reversing the
trends of recent months. We take due note of the
message of the African Union in Sirte in this regard.

09-39851

S/PV.6158

The European Union strongly calls on all States to
respect the United Nations arms embargo.
Stabilization of the security environment is vital
for building State institutions, for providing necessary
humanitarian assistance and for resuming a path to
development and political reconciliation. Once the
security situation improves in Mogadishu and beyond,
the Transitional Federal Government must resume its
efforts to complete the Transitional Federal Charter of
the Somali Republic. We stress our support for the
Transitional Federal Government under the leadership
of President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and welcome
his efforts to consolidate the political process through a
broad and inclusive dialogue.
The European Union expresses its appreciation to
the African Union and to the countries contributing
troops to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for their efforts aimed at stabilizing the
situation in Mogadishu. The capabilities of AMISOM
need further strengthening. Thus far, the European
Union has committed a total of €40 million, in addition
to bilateral contributions from its member States.
Additional support is under consideration.
The international conference on security in
Somalia, held in Brussels on 22 and 23 April,
expressed unanimous support for AMISOM and the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to build
inclusive and accountable national capacity in the
security sector. The considerable pledges made by the
European Union at the Brussels conference underline
the importance we attach to this endeavour.
There is now an urgent need to follow up. The
pledges made by the international community must be
implemented swiftly. The security sector should be
committed to the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the principle of good governance.
Enhancing the capacity of the Somali security
and police forces is vital to the stability of Somalia and
to the State-building effort as such. Training is an
essential element. The European Union is studying the
option of providing assistance to this end, in addition
to various bilateral activities and initiatives.
We also recall our contributions to the
international fight against piracy off the coasts of
Somalia through Operation Atalanta. Legal measures
must also be taken to prevent impunity for pirates in
Somalia and elsewhere in the region.

09-39851

The Djibouti process remains our best hope for
peace in Somalia. Intensified and urgent efforts are
now needed to save the process from dissolving. We
urge all parties in Somalia to join this effort. We also
reaffirm our support for the International Contact
Group, under the leadership of Special Representative
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah.
In parallel with addressing the current crisis, we
must seek enhanced international coordination and a
more comprehensive long-term strategy for supporting
Somalia. Such an approach should link security and
development in a coherent State-building effort. It
should be based on Somali ownership and take into
account the needs of the entire Somali territory.
For its part, the European Union will consider
options for enhanced engagement — including
training, capacity-building and regional cooperation —
ahead of the EU ministerial meeting later this month.
The European Union stands ready to continue to
support Somalia and its people.
The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its previous
resolutions and presidential statements on
Somalia, in particular its resolution 1872 (2009),
which reaffirmed the Djibouti Agreement as the
basis for a resolution of the conflict in Somalia.
“The Security Council reiterates its support
for the Djibouti peace process outlined in the
Transitional Federal Charter, which provides a
framework for reaching a lasting political
solution in Somalia. The Security Council
reaffirms its support for the Transitional Federal
Government as the legitimate authority in
Somalia under the Transitional Federal Charter
and notes the declaration on 22 June of a state of
emergency as a result of the recent renewal in
fighting led by Al-Shabaab and other violent
opposition groups, which constitutes an attempt
to remove that legitimate authority by force. The
Security Council also reiterates its support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his efforts
towards advancing the political process in
Somalia.

27

S/PV.6158

“The Security Council condemns the recent
attacks on the Transitional Federal Government
and the civilian population by armed groups and
foreign fighters who undermine peace and
stability in Somalia. The Security Council
reaffirms its demand of 15 May 2009 that violent
opposition groups immediately end their
offensive, put down their arms, renounce violence
and join reconciliation efforts. The Security
Council condemns the flow of foreign fighters
into Somalia.
“The Security Council deplores the loss of
life in Somalia and the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, which has resulted in increased flows of
refugees and internally displaced persons,
threatening stability in the region. The Security
Council calls on all parties to abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
in particular to respect the security of civilians,
humanitarian workers and AMISOM personnel.
“The Security Council reaffirms that
Somalia’s long-term security rests with the
effective development by the TFG of the National
Security Force and the Somali Police Force, in
the framework of the Djibouti Agreement and in
line with a national security strategy, and urges
the international community to support the
Somali security institutions, including through
training and equipping.
“The Security Council commends the
contribution of AMISOM to lasting peace and
stability in Somalia, expresses its continued

28

appreciation for the commitment of troops to
AMISOM by the Governments of Uganda and
Burundi, and condemns any hostilities towards
AMISOM. In this context, the Security Council
welcomes the decision by the African Union
summit at Sirte on 3 July to increase AMISOM’s
strength to its mandated troop levels and its call
for AU member States to provide the necessary
military and police personnel.
“The Security Council takes note of the
decision of the African Union summit in Sirte,
calling on the Council to impose sanctions
against those, including Eritrea, providing
support to the armed groups engaged in
undermining peace and reconciliation in Somalia
and regional stability. The Security Council is
deeply concerned in this regard and will consider
expeditiously what action to take against any
party undermining the Djibouti peace process,
based on all available evidence, including that
submitted to the Monitoring Group and the
Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 751 (1992).”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2009/19.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

09-39851
