A/RES/70/112

United Nations

Distr.: General
31 December 2015

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 143

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 14 December 2015
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/593)]

70/112. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001 and its
resolutions 57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of
13 April 2005, 61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of
24 December 2008, 64/233 of 22 December 2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010,
66/237 of 24 December 2011, 67/241 of 24 December 2012, 68/254 of 27 December
2013 and 69/203 of 18 December 2014,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations, 1 on the activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services 2 and on the amendment to the rules of
procedure of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, 3 the report of the Internal Justice
Council on administration of justice at the United Nations 4 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 5 as well as the
letter dated 3 November 2015 from the President of the General Assembly to the
Chair of the Fifth Committee, 6
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations, 1 on the activities of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services 2 and on the amendment to the rules of
procedure of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, 3 the report of the Internal Justice
Council on administration of justice at the United Nations 4 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;5
2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee;

_______________
1

A/70/187.
A/70/151.
3
A/70/189.
4
A/70/188.
5
A/70/420.
6
A/C.5/70/9.
2

15-16866 (E)

*1516866*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/112

Administration of justice at the United Nations

I
System of administration of justice
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in
the system of administration of justice;
4.
Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the
system of administration of justice, regardless of their duty station;
5.
Acknowledges the evolving nature of the system of administration of
justice and the need to carefully monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains
within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
6.
Stresses the importance of continuous consultation among relevant
stakeholders in fostering a dialogue-oriented culture across the Organization;
7.
Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of its resolution 61/261,
to establish a new, independent, transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced
and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent with the relevant
rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to
ensure respect for the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability
of managers and staff members alike;
8.
Decides to extend the three ad litem judge positions for one year, from
1 January to 31 December 2016;
9.
Stresses that any decision regarding the possible conversion of ad litem
positions to full-time positions and the eligibility criteria for the future permanent
positions, including the eligibility of the current ad litem judges, shall be taken after
consideration of the recommendations of the panel of independent experts on this
matter, as well as the related comments of the Secretary-General, during the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly;
10. Welcomes the establishment of the panel of experts and, recalling
paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee, trusts that the
recommendations of the panel and the related comments of the Secretary-General
will be comprehensive and will cover all major aspects of the system of
administration of justice;
11. Recalls that the objective of the interim independent assessment of the
system of administration of justice is the improvement of the current system;
12. Also recalls its decision that the interim independent assessment of the
system of administration of justice should include consideration of the relationship
between the formal and informal systems and whether the aims and objectives of the
system set out in its resolution 61/261 are being achieved in an efficient and costeffective manner;
13. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to transmit the
recommendations of the panel of experts, together with its final report and his
comments, for consideration by the General Assembly at the main part of its
seventy-first session;

2/9

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/70/112

II
Informal system
14. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an
efficient and effective option both for staff who seek redress of grievances and for
the participation of managers;
15. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of
the system of administration of justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be
made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation, without
prejudice to the basic right of staff members to access the formal system, and
encourages recourse to the informal resolution of disputes;
16. Recalls paragraph 38 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
encourages the continued involvement of the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services in the progressive development and refinement
of human resources policies and practices;
17. Emphasizes the importance of both staff and managers understanding and
adopting conflict competency skills in order to prevent conflicts, cope with potential
or actual conflicts and maintain resilience, and in this regard notes with appreciation
the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services to promote conflict competence at all levels of the Organization;
18. Commends efforts to resolve cases prior to litigation, including through
enhanced conflict competence and cooperation between the formal and informal
parts of the system of administration of justice, and encourages the Office of the
United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services to continue its outreach
activities at all duty stations to promote informal dispute resolution;
19. Recognizes that access to the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman
and Mediation Services is a challenge for staff in the field, including for those in
special political missions, encourages the development of innovative measures to
address these challenges, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the
General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-first session;
20. Requests that information on the number and nature of cases from nonstaff personnel continue to be clearly set out in future reports on the activities of the
Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;
21. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the
United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, 2 and stresses the importance
of improving performance management and communication between staff members
to help to address the root causes of disputes;
22. Welcomes the recommendations to address systemic and cross-cutting
issues contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office
of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on progress made in the
implementation of those recommendations in his next report;

3/9

A/RES/70/112

Administration of justice at the United Nations

23. Recalls paragraph 39 of the report of the Advisory Committee, regrets
that the Secretary-General has once again not fulfilled the request to ensure that the
revised terms of reference and guidelines for the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services are promulgated, and reiterates its request to
the Secretary-General to do so as a matter of priority, by the end of February 2016 at
the latest;
III
Formal system
24. Recognizes the ongoing positive contribution of the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance to the system of administration of justice;
25. Also recognizes the importance of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance as
a filter in the system of administration of justice, and encourages the Office to
continue to advise staff on the merits of their cases, especially when giving
summary or preventive legal advice;
26. Reaffirms the need for the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the
Appeals Tribunal to have at their disposal fully functional courtrooms, including
appropriate information technology;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to track the data on the
number of cases received by the Management Evaluation Unit of the Department of
Management of the Secretariat and the Dispute Tribunal in order to identify any
emerging trends and to include his observations on those statistics in future reports;
28. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to include information on
disputes involving non-staff personnel in the context of both management
evaluation and informal mediation in his future reports, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide information on existing measures to institutionalize good
management practices that aim to avoid or mitigate disputes involving the various
categories of non-staff personnel;
29. Notes with concern the increase in the number of pending cases before
the Dispute Tribunal and the high cost to the Organization due to financial
compensation paid to staff, and in this regard encourages further efforts to handle
cases in an effective and efficient manner, including through enhanced cooperation
between the formal and informal parts of the system of administration of justice and
proactive case management by the judges of the Tribunal;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the accountability of managers
whose decisions have been established to be grossly negligent, according to the
applicable Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, and which have led to
litigation and subsequent financial loss, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session;
31. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide further information with
regard to the effectiveness of the Management Evaluation Unit as a first step in the
formal system of administration of justice and its review of administrative decisions
taken by managers that could potentially have legal and financial implications for
the Organization, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session;

4/9

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/70/112

32. Takes note of the information provided regarding the voluntary
supplemental funding mechanism for additional resources for the Office of Staff
Legal Assistance, and decides to extend the experimental period for the mechanism
for one year, from 1 January to 31 December 2016;
33. Acknowledges the efforts made with respect to incentives for staff not to
opt out of the voluntary supplemental funding mechanism, and in this regard
encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen such incentives, particularly in
locations where the participation rate is low;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to collect and examine data
relating to staff contributions to the Office of Staff Legal Assistance and to report
thereon to the General Assembly in his next report;
35. Stresses the need to continue to explore means to raise awareness among
staff of the importance of financial contributions to the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance;
36. Recalls paragraph 44 of its resolution 69/203, regrets the delay in the
finalization of a single code of conduct for all legal representatives, and reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to submit the code of conduct to the General
Assembly, no later than at the main part of its seventy-first session;
37. Also recalls paragraph 41 of its resolution 69/203, and reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General to provide to the General Assembly a report on the
implementation of the amendment to article 11, paragraph 3, of the statute of the
Dispute Tribunal and to article 7, paragraph 5, of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal,
including with respect to the administrative implications, any implications for the
timely disposal of these cases, the ultimate disposition of appeals of orders, if any,
and any costs saved by reason of stays pending such appeals, and to do so at the
main part of its seventy-first session;
38. Approves the proposal of the Secretary-General to harmonize the
privileges and immunities of the judges of the Dispute and Appeals Tribunals, and
decides to amend article 4 of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal and article 3 of the
statute of the Appeals Tribunal as follows:
(a)

Statute of the Dispute Tribunal, article 4, new paragraph 12:

12. The judges of the Dispute Tribunal shall be considered officials other
than Secretariat officials under the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations;
(b)

Statute of the Appeals Tribunal, article 3, new paragraph 12:

12. The judges of the Appeals Tribunal shall be considered officials other
than Secretariat officials under the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations;
39. Also approves the proposal of the Secretary-General to amend article 8
(Appeals) of the rules of procedure of the Appeals Tribunal, and decides to amend it
as follows:
Article 8 (Appeals), new paragraph 6:
`

6.
The filing of an appeal shall suspend the execution of the judgement or
order contested;

5/9

A/RES/70/112

Administration of justice at the United Nations

40. Further approves the proposal of the Secretary-General with respect to
the mechanism for addressing complaints regarding alleged misconduct or
incapacity of the judges of the Tribunals and the amendment suggested by the Sixth
Committee contained in the letter dated 3 November 2015 from the President of the
General Assembly to the Chair of the Fifth Committee, 7 and decides to adopt the
mechanism with the amendment as proposed therein and annexed to the present
resolution;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to publish the statutes of the Dispute and
Appeals Tribunals, as amended since their initial adoption by the General Assembly,
as soon as possible, but no later than at its seventy-first session;
IV
Other issues
42. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure
independence, professionalism and accountability in the system of administration of
justice, and requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council with including the
views of both the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its reports;
43. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to
be submitted by the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth
Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities for administrative
and budgetary matters.
75th plenary meeting
14 December 2015
Annex
Mechanism for addressing complaints regarding alleged misconduct or
incapacity of the judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the
United Nations Appeals Tribunal
1.
Allegations regarding misconduct or incapacity of a judge should be made, in
writing, directly to the President of the relevant Tribunal. In the event that a
complaint is against a serving President, it shall be addressed to the most senior
judge after the President (“receiving judge”).
2.
The complainant shall receive a written acknowledgement of receipt of the
complaint.
3.
A complaint shall not be receivable unless it is received within 60 days of the
date on which the alleged misconduct or incapacity took place, except as set out in
paragraph 4 below.
4.
By way of a transitional measure only, a complaint may be filed against a
judge of either Tribunal related to alleged misconduct or incapacity during the
period from the date of the General Assembly’s approval of the mechanism for
addressing possible misconduct of judges in resolution 67/241 of 24 December 2012
to the date of approval of this mechanism, provided such complaint is filed within
60 days of the date of such approval.

_______________
7

6/9

See A/C.5/70/9, appendix.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/70/112

5.
The types of conduct that would warrant the sanctioning of a judge are
violations of the standards established in the code of conduct for the judges of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal approved
by the General Assembly in resolution 66/106 of 9 December 2011. The types of
incapacity that would warrant removal from the Dispute Tribunal or the Appeals
Tribunal would involve either a physical or a mental condition that would prevent a
judge from performing his or her judicial functions and that cannot be addressed by
a reasonable accommodation of such condition.
6.
Consistent with the principles of the independence of the administration of
justice and judicial independence, judicial decisions are not matters of conduct and
shall not be the subject of a complaint under this mechanism. Recusal – whether a
particular judge should preside over a case or sit on a hearing – cannot be dealt with
under the complaints mechanism. 8 A complaint is not an appeal.
7.
As a general rule, filed complaints relating to a pending case will not be dealt
with until the case is disposed of.
8.

Complaints regarding the misconduct or incapacity of a judge shall contain:
(a)

The name and address of the complainant;

(b)

The date and location of the alleged misconduct;

(c)

The name of the judge against whom the complaint is made;

(d) A detailed description of the alleged misconduct or incapacity, including
the date on which it took place;
(e) Any other relevant information, including the names and contact details
of witnesses, if any, to the event complained of, and documentary evidence if
available;
(f)

The signature of the complainant and date of submission.

9.
A complainant may be represented by another person, at his or her own
expense.
10. Upon receipt of a complaint, the President or receiving judge shall review it in
order to determine what action, if any, is warranted.
11. If the President or receiving judge decides that no further action is appropriate,
he or she will so inform the complainant in writing, within seven days, providing
reasons for the decision and sending a copy to the judge against whom the
complaint was made (“judge concerned”).
12. If the President or receiving judge decides that further action is warranted, he
or she shall provide the judge concerned with a copy of the complaint and any
supporting documentation thereto and invite him or her to provide comments in
writing within two weeks, unless the President or receiving judge grants an
extension of time to do so.
13. If the complaint is informally resolved to the satisfaction of the parties at any
time during its pendency before the President or receiving judge, the complainant
will inform the President or receiving judge accordingly and the complaint will be
closed.
_______________
8

Recusal of judges of the Dispute Tribunal or the Appeals Tribunal is covered in articles 4.9 and 3.9 of the
respective statutes of the Tribunals.

7/9

A/RES/70/112

Administration of justice at the United Nations

14. If, following a preliminary review, the President or receiving judge is of the
view that further inquiry is appropriate, the complainant will be so advised.
15. If the President or receiving judge is of the view that there are sufficient
grounds to warrant a formal investigation, he or she shall establish a panel of
outside experts to investigate the allegations and report its conclusions and
recommendations to the President or receiving judge. The panel of experts shall
comprise three members who shall be judges, former judges or other eminent jurists.
When appointing the panel, the President or receiving judge shall take into account
geographical distribution and gender balance.
16. The President or receiving judge shall establish the terms of reference for the
panel of experts. Such terms of reference should ensure that the judge concerned is
accorded all requisite due process safeguards.
17. The judge concerned may be represented by another person, at his or her own
expense.
18. The panel of experts shall complete their inquiries and report in writing to the
President or receiving judge within three months of the date of referral of the
complaint to the panel.
19. All judges of the relevant Tribunal, with the exception of the judge concerned,
shall review the report of the panel and recommend one of the following courses of
action:
(a) If a majority of the judges are of the opinion that the complaint is not
well founded, the complaint shall be closed and the President or receiving judge
shall advise the judge concerned and complainant in writing;
(b) If a majority of the judges are of the opinion that the complaint is well
founded but the removal of the judge concerned is not warranted, the President or
receiving judge shall take such corrective action as he or she deems appropriate;
(c) If the judges are of the unanimous opinion that the complaint is well
founded and that the matter is of sufficient severity to suggest that the removal of
the judge concerned is warranted, they shall so advise the President or receiving
judge of the Tribunal. The President or receiving judge shall report the matter to the
General Assembly, through the Internal Justice Council, to request the removal of
the judge concerned. The judge concerned will be advised of such recommendation
as soon as possible by the President or receiving judge;
(d) If a majority of the judges are of the opinion that the complaint is well
founded and the matter is of sufficient severity to suggest that the removal of the
judge concerned is warranted, the President or receiving judge shall take such
corrective action as he or she deems appropriate. The judge concerned shall be
given an opportunity to make final written representations regarding the sanction
proposed;
(e) When the process described in this paragraph is complete, the
complainant will be advised of the disposition of his or her complaint.
20. The process of review of the complaint up to the final disposition thereof shall
be confidential. If the final disposition is that set out in paragraph 11, 13 or 19 (a),
the name of the judge concerned shall continue to remain confidential following
completion of the process.

8/9

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/70/112

21. The respective Presidents of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal
shall submit an annual report to the General Assembly on the disposition of
complaints through the Internal Justice Council.
22.

This mechanism shall come into effect upon approval by the General Assembly.

9/9
