S/2014/296

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 April 2014
Original: English

Nineteenth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
I. Background
1.
The present report is my nineteenth semi-annual report on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a review and assessment of
the process of the implementation of the resolution since my previous repor t on the
subject was issued on 16 October 2013 (S/2013/612). I note herein the continued
lack of progress on key provisions of the resolution, in addition to highlighting
increasing concerns threatening the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon, including challenges to efforts to uphold that country’s
policy of disassociation from the Syrian crisis. I also note positive developments on
the political front.
2.
There were serious security challenges to stability in Lebanon and further
political polarization during the reporting period. In response to acts of terrorism
during the period, the Security Council issued seven press statements, on
19 November (SC/11180), 27 December (SC/11232), 2 January (SC/11239),
16 January (SC/11249), 21 January (SC/11256), 1 February (SC/11269) and
19 February (SC/11287), in which Council members appealed to all Lebanese
citizens to preserve national unity in the face of attempts to undermine the cou ntry’s
stability and stressed that it was important for all Lebanese parties to respect the
country’s policy of disassociation and to refrain from any involvement in the Syrian
crisis, consistent with their commitment in the Baabda Declaration.
3.
Lebanon witnessed many terrorist incidents during the reporting period,
leading to at least 65 fatalities and more than 400 injuries. Incendiary explosive
devices and car bombs had a significant impact on security and stability in many
parts of the country. On 27 December, a former minister, Mohamad Chatah, was
assassinated in a car bombing that also killed five other people. There were three
suicide bombings in the area of Hermel, three in the eastern Bekaa, four in Beirut and
one in Choueifat, north of Beirut, as well as two targeting Lebanese Armed Forces
checkpoints in Sidon, all of which led to further loss of life and many injuries.
4.
The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to have an impact on the
security and stability of Lebanon. There were at least five attacks by the Syrian air
force on the area around the Lebanese town of Aarsal, close to the Syrian -Lebanese
border. There was also at least one air strike on the northern area of Wadi Khalid,
14-30852 (E)

300414

*1430852*

S/2014/296

reportedly leading to the death of at least two Lebanese citizens. Cross-border
shooting, shelling and rocket attacks from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon
continued to cause death, injury and material damage. The President of Lebanon,
Michel Sleiman, maintained his calls for all Lebanese parties to dis associate
themselves from the war in the Syrian Arab Republic and to respect their
commitment to the principles of the Baabda Declaration.
5.
There were positive developments on the political front during the reporting
period. For example, on 15 February, after extensive consultations across
the political spectrum, the Prime Minister, Tammam Salam, succeeded in forming a
24-member national interest government. The Government won Parliament’s vote of
confidence on 20 March, with 96 of 128 parliamentarians giving their support. In
the Government’s ministerial statement, it committed itself to, among other things,
preserving the sovereignty and improving the security of Lebanon, respecting
Security Council resolutions, supporting the National Dialogue, includi ng resuming
discussions concerning the national defence strategy and implementation of
decisions taken at earlier sessions, building the capabilities of the armed forces,
including by expediting a $3 billion donation from Saudi Arabia, and following up
on decisions agreed upon in the context of the International Support Group for
Lebanon. The Government stressed the need to approve a new electoral law for
parliamentary elections and committed itself to holding the presidential election on
time and on the basis of constitutional procedures and democratic practice.
6.
Lebanon, the smallest and most vulnerable of the countries neighbouring the
Syrian Arab Republic, continues to host the largest number of Syrian refugees and is
facing significant humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges as a consequence. In
its ministerial statement, the Government underlined its commitment to addressing
practically the humanitarian challenges arising from the presence of 1 million
registered Syrian refugees in Lebanon who had fled the violence in their country,
through the activation of assistance programmes through the multi -donor trust fund
established by the World Bank and other mechanisms. There was also a further
influx into Lebanon of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Ara b Republic during the
reporting period. Lebanon and its people deserve the highest praise for the way in
which they have maintained an open door to refugees fleeing the violence in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations and the Government of Lebanon have
continued to work closely together to raise funds to help Lebanon to respond to the
humanitarian crisis.

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
7.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) on 2 September 2004, several of its
provisions have been implemented, as highlighted in my previous reports. Presidential
and parliamentary elections have been held in a free and fair manner. The Syri an Arab
Republic withdrew its troops and military assets from Lebanon in April 2005.
Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic established full diplomatic relations in 2009.
8.
During the reporting period, the President and the Prime Minister of Lebanon
continued to affirm the country’s respect for all United Nations resolutions. The
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and its corresponding impact on Lebanon,
however, continued to limit progress in the implementation of the outstanding
provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) and other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.

2/12

14-30852

S/2014/296

9.
On 15 February, I warmly welcomed the formation of a new government in
Lebanon and have been encouraged since by the Government’s commitment to
implementing Security Council resolutions, including, specifically, with regard to
priority concerns that are directly relevant to resolution 1559 (2004), such as the
need to improve security, secure the borders and to implement decisions taken at
previous National Dialogue sessions, as detailed in the ministerial statement of
20 March. Nonetheless, the continued rise in violence that characterized the
reporting period made progress on the implementation o f resolution 1559 (2004)
still more difficult, although more necessary than ever.
10. The delineation of the Syrian-Lebanese border, which was strongly encouraged
by the Security Council in its resolution 1680 (2006), has still not taken place.
Moreover, the existence and activities of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias along
the border continue to pose a threat to the stability of the country and the reg ion,
highlighting the need for the Government and the armed forces to step up their
efforts to reach a full monopoly on the possession of weapons and the use of force
throughout Lebanon.
11. My representatives and I remained in regular contact with all par ties in
Lebanon during the reporting period, as well as with relevant regional and
international leaders. I spoke to the President and the Prime Minister on 15 February
to congratulate them on the formation of the Government and met the former
caretaker Prime Minister, Najib Mikati, in Kuwait on 15 January on the occasion of
the Second International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for Syria, hosted by the
Government of Kuwait. The Government of Lebanon has highlighted its
commitment to tackling urgent issues relating to Syrian refugees and the need for
the international community to provide assistance in response to the appeal
launched in Kuwait in January. The President of France, François Hollande, and his
Government hosted a meeting of the International Support Group for Lebanon on
5 March in Paris, attended by the President of Lebanon. Participants stressed that
there was a continuing need for strong and coordinated international support for
Lebanon to help it to withstand the multiple challenges to its security and stability
and reiterated the importance of further strengthening the capabilities of the armed
forces. They also thanked the President of Lebanon for his leadership in seeking to
uphold the country’s sovereignty, unity and stability, in additi on to stressing the
importance of commitment to the policy of disassociation in an effort to promote
dialogue and safeguard Lebanon from the impact of the Syrian crisis.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
12. Resolution 1559 (2004) aims at strengthening the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive
authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout the country, in line with the
Taif Agreement of 1989, to which all the political parties in Lebanon committed
themselves. This objective has remained the highest priority of my efforts to
facilitate the implementation of all resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.
13. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request by the
Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. I continue to call upon

14-30852

3/12

S/2014/296

the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon to achieve the full delineation of their
common border. Given the continuing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
however, progress has been even more difficult to achieve and no tangible steps
were taken by either side in this regard during the reporting period.
14. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain
elements essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
They also remain critical to facilitating proper border control. The complex security
situation along the Syrian-Lebanese border in the current circumstances, including
continuing reports of cross-border fighting and movement of arms and people,
further underlines the continued urgency of demarcating the border. While
acknowledging the bilateral nature of border delineation, progress on this matter
remains an obligation of the two countries under resolution 1680 (2006), derived
from resolution 1559 (2004).
15. During the reporting period, cross-border shelling, shooting incidents and
rocket attacks continued to occur almost daily, causing at least 12 fatalit ies and tens
of injuries. The areas and towns of Aarsal, Labwah, Britel, Nabi Uthman and Wadi
Khalid were all frequently subject to such attacks. On 17 January, rockets struck the
eastern border town of Aarsal, killing seven people and injuring seven other s. In a
series of air raids by the Syrian air force on 3 and 16 March, at least 20 missiles hit
Aarsal and the surrounding area, causing at least five deaths, tens of injuries and
material damage. The Lebanese authorities have consistently highlighted the need to
defend Lebanon from such attacks and on 30 December the armed forces responded
by firing back at Syrian aircraft in Lebanese airspace.
16. The Bekaa continued to suffer from the impact of the fighting in the
neighbouring Syrian region of Qalamon. Several hundred Syrian families arrived in
Aarsal fleeing fighting in the Syrian town of Yabrud, with reports of many more
stranded in the border area. There were further strikes by Syrian government aircraft
on and around Aarsal between 16 and 20 March, with tens of rockets also fired at
predominantly Shia towns in the Bekaa, including Hermel and Labwah. The
Lebanese army and security forces intensified their deployment in this area,
contributing to restoring relative calm. There was a further influx of ref ugees into
the northern Akkar area of Lebanon, in addition to shelling, coinciding with fighting
on the Syrian side of the border.
17. The continued occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of the northern part of
the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line stands in violation
of the sovereignty of Lebanon and resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). My
representatives and I continue to engage closely with both parties with a view to
facilitating the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the area in implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
18. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab’a Farms area during
the reporting period. Neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has yet responded
with regard to the provisional definition of the area contained in my report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), issued on 30 October 2007 (S/2007/641).
19. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israeli armed forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). The Government of Lebanon has repeatedly protested

4/12

14-30852

S/2014/296

against the violations. I have deplored them and demanded that they cease
immediately. The Israeli authorities, in turn, claim that the overflights are carried
out for security reasons.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
20. The Government of Lebanon has reiterated to the United Nations its intention
to extend State authority over all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif
Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004). The armed forces and internal security
forces have played a crucial role in implementing this commitment under difficult
circumstances. The ability of the Lebanese State to fully exercise its authority o ver
all its territory continues to be challenged, however. I welcome the Government’s
commitment to building the capabilities of the army and security forces and stress
the need for continued international support to be provided to the authorities and the
armed forces.
21. During the reporting period, several incidents challenged national security,
most of which were linked directly or indirectly to the war in the Syrian Arab
Republic, which has exacerbated sectarian tensions in Lebanon. Concern continued
about the involvement of Lebanese fighters in the Syrian Arab Republic, notably
those of Hizbullah. Hizbullah publicly acknowledged its continued involvement in
that fighting and held funerals for its fighters killed in the Syrian Arab Republic. Its
Secretary-General also reaffirmed the party’s position on the fighting, including in a
speech on 29 March and an interview on 7 April. In addition to the commitment
made by the Government of Lebanon in its ministerial statement, the President
continued to call upon all parties to adhere to the policy of disassociation agreed
upon in the Baabda Declaration during the National Dialogue session of June 2012.
22. During the reporting period, there were violent incidents, terrorist attacks and
a political assassination in Lebanon. On 19 November, a double suicide bombing in
the Bir al-Abed neighbourhood of Beirut targeted the Iranian Embassy, killing at
least 23 people and injuring at least 140 others. There were two attacks on Lebanese
army checkpoints in Sidon, killing a soldier and five of the alleged attackers. On
17 December, a car bomb exploded in the Bekaa near an area that was allegedly the
site of a Hizbullah training camp, reportedly causing two casualties. On
27 December, a former minister, Mohamad Chatah, who had been a senior adviser to
the former Prime Minister, Saad Hariri, was assassinated in downtown Beirut by a
car bomb, which also left five others dead. On 2 January, a suicide bombing in the
Haret Hreik suburb of Beirut killed 5 people and injured 77 ot hers. In the Bekaa
town of Hermel, a car bomb killed 3 people and injured 26 others on 16 January. A
suicide bombing on 21 January in Haret Hreik killed 4 people and injured 35 others.
On 1 February, a suicide bomber detonated a car in Hermel, causing thre e fatalities,
while on 3 February a suicide bomb attack killed the suicide bomber and injured
two others. On 19 February, twin suicide bombs exploded in the Beirut area of Bir
Hassan, killing 6 people and injuring more than 100 others. A suicide car bomb
exploded at a Lebanese army checkpoint on 22 February, killing 4 people, including
2 Lebanese soldiers, and injuring 15 others. On 16 March, a suicide car bomb
exploded in the town of Nabi Uthman in the Bekaa, killing 4 people and injuring
more than 10 others. On 29 March, three Lebanese soldiers were killed and four
wounded in a suicide car bomb attack at an armed forces checkpoint close to the

14-30852

5/12

S/2014/296

eastern town of Aarsal. The Abdullah Azzam Brigades and other extremist groups
such as the Nusrah Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant claimed
responsibility for some of the attacks, alleging that they were in response to the
continued involvement of Hizbullah in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic.
23. There were further outbreaks of sustained violence in the northern city of
Tripoli, between the mainly Sunni residents of Bab al -Tabbaneh and the
predominantly Alawite community of Jebel Mohsen. Clashes that began on
30 November led to 12 deaths, including that of a Lebanese soldier, and at least
70 injuries. Violence between the same communities in January led to a further
seven fatalities, including a Lebanese soldier, and more than 48 casualties. The third
round of clashes began on 20 February and continued intermittently for six weeks,
leaving at least 30 people dead, including 2 Lebanese soldiers, and more than
100 injured. The fighting was halted on 27 March when the Government approved
its new security plan for the city.
24. Such violent incidents are a reflection of the widespread proliferation of
weapons held by non-State actors and the significant threat that such weapons pose
to national peace and security. Efforts to increase the capabilities of the armed
forces and their ability to tackle multiple challenges, including internal security,
continued, such as the Government’s security plan for Tripoli, which was agreed
upon on 27 March. The implementation of the plan led to the arrest of dozens of
fighters and gang leaders from both the Sunni and Alawite communities and the
dismantling of firing positions and checkpoints established by the militias. During
raids carried out as part of the plan, quantities of weapons and ammunition were
seized. Similar raids were carried out by the armed forces in the predominantly Shia
area of the Bekaa, where Syrian and Lebanese armed men were arrested and illegal
weapons confiscated.
25. The armed forces also made progress in efforts to prevent terrorist attacks and
disrupt terrorist networks, making arrests and discovering and defusing car bombs.
On 30 December, Lebanese media reported the arrest of Majed al-Majed, the
commander of the Abdullah Azzam Brigades, which had claimed responsibility for
the bombing of the Iranian Embassy. Reportedly seriously ill, he died in custody on
4 January. Other militants from the Abdullah Azzam Brigades were arrested and
charged by military prosecutors with membership of the organization. On
22 January, a Sunni militant wanted in connection with terrorist attacks in Lebanon,
Omar Atrash, was arrested, as were Naim Abbas (on 12 February) and Sami al-Atrash
(on 27 March). All were reportedly leaders of the Abdullah Azzam Brigades. The
armed forces discovered and defused car bombs in the Bekaa on 22 November,
Zahle on 29 November, Beirut on 12 February and Baalbek on 17 March.
26. The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally stable, notwithstanding the incidents detailed
in my most recent report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2014/130). In my next report on that subject, I will provide details on subsequent
incidents, including the explosion of an improvised explosive device on 14 March
south of the Blue Line and subsequent firing by the Israeli armed forces into
southern Lebanon, the UNIFIL investigation into which is continuing.
27. In a letter dated 27 February (A/68/776-S/2014/134), the Lebanese authorities
said that on 24 February Israeli military aircraft had violated Lebanese airspace,
raiding the outskirts of Janta town and firing several missiles within Lebanese

6/12

14-30852

S/2014/296

territory, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). In an interview on 7 April, the
Secretary-General of Hizbullah claimed responsibility for the aforementioned
incident of 14 March south of the Blue Line against an Israeli patrol, committed
allegedly in retaliation for the Janta incident. In a letter dated 9 April (S/2014/254),
the Israeli authorities, with reference to the claim by Hizbullah of responsibility,
drew attention to the incident of 14 March as a severe violation of resolution
1701 (2006). In a letter dated 14 April (A/68/848-S/2014/278), the Lebanese
authorities informed me of several shells fired by Israel on 14 March that had struck
locations on Lebanese territory in violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
28. With regard to the border of Lebanon with the Syrian Arab Republic, there
continued to be reports of arms trafficking taking place in both directions. Several
Member States continued to express deep concern over the illegal transfer of
weapons across the land borders. Israeli officials stated that they would act to
prevent advanced weapons systems from being transferred to Hizbullah from the
Syrian Arab Republic. Senior representatives of Hizbullah, for their part, maintained
their position that they had no intention of acquiring chemical weapons. The
Lebanese authorities indicated that the land border between Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic remained difficult to control, but that the Lebanese armed forces had
been deployed and were seeking to tighten control along the border to the best of
their ability. While the United Nations has no independent means of verifying
reports of cross-border arms smuggling, I have repeatedly expressed my concerns
about the risks to both countries.
29. To tackle continuing cross-border incidents and in the context of reports of
arms smuggling, there remains an urgent need to improve the management and
control of the land borders of Lebanon. This is also necessary to prevent armed
groups and militias in Lebanon from expanding their weapons arsenals, given that
such expansion constitutes a threat to national and regional peace. Donor
coordination with the authorities on integrated border management is under way.
I reiterate my calls upon all Member States to renew efforts to meet their obligations
under Security Council resolutions to take the measures necessary to prevent the
transfer of arms to groups outside the control of the Government of Lebanon.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias
30. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disarming and
disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias. This remains a key provision
of the resolution that has not yet been implemented. It reflects and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Agreement, which
led at the time to Lebanese militias, with the exception of Hizbullah, giving up their
weapons. Given the current national context of increased sectarian tensions and the
growing impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon, it is critical that this agreement be
preserved and implemented by all in order to avoid the spectre of a renewed
confrontation among the Lebanese.
31. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continue to operate
outside the control of the Government, in serious violation of resolution
1559 (2004). While several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess
weapons outside government control, the armed component of Hizbullah is the most

14-30852

7/12

S/2014/296

significant and most heavily armed Lebanese militia in the country. On 4 December,
a Hizbullah commander, Hassan Laqis, was assassinated in Beirut. The maintenance
of arms by Hizbullah and other groups poses a serious challenge to the State’s
ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In addition, a
number of Palestinian armed groups continue to operate in the country inside and
outside the refugee camps. Furthermore, there continued to be reports in recent
months of infiltration or presence of extremist elements in Lebano n. Tackling this
issue has become all the more urgent in the current difficult circumstances. The
extent of violence and terrorist acts during the reporting period cost many lives and
caused great suffering to many innocent Lebanese, affecting communities
throughout Lebanon.
32. During the reporting period, there was yet again no tangible progress towards
the disbanding and disarming of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for
in the Taif Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that
resolution, no specific steps have been taken to tackle this crucial issue, which lies
at the heart of the sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon. Several
Lebanese groups and individuals continue to speak up against the maintenance by
Hizbullah of a military arsenal, which they consider a destabilizing factor in the
country and contradictory to democracy. Many Lebanese see the continued existence
of such arms as an implicit threat for use within Lebanon for political reasons.
33. I have repeatedly expressed my deep concern to Lebanese leaders about the
serious risks that armed groups pose to the stability of the country and the region.
I have urged them to tackle this matter without further delay, given that it is their
obligation under resolution 1559 (2004). In a democratic State, it is a fundamental
anomaly that a political party maintains its own militia. Nonetheless, Hizbullah has
continued to acknowledge openly that it maintains and expands a substantial
military capacity separate from that of the Lebanese State. It further claims that its
arms serve as a deterrent against potential aggression from Israel. Israeli officials
continued to express concern at the alleged maintenance by Hizbullah of
unauthorized weapons or the presence of armed personnel in civilian areas in the
south of Lebanon.
34. I have long supported the National Dialogue as the best way to deal with the
issue of arms and achieve the ultimate goal of no weapons or armed forces in
Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State. A National Dialogue session was
held on 31 March under the leadership of the President of Lebanon. All the main
Lebanese political groups participated, with the exception of Hizbullah and the
Lebanese Forces. During the session, the President reintroduced his plan, originally
set out in September 2012, for a national defence strategy, highlighting the
importance of implementing the Baabda Declaration and meeting constitutional
deadlines, including that for the presidential election. The Government committed
itself to resuming debate on the national defence strategy, the importance of which
had been underlined by the President on 23 March. The next session is scheduled
for 5 May.
35. During the reporting period, the security situation in the Palestine refugee
camps remained generally stable, with the exception of a few violent incidents. The
Ein el-Hillweh camp and the neighbouring area of Taamir were used as a refuge by
militant Sunni elements, allegedly including fugitive Ahmed Assir. On 1 December,
militants from the Jund al-Sham group killed a member of Fatah and injured two

8/12

14-30852

S/2014/296

others. In continuing violence over the next two days, two more people were
injured. On 25 December, a car bomb exploded in Ein el -Hillweh, without causing
casualties. On 1 February, an individual with links to Fatah was killed by two
unidentified gunmen in Ein el-Hillweh. On 8 April, clashes erupted in the Mieh
Mieh camp, close to Sidon, leaving at least seven people dead and at least seven
injured. On 28 November, the Prime Minister of the State of Palestine, Rami
Hamdallah, reiterated that it was important for Palestinians in Lebanon to safeguard
security and stability there.
36. Humanitarian conditions for Palestine refugees in Lebanon remain dire, with
the influx of an additional 52,977 refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic since the
beginning of the crisis placing tremendous further pressure on the overall situation
in the camps, in addition to the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to provide assistance. Tensions are
also increasing between the Palestine refugees who have been residing in Lebanon
and those arriving from the Syrian Arab Republic, given that the latter are deemed
to be placing an additional burden on the already limited resources available for
Palestine refugees. The United Nations has continued to urge the Lebanese
authorities to improve the living conditions of the refugees. This should be done
without prejudice to the eventual resolution of the Palestine refugee question in the
context of a comprehensive peace agreement in the region, and bearing in mind the
detrimental effects of dismal living conditions on the wider security situation.
37. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps continues to
challenge the ability of Lebanon to exercise full sovereignty over its territory.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 by the National Di alogue and confirmed
in subsequent sessions, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country. All but one of
those bases are located along the Syrian-Lebanese border. Their presence continues
to undermine Lebanese sovereignty and governmental authority and makes
delineation of the border more difficult. It poses a serious challenge to the effective
control of the eastern border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. I have
reiterated my calls upon the Lebanese authorities for the implementation of earlier
decisions of the National Dialogue, specifically those relating to the dismantling of
the above-mentioned military bases, and upon the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate with those efforts in good faith.

III. Observations
38. I welcome the positive political developments in Lebanon, including the
formation of a new government of national interest under the leadership of the
Prime Minister, Tamam Salam, and its commitment to international obligations,
including issues relevant to resolution 1559 (2004). The unity that led to the
formation of the Government after a protracted period of 11 months should be built
upon in order to better protect the security, stability, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. In particular, it will be important for confidence to build on
the initial gains made in tackling immediate security threats. I am encouraged by the
resumption of the National Dialogue sessions and hope that within this Lebanese -led
process further progress can be made on developing a national defence strategy.
Continued political unity will remain important in furthering these positive steps

14-30852

9/12

S/2014/296

and in continuing to empower the armed and security forces to tackle the difficult
security challenges ahead.
39. I remain disappointed, however, at the lack of further tangible progr ess
towards the implementation of the remaining provisions of resolution 1559 (2004).
Lebanon continues to face serious challenges to its stability and security, both
internally and along its borders with the Syrian Arab Republic, including from arms
smuggling and from further influxes of refugees. I am also concerned that continued
stagnation in the implementation of the resolution could lead to the erosion of
provisions already implemented and contribute to further deterioration in the
stability of Lebanon. I reiterate my firm conviction that it is in the best interest of
Lebanon and the Lebanese to make progress towards the full implementation of the
resolution for the long-term stability of the country and the region.
40. Recent incidents along the Blue Line, as detailed in my reports on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), underscore the fragility of the situation
there. I commend the Lebanese and Israeli armed forces for their efforts to reduce
tensions and for the support and coordination of UNIFIL in this regard.
41. I have repeatedly condemned the continued violation of the sovereignty of
Lebanon, including the many incidents in which civilians have been killed or
injured on the Lebanese side of the border because of the actions of warring parties
in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular in the context of the recent fighting
around the Syrian towns of Yabrud and Hosn. I continue to call up on all parties,
including the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon, in accordance with resolution 1559 (2004).
42. The escalation of violence in Lebanon during the reporting period is deeply
worrying, including multiple terrorist incidents carried out by groups claiming that
they are acting in response to the involvement of Hizbullah in the fighting in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I remain deeply concerned by the failure of various parties to
cease involvement in that fighting and in particular the continued acknowledgement
by Hizbullah of its role therein. The involvement by some Lebanese groups in the
conflict has had a devastating impact on security and stability in Lebanon. I call
upon all in the region to respond to my calls to stop the transfer of arms and fighters
from Lebanon to the Syrian Arab Republic and for the full respect of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Lebanon. This surge in violence and terrorism highlights
that there is a continued need to uphold the principles of the Baabda Declaration and
the policy of disassociation and for Lebanese parties to step back from their
involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic. I welcome the Government’s clear
commitment in this regard and encourage all parties in Lebanon to respect and fulfil
the obligations upon which they have all agreed.
43. The return of political assassination in the form of the bombing that targeted
Mohamad Chatah was a disturbing and worrying reminder of earlier crimes in
Lebanon. The opening of the trial in the Special Tribunal for Lebanon on 16 January
was a strong signal of the refusal of Lebanon and the international community to
bend to terror or impunity.
44. I am encouraged by the resumption of the National Dialogue under the
leadership of the President and have long believed that the best way to tackle
violence in the country is to disarm militias through a Lebanese -led process. The
discussion of the President’s 2012 vision for developing a national defence strategy

10/12

14-30852

S/2014/296

at the session on 31 March was a welcome step in this regard that needs to be built
on. I urge all parties to engage in the National Dialogue and to implement earlier
decisions taken in that context, specifically those relating to the disarmament of
non-Lebanese groups and the dismantling of Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada military bases. The Syrian
conflict should not be used as an excuse to ignore those responsibilities, but as a
clear reminder of the need to disarm and disband militias.
45. I have repeatedly cautioned that the widespread proliferation of weapons
outside the control of the State, combined with the continued existence of heavil y
armed militias, undermines the security of Lebanese citizens. The maintenance by
Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military capabilities outside the control of
the Government remains a matter of grave concern, in particular because it creates
an atmosphere of intimidation and represents a key challenge to the safety of
Lebanese civilians and to the government monopoly on the legitimate use of force.
It also puts Lebanon in violation of its obligations under resolution 1559 (2004) and
constitutes a threat to regional peace and stability. I reiterate my call upon Hizbullah
and all other parties concerned not to engage in any militant activity inside or
outside Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the Taif Agreement and
resolution 1559 (2004).
46. I continue to urge the Government and armed forces of Lebanon to take all
measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah from acquiring weapons and buildin g
paramilitary capacities outside the authority of the State, in violation of resolution
1559 (2004). I also call upon countries in the region that maintain close ties with
Hizbullah to encourage the transformation of the armed group into a solely political
party and its disarmament, consistent with the requirements of the Taif Agreement
and resolution 1559 (2004), in the best interest of Lebanon and regional peace
and security.
47. I am deeply concerned by the situation of Palestine refugees in the camps and
the additional pressure being placed on the limited resources available in the light of
the presence of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Repub lic who have fled
violence there. I reiterate my call upon donors to support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its vital work in
providing services to Palestine refugees in Lebanon. Strong cooperation be tween the
Lebanese authorities and the Palestinian security forces in the camps has been
crucial in ensuring that security incidents are brought under control swiftly.
I welcome the continued commitment of the Palestinian leadership to ensuring
security and stability in Lebanon.
48. I regret the absence of any progress on the delineation and demarcation of the
border with the Syrian Arab Republic, which has a significant impact on border
control. I remain of the view that integrated border management will, in the longer
term, contribute significantly to better control of the borders of Lebanon and help to
prevent the illegal transfer of weapons and fighters in both directions. This has
become even more pressing in the context of events in the Syrian Arab Rep ublic.
I call upon donors to continue to support border management.
49. The continued violations by Israel of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon, most conspicuously the overflights of Lebanese territory by Israeli
aircraft, are deplorable. I reiterate my call upon Israel to adhere to its obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions and to withdraw its forces from the

14-30852

11/12

S/2014/296

northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line, as
well as to cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace, which undermine the
credibility of the Lebanese security services and generate anxiety among the civilian
population. They also greatly increase the risk of unintended consequences in a very
tense regional context.
50. I warmly welcome the formation of a national interest government after many
months of political stagnation. I am encouraged by the Government’s commitment
to the policy of disassociation, the National Dialogue, the implementation of earlier
decisions taken at the National Dialogue sessions and respect for Security Council
resolutions pertaining to Lebanon, as referred to in the ministerial statement of
20 March.
51. I also welcome the priority given in the statement to holding the presidential
election on time on the basis of constitutional procedures and democratic practice.
Holding that election in a free and fair environment, in the spirit of resolution
1559 (2004), is a key element in preserving democratic institutions and processes
and will contribute to the renewed spirit of cooperation and respect for coexistence
that has been increasing. The security of Lebanon must prevail, as must national
peace, without intimidation by armed groups. The maintenance of wea pons by
armed groups, including Hizbullah, outside State control is in contradiction to the
Taif Agreement and incompatible with the imperative of free and fair elections.
52. I commend the efforts of the armed forces to confront multiple security
challenges throughout the country. They have made progress in tackling various
security challenges, including terrorist threats and the situation in Tripoli. Despite
suffering losses, they have deployed robustly in all conflict -affected areas. The
implementation of a new security plan in Tripoli and the Bekaa appears to have
produced positive results to date and has been broadly welcomed by leaders and
local communities. For the army to continue to build on those successes, given its
overstretched capacity, it is crucial for it to continue to receive support from all
Lebanese leaders. The emphasis placed thereon by the Prime Minister and his
Government is encouraging and should be built upon further, including in
the context of the International Support Group for Lebanon and its support for the
five-year development plan of the armed forces. I encourage all stakeholders,
including international donors and the Government, to continue to be forthcoming in
the support for the plan and the army. I also pay tribute to the former Prime Minister,
Najib Mikati, for his strong leadership during a particularly difficult period.
53. I remain firmly committed to the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) for
the sake of peace and security during a particularly difficult and challenging time in
Lebanon. I therefore count on the continued commitment of the Government to its
international obligations and call upon all parties and actors to fully abide by
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). I further call upon Member
States to renew efforts to support Lebanon in ensuring respect for its obligations
under those resolutions, as the best way to advance the country’s long -term
prosperity and stability as a democratic State. I will continue my efforts towards the
full implementation of those and all other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.

12/12

14-30852
