S/2012/206

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 April 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 10 April 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to attach herewith a letter dated 10 April 2012 from Kofi
Annan, Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab States on
the Syrian crisis (see annex).
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council as a matter of urgency.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-28817 (E) 100412

*1228817*

S/2012/206

Annex
I would like to update the Security Council on my mission as Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab States on the Syrian crisis. I do
so in the context of the 10 and 12 April timeline. We enter a critical moment in the
implementation of the six-point plan, and I am gravely concerned at the course of
events.
As I reported to the Security Council on 2 April, the Syrian Government had
informed me the previous day that it would implement a plan for withdrawing its
military units from populated zones and surrounding areas to take effect from 1 to
10 April 2012, with no new deployments to population centres. I subsequently
relayed to all sides that upon the completion by the Government of its commitments
under item 2 of the plan by Tuesday, 10 April, all parties should immediately cease
all forms of violence, so that a complete cessation is in place by 0600 hours
Damascus time on Thursday, 12 April. I appreciated the Council’s support for this
timeline in its presidential statement of 5 April, further to its support for the sixpoint plan in its presidential statement of 21 March.
In this regard, the days before 10 April should have been an opportunity for
the Government to send a powerful political signal of peace, with action on all
aspects of the six-point plan, in particular through the urgent and visible
implementation of its commitments under item 2 of the plan, namely, to cease troop
movements towards population centres, to cease all use of heavy weapons in such
centres and to begin the pullback of military concentrations in and around
population centres. In the past five days it has become clear that such a signal has
yet to be issued.
With respect to humanitarian access, discussions are ongoing regarding an
expansion of humanitarian access and capacity to reach the estimated 1 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance. Following participation in the
Government-led humanitarian assessment mission in March, the United Nations, in
coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, is now delivering assistance to
displaced persons in Tartous governorate.
With respect to detainees, on 5 April the International Committee of the Red
Cross announced that they had agreed to procedures with the Government for visits
to places of detention, including an immediate visit to Aleppo Central Prison. In a
letter dated 8 April, the Government informed me of the release of 97 people
detained for participating in opposition activities. The Government has also
informed me of the pardon of 211 individuals who had surrendered.
With respect to journalists, the Syrian Government has sent me a letter,
informing me of the attribution of visas to journalists from 21 international news
organizations.
With respect to the military provisions of the six-point plan, the Syrian
Government has underlined security issues in several letters detailing actions by
armed groups against Government forces, civilians and property. As for its own
commitments, it has informed me of some military movements. According to the
communications addressed to me, Syrian armed forces withdrew some units from
the city of Idlib, the Zabadani area as well as from positions in the governorates of
Dar’a on 5 and 6 April and from Dayr az Zawr on 7 and 8 April.

2

12-28817

S/2012/206

Despite these assurances from the Syrian Government, credible reports
indicate that during that same period, Syrian armed forces conducted rolling military
operations, characterized by troop movements, supported by artillery fire, in
population centres. While some troops and heavy weapons have been withdrawn
from some localities, this appears to be often limited to a repositioning of heavy
weapons that keeps cities within firing range. Furthermore, several new localities
also appear to have been subject to military operations, including the use of heavy
weapons on population centres.
While the absence of United Nations observers makes it difficult to fully
ascertain the situation on the ground, the rapid increase of refugee flows into Turkey
gives a strong indication of a surge in violence. Between 15 December 2011 and
31 March 2012, the average rate of refugees entering Turkey was 96 persons per
day. By contrast, the average rate of incoming refugees in the past nine days has
been 707 persons per day. The spike is unquestionable, and of the greatest concern,
given the implications for the situation inside the country.
Finally, in a letter dated 8 April, the Syrian Government introduced new
conditions for any full implementation of the plan: (a) written assurances that armed
opposition groups are prepared to cease all violence; (b) immediate disarmament of
armed groups; and (c) a commitment by regional countries that they would not
finance or arm opposition groups.
These new Syrian requests constitute ex post facto requirements that are not
part of the six-point plan that they agreed to implement. This puts at risk the
cessation of violence in all its forms, which is so urgently needed and which must
take place at 0600 on 12 April. I have, however, been advised by Foreign Minister
Lavrov, following his meeting with Foreign Minister Al-Moallem, that the Syrian
Government is no longer insisting on written guarantees, but would need me to
assure that the other parties and Governments also accept the plan.
I remain of the view that every effort must be made to achieve a cessation of
violence in all its forms on 12 April at 0600. We have been in close contact with the
leaderships of the Syrian National Council, the Free Syrian Army, local coordination
committees and other groups. We have engaged the whole spectrum of the
opposition to explain what is required of them alongside the Government’s
implementation of its obligations. Members of the opposition have indicated to us,
and publicly, that they would observe a cessation of all forms of violence provided
that Syrian forces withdraw from cities.
Meanwhile, the United Nations team led by General Mood has worked closely
with Syrian military authorities to start technical preparations for the potential
deployment of observers to supervise and monitor a cessation of armed violence.
Progress on technical issues appears to have been made but substantive differences
have emerged. General Mood is returning to Geneva to report on his mission, and I
should be in a position to provide the Security Council with more information on
12 April.
If the required political will is present and the implementation of the six-point
plan can proceed as agreed, the cessation of violence on 12 April will need to be
followed in short order by the deployment of an effective international monitoring
mechanism. This will require quick action from the Security Council. This could

12-28817

3

S/2012/206

then create the necessary conditions for an inclusive political solution that meets the
democratic aspirations of the Syrian people.
But recent events are deeply concerning. The prevailing security and human
rights situation is unacceptable. This crisis has lasted for more than one year, has
produced an intolerably heavy death toll and is now triggering increased flows of
refugees throughout the region. Earlier this morning, I saw with my own eyes the
devastating impact of the crisis in a refugee camp in Turkey, close to the Syrian
border. The scale of the suffering of the Syrian people is clear. A cessation of
violence is urgent.
The Syrian leadership should now seize the opportunity to make a fundamental
change of course. It is essential that the next 48 hours bring visible signs of
immediate and indisputable change in the military posture of the Government forces
throughout the country, as called upon by the six-point plan, and that items (a), (b)
and (c) of paragraph 2 of the six-point plan be fully implemented, in order to enable
a cessation of armed violence on 12 April. We also urge the opposition to fulfil their
commitments to the six-point plan and to give no excuse for the Government to
renege on its commitments. The clear declarations coming from the opposition are
encouraging in this respect.
I have been in constant contact with countries with influence. I appreciate the
support they have given to the six-point plan and to my efforts. The unity of the
international community, and in particular of the Security Council, is of vital
importance to finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis. At this critical
moment, I would be grateful if a united Council could register its deep concern at
the state of the implementation of the Syrian Government’s immediate obligations
and impress upon the parties the importance of meeting the deadline of 12 April.
The cessation of violence in all its forms is a first but essential step. It must not be
delayed by new conditions. Violence must stop now.
On 12 April I hope to be able to give a more detailed assessment of the
situation on the ground.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan
Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States on the Syrian crisis

4

12-28817
