L

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING: 20 MARCH 1973
PANAMA

CITY

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l702)

,...,.., ..... .,... .. ... ..... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , , . . . , . , , ‘. , . . , . , , . , , , . . , . a . . . . . . . .

1

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter . , . . . , . . . , . . . . , . . , . . I . . . . , . . . , . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1702

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN
Held in the Legislative

HUNDRED

AND SECOND

MEETING

Palace, Panama City, on Tuesday, 20 March 1973, at 3.30 p.m.

fiesident: Mr. Juan Antonio TACK (Panama)
later: Mr. Aquilino E. BOYD (Panama).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 702)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2, Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in
Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter,
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Consideration of the measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles
of the Charter
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with decisions previously taken by the Security
Council f 1696th-I 699th meetings] , and with its consent, I
invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Bolivia,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Jamaica, Mauritania, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire and Zambia to take the
placesreserved for them in the Council chamber.
2. Speaking now asthe representative of PANAMA, I wish
to exercise my right of reply,
3. We listened this morning to the statement of the
representative of the United States of America [170lst
meeting/. I shall refer, on behalf of my country, to some
parts of the statement by that distinguished representative.
4. The fact is that the countries of Latin America are
showing general and justified concern because of the
increasing habit of North American officials of making a
public inventory of the results of their apparent generosity.

But in that inventory no reference is ever made to the fact
that our raw materials, our cheap labour force, our limited
economic and military capability have been and continue to
be, among others, important factors which have been used
to achieve the development of the United States of
America. The supposed economic assistance which that
country provides Latin America is not so generous, broad
or disinterested as its representatives proclaim. On the other
hand,’ the damages we have suffered for the benefit of the
development of the United States have not been nor will
they be compensated for. The trend is clear: not to allow
the complete development of Latin America in order to
maintain it as a source of supply of raw materials or of a
cheap labour force,
5. The jurisdiction and competence of the United Nations
in this region cannot be diminished or limited by the
jurisdiction which the Organization of American States
(OAS) has in certain matters. We know fuIl well that these
are two organizations with different structures and powers.
It suffices to refer to Article 103 of the Charter of the
United Nations to dispel any doubt anyone might have on
the subject, or perhaps we should read out the text of
article 137 of the Charter of the OAS:
“None of the provisions of this charter shall be
construed as impairing the rights and obligations of the
member States under the Charter of the United Nations.”
But the history of the actions of the Security Council
reaffirms its competence and jurisdiction without any
doubt.
6. We would wish to refer now to the OAS. We believe
that the time has come to re-examine its structure in order
to adjust it to the real needs of the region. Let it be stated
clearly that the history of the OAS in respect of pacification is not as brilliant as some have tried to claim here.
Enshrining the principle that might makes right or belatedly
lamenting the painful events which, because of the incapacity of the OAS, have brought sorrow to Latin America are
not really things to be proud of. How anyone speaks/about
the party depends on how he enjoyed it.
7. The recent conference at Bogota of the Inter-American
Economic and Social Council of the OAS made it clear that
many of the Latin American aspirations could be fulfilled in
large measure by cqmplete compliance with the rules of the
Charter of that organization. Nevertheless the whole world
knows that when the final resolution was discussed the
United States abstained because it was not able to accept
even clauses which merely repeated provisions of the

Charter of the OAS, despite the fact that that instrument
had been signed and ratified by the United States.

ble savings in current costs and in investment for equipment, installations and ships.

8. The purposes of the United States in the bilateral
negotiations-as they were admitted to this morning by the
United States representative-cannot satisfy Panama. To
agree to them would only lead to increasing the causesof
conflict between the two countries which we are seeking to
eliminate through the negotiations.

13. The purely economic profits obtained by the United
States from the Canal and in general from the present status
of the Canal Zone have very diverse aspects and as a whole
are considerable. Thus, for example, during the period 1960
to 1970 the Canal Company had surpluses which exceeded
$450 million and which were allocated to,the payment of
interest to the Government of the United States and to
finance a large part of the cost of the government of the
Zone and to increase the company’s reserves.

9. There is no logic in the affirmation that in order for the
Canal to serve world trade efficiently, the United States
must have the right to increase its capacity. This is not in
accord with our legitimate aspirations to regain complete
jurisdiction over our territory and to exercise our sovereign
rights over our natural resources. The aim of ensuring that
the Canal would “continue to be operated and defended by
the United States for an extended but specified period of
time” (ibid., para. 138/ is a very subtfe way of expressing
the concept of perpetuity in figures.
10. A treaty cannot be new and modem if it does not
satisfy our legitimate aspirations effectively to exercise
sovereignty over our entire national territory, to exercise
sovereignty over our natural resources, to do away with the
existence of a government within another government, to
put an end to the colonial enclave which gives rise to our
dispute.
11. The representative of the United States explained that
the considerable growth of Panama’s economy has resulted
in part from the contributions received from abroad, among
them the aid given by the United States. He specified that
for 1972 the aid amounted to $227 million and he added
that American loans and grants to Panama represent the
highest per capita level of United States assistance any
where in the world. That might be true, but we are bound
to add that this represents only one side of the coin. It is
fitting to mention that on the other side there are the vast
benefits which the United States had been receiving since
1910-when the Panama Canal was opened-because of its
use of our geographical position in regard to the Canal, and
which represents possibly the largest per capita subldy
which any country has ever given to the vast economy of
the United States. Those benefits include, on the one hand,
strategic and political benefits and, on the other, strictly
economic benefits. s
12. As regards the strategic aspects: the Canal has had and
continues to have an undeniable military value. During the
Second World War it was used by approximately 5,300
warships and 8,500 ships carrying troops and military
supplies. The Canal also facilitated military operations and
logistic support for the United States Army in the Korean
war. It is estimated that 22 per cent of the tonnage sent
from the eastern seaboard of the United States went
through the Panama Canal. Between 1964 and 1968 there
was an increase of 640 per cent in the dry tonnage and 430
per cent in the transport of fuel and oil through the Canal
in order to support military operations in South-East Asia.
Therefore the Canal has had considerable strategic advantages for the United States, in improving the ability of its
naval forces to manoeuvre and facilitating the sending of
troops and supplies to the areas of conflict, with apprecia-

14. Other economic benefits can be mentioned which are
perhaps of greater significance ,but which are difficult to
quantify, such as the advantage which the Canal gives the
United States in the expansion of its internal and international trade and in general in the improvement of its
international economic relations. Nevertheless, the main
economic advantages are derived from the fact that the
United States is the main user of the Canal and from the
rate schedule, which has remained unchanged since the
opening of the Canal.
15. A recent study by the Economic Commission for
Latin America (ECLA)i estimated at $5,400 million the
money saved by those who used the Canal from 1960 to
1970 because they did not have to use the lesseconomical
alternative route, wh&h is 6 to 7 times as long. In the same
study ECLA estimated at $2,600 million the profits the
Canal Company would have obtained from its monopolistic
position by applying a rate structure which discriminated
according to economic density and other characteristics of
the goods carried through the Canal. Between these two
extremes-$2,600 million and $5,400 million-one
can
estimate the subsidies thus given to world fleets and trade.
With regard to trade originating in or destined..for the
United States, according to ECLA the net profit for the
United States economy can be estimated at between $700
million and $1,700 million from 1960 to 1970.
16. Although that does not complete the list of economic
efforts which the United States receives from the Canal and
from the colonial control of the Canal Zone, it is worth
mentioning, finally, that there is a situation which, while it
gives only a small economic advantage to the United States,
is revealing in regard to the existing relationships. Apart
from the activities related directly to the maintenance and
operation of the Canal and to the functioning of the citiIian
and military government, the Canal Company carries out a
series of purely trade activities connected with supplying
and servicing the population residing in the Zone, as well as
other auxiliary activities, all of which are exempt from any
taxation on the part of the State of Panama. In this way the
public budget of this small country had been subsidizing a
large company controlled by the greatest Power in the
world.
17. Panama is seeking not a change in wording, but a
change in structure. So far, there have been no real bilateral
1 Study entitled “The economy of Panama and the Canal Zone”,
prepared at the request of the Government of Panama and
transmitted to the Security Council by the representative of Panama
(see S/10900 of 9 March 1973).

negotiations; what there have been are North American
proposals designed to disguise, in perpetuity, the colonialist
enclave. When Panamanian proposals intended to put an
end to that enclave were put forward, they were not, nor
have they ever been, accepted by the United States.

sell US a revised, corrected and expanded version of the
1903 Convention, and this the people of Panama will never
accept.
24. In my capacity as PRESIDENT I wish to state that the
next name on the list of speakers is that of the UnderSecretary for External Relations of Chile, Mr, Luis Orlandini, and I invite him to take a place at the Council table in
order to make his statement.

18. In order for talks to be bilateral there must be a
serious desire on both sides to deal with each other in
equality and respect and with a concern to find solutions to
the problems. But when what exists is a desire on the part
of one party to impose conditions, make threats and exert
pressure, on the basis of its vast military and economic
power, then there is no mutual negotiation: what there is is
the imposition of a single will in disguise.

25. Mr.

ORLANDINI

(Chile) (interpretation from
I must apologize to you for
venturing to distract the Council’s attention. I deliberately
postponed my statement with the idea of not disturbing the
course of the debate that quite justifiably is being held on
the main problem that has been before the Council. I make
that statement by way of explanation of what otherwise
might seem to be an ill-timed statement.
Spanish): Mr. President,

19. Why, in nine years, has there been no progress in the
negotiations between Panama and the United States? Why
does the United States seek to perpetuate its military
display on the isthmus, build a new sea-level canal and
maintain the Canal Zone, while at the same time claiming
that it is doing away with the concept of perpetuity? What
are the causesof conflict between the two countries? Quite
simply, the existence of a foreign Government within our
own territory, the oppressive presence of a foreign army on
the isthmus, and the existence within the territory which is
called the Canal Zone of a legislation different from that of
the Republic of Panama. In the negotiations Panama has
asked .for the elimination of those causesof conflict. At no
time has the United States agreed definitively. Basically,
what it wishes is to maintain the status quo, changing it
only in name.

26. At this stage of these meetings, it seems inexcusable to
me that I should be obliged to make the following
statement, which is linked to the intervention of one of our
sister-countries of this area before the Council.
27. With regard to the statement made on the 16th of this
month by the representative of Bolivia [169&h meeting],
the delegation of Chile feels it imperative to give the
following clarifications. First of all, my Government has
repeatedly stated its willingness to undertake a dialogue
between our two countries in order to define and solve the
problems of interest to both as neighbours and sisterrepublics. Second, we believe that the resumption of
diplomatic relations would be a positive and constructive
step towards achieving such goals and aims for the benefit
of both our peoples. Third, we reiterate our adherence to
the principles of international law recognized in the Charter
of the United Nations regarding the inviolability of treaties
freely entered into and which serve as the basis for peaceful
international coexistence. Fourth, we emphatically stress
that the existing historical and juridical systems regulating
relations between Bolivia and Chile in no way imply a
challenge to any sovereign rights of Bolivia, as can be seen
clearly from those international instruments that serve to
regulate them in accordance with international law.lFifth,
we believe that within the framework of the process of
Andean integration, in which both of our countries
participate, and, furthermore, as a result of the current
progressive bilateral conversations between Bolivia and
Chile which are dealing with problems of mutual interests,
we will gradually create the necessary conditions so that, in
strict observance of the norms of international law, both
Bolivia and Chile will be able to expand their common
ground and strengthen their ties of friendship and co-operation.

20, When General Torrijos, in his opening statement
before the Council /1695th meeting/, referred to the fact
that the problems of the developing countries of the third
world were similar, he was expressing the Panamanian
people’s deep feeling of solidarity with the rest of the
people of Latin America, Aftica and Asia.
21. The Security Council must play a vital role in the
solution of this problem, and not accept a false bilateral
negotiation as genuine. While we certainly want the two
countries to negotiate, the world must be alert and vigilant
SO that those bilateral negotiations will really be that, and
riot the imposition of the will of the stronger.
22. The rejection of the 1967 draft treaties was the result
of the fact that they were even more offensive than the
1903 Convention. The term “perpetuity” wasreplaced by a
date: up to the year 2067-that is to say, perpetuity in
numbers; it legalized the existence of military basesand of
the Southern Command, which so far, even with the
shameful Convention of 1903, has no legal justification. It
further intended, in exchange for all that, that they also be
given the exclusive right to build in Panama a new, sea-level
canal and a new canal zone on the basis of what is called an
open option with no commitment whatever.

28. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish).’The
Council has before it document S/10931/Rev.l, which
contains the draft resolution sponsored by Guinea, Kenya,
Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia.

23. The situation between Panama and the United States
is still

potentially explosive and liable to endanger international peace. Nine years of negotiation have not brought US
forward from the point of departure. True, a more flowery
and deceitful language has been developed in order to
maintain the statusquo. So far what has been intended is to

(The Presidentreadout the draft resolution] .

29. The Republic of Panama, with the co-sponsorship and
support of Guinea, Kenya, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia
3

is putting before the Security Council a basic problem
which affects international peace and security. Panama is
suffering the noxious consequences of a colonial situation.
My country has not completed its process of independence
with respect to a particular belt of its territory known as
the Panama Canal Zone. That process of independence will
be completed only when the presence of an alien Government-that is, the United States-in that Zone is ended, and
when that belt of territory is incorporated politically,
economically and culturally in the rest of the Republic, as
is called for by the United Nations in paragraph 6 of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), the Magna Carta
of decolonization. I think it appropriate to recall for the
record that the paragraph reads as follows:

proclaimed and repeated by the General Assembly. That
being the case, Panama is justified in invoking Article 103
of the Charter so that the United States will fulfi its duties
as a Member of the United Nations. That is to say: /al it
must respect Panama’s right to complete its process of
independence (Article 1, paragraph 2, of the Charter);(b) it
must refrain from the use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, in this
specific case, Panama (Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter); and (c) it should refrain and abstain from taking
any step that might jeopardize the territorial integrity and
the unity of Panama (General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV)).
35. We are convinced that the draft resolution we have
submitted will tend to achieve the objectives we have put
before the Council.

“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of
the national unity and the territorial integrity of a
country is incompatible with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.”

Mr. Boyd (Panama)took the Chair.

30. There can be no doubt that wherever the Charter of
the United Nations is violated, there is a danger to the
world peace and security which it is the basic objective of
that Charter to achieve. The members of the Council and
the observers are fully aware of the situation prevailing in
the territory under Panamanian sovereignty which is called
the Panama Canal Zone. There are foreign authorities and
laws there, and a foreign flag is flying there, and all that is
based upon a treaty whose signature did not have the
consent of Panama, as was explained very clearly and in
detail by the Minister for External Affairs of Costa Rica,
Mr. Gonzalez Facie [169&h meeting].

36. I have the honour to announce that the draft
resolution in document S/10932/Rev.l,
submitted by
Panama, Peru and Yugoslavia, now has three additional
co-sponsors: Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan.
37. I call on the representative of the United States, who
wishesto exercise his right of reply.
38. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I have listened
with attentiveness and respect to the views the distinguished Foreign Minister of Panama has expressed. It does
not surprise me that there are points that have been raised
on which our two governments disagree. If we have
differences-and we do-the most meaningful place where
we can discuss them is in direct negotiations, face-to-face,
as we both have a responsibility to do for the sake of our
own good relations and for the sake of international
understanding. So I invite the Foreign Minister, in a spirit
of respect for his views, to continue negotiations, to meet
us at the table.

31. The Council has been shown very clearly that in practice
there is a dismemberment of Panamanian soil, there is a
break in its territorial unity because of the presence of
United States authorities, who are applying juridical acts
based on laws that are not Panamanian and are using a
language that is not Panamanian.
32. There can be no doubt whatever that the existence of
a foreign Government on a part of our soil, a Government
that has usurped governmental functions and arbitrarily
excluded our legislation from the Panama Canal Zone,
breaks the national unity and, in practice, dismembers our
territory.

39. I do wish to reply, however, to comments about
American economic assistance. I am proud of our record, I
think it is unparalleled in the history of the world. Since the
Second World War, our nation has poured out more tllan
$100,000’million in economic assistance to nations WltiCh
needed that kind of aid. It is a record that few can match.
We have done this not because we expect plaudits but
because of our long tradition of assisting those in the
position where they need urgent assistance. Regardless of
what happens, I can assure the representatives at this table,
my Government will continue to provide that kind of
assistanceunselfishly and for the benefit of all of mankind.

33. I must stress to this world body that the Government
of the United States has recognized that the existence of
the Canal Zone and the way in which it is administered
stands in the way of our territorial integrity, In fact,
point 4 of the joint declaration of Presidents Robles and
Johnson of 24 September 1965 reads as follows:
“A primary objective of the new treaty will be to
provide for an appropriate political, economic, and social
integration of the area used in the canal operation with
the rest of the Republic of Panama.“2

40. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):Since
there are no more speakers on the list, and since tomorrow
is the last day of meetings, I intend, if I hear no objection,
to suspend the meeting until 8.30 p.m. so that members
may have consultations on the draft declaration of consensus with which we wish to conclude the general debate,
which ends today.

34. This colonial situation is obviously incompatible with
the Charter of the United Nations, and that has been
2 See The Department of State Bulletin,

vol.

The meeting was suspendedat 5.10 and resumed at
9.15 p.m.

LIII, No. 1371

(Washington,DC., U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965), p. 625.

4

41. The PRESIDENT
/iMe~~fati~n
from Spa&h): I
should like to draw the attention of members to two draft
resolutions which have been submitted for consideration.
The first is contained in document S/10931/Rev.l and has
been sponsored by Guinea, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the
Sudan and Yugoslavia. The second draft resolution is
contained in document S/10932/Rev.l and is sponsored by
the delegations of Guinea, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan
and Yugoslavia.

44. Mr. SEN (India): My suggestion-which is in line with
what the representative of Yugoslavia has said-is that we
not only adjourn this meeting but adjourn it until 11 a.m.
tomorrow. It is already well past 9 o’clock, and we do not
have much time left for a discussion tonight. If we are to
have fruitful discussion, I think we should allow for a few
hours tomorrow morning, So I would suggestthat we not
only adjourn but adjourn until 11 a.m. tomorrow-which is
in accordancewith rule 33, paragraph3.

42. Mr, MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): During the past two days,
and especially this afternoon, the members of the Council
have had extensive consultations with you, Mr. President,
and among themselves concerning the two draft resolutions
which you have just mentioned. We had earnestly hoped
that by this evening we would have arrived at some
concrete results about which we would have been able to
inform the Council. The consultations are still going on,
however, and I should like formally to propose, under rule
33 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Council, that
the Council adjourn until tomorrow morning to allow us
additional time for consultations.

45. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
proposal of the representative of Yugoslavia, with the
addition made by the representativeof India, is now before
the Council.
46. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation fvom Russian): With all due respect to the

views which have been expressed,I should personally prefer
to complete this work today so that tomorrow we might
perhaps have more time for other questions. But if the
majority of the members of the Council are in favour of
adjourning the meeting, then that is the Council’s will.
47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): AS
no other member of the Council wishes to speak, and asI
hear no objection, I take it that the proposal of the
representative of Yugoslavia,with the addition made by the
representative of India, hasbeen adopted by the Council.

43. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Council is now seized of a motion by the representative of
Yugoslavia calling for the adjournment of this meeting, in
accordance with rule 33 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to allow the consultations on the two draft
resolutions before the Council to continue.

The meeting rose at 9.20 p.m.

5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les sgences
d&ositaires
du mondc entier. Informer-vous
auprbs de votre libraire ou adressex-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes. New York ou Gengve.
ICAK

IIOJIY’IZITb

HBAAHHR

OP~AHHSAWiH

OFhEflNHEHHhIX

HAU2il-i

HaquR MO,X”O
KynW’rb B KHW)KHhlX Y&Pa3HHax H arewrcmax
a0 rwex pathwax
rmpa. Ham~lr’re
cnpamu
06 KmaHHIIx
a
BauxeM xwwio~
rdara3me
wnlx nmmme no anpecy:
Opramsaqwfl
06’hewweHHbIX
HaswB, Cewm
no nponame
mAamR,
Hbw-Ffopx
WH Xefieaa.
HJAaHWR

Op,-aHH3aWtH

06WAWHWHbIX

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las N&ones
Unidas estin en venta en Iibrerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas’partes
de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 ,(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73.82091-April

1976--1,925
