S/2015/475

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 June 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 28 February 2015 to 26 June 2015

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my previous
report of 28 February 2015 (S/2015/147).
2.
The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and along the Blue Line remained generally calm, despite the
tense regional context and following the serious breach of the cessation of hostilities
between Lebanon and Israel on 28 January (see S/2015/147). Overall, despite
escalatory rhetoric on both sides, the Lebanese and Israeli authorities displayed
resolve to maintain calm along the Blue Line, continued to engage constructively
with UNIFIL through the established liaison and coordination arrangements and
reaffirmed their commitment to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
There was no progress, however, on their outstanding obligations under the
resolution and no movement towards a permanent ceasefire.
3.
My Special Coordinator has remained closely engaged with the Governments
of Israel and Lebanon, and with all Lebanese parties, in an effort to preserve the
calm in Lebanon and ease political and security tensions. Fighting between
Hizbullah and extremist armed groups from the Syrian Arab Republic, including the
Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), in the border region
of Qalamoun presents an ongoing risk for the safety of the populations living in the
Beqaa, particularly the town of Arsal. The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed heavily
around the town in recent weeks and clashed with extremist armed groups,
including the Nusra Front and ISIL, to prevent further infiltration attempts into
Lebanon. During the reporting period, there were continued incidents of shooting,
shelling and air strikes from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon.
4.
Despite the threat posed by insecurity along the border area between Lebanon
and the Syrian Arab Republic, the security situation across most of Lebanon was
relatively stable during the reporting period. Security plans for the southern Beqaa
valley and southern suburbs of Beirut continue to be implemented. The security
forces carried out a number of arrests of alleged militants planning terrorist attacks,
including individuals suspected of belonging to the Nusra Front and ISIL.
15-10516 (E)

010715

*1510516*

S/2015/475

Negotiations to secure the safe release of Lebanese soldiers and security personnel
seized by the Nusra Front and ISIL in August 2014 have continued.
5.
On 25 May, Lebanon marked one year without a president of the Republic.
Twenty-four parliamentary sessions to elect a new president have been inquorate
owing to the continued boycott of the proceedings by members of Hizbullah and of
the Free Patriotic Movement from the 8 March bloc. In the context of the
presidential vacancy, on 19 May my Special Coordinator co -chaired a meeting of
the International Support Group for Lebanon at the invitati on of Prime Minister
Tammam Salam at the Grand Serail in Beirut. The Group expressed concern over
the vacuum in the presidency and its negative impact on the ability of Lebanon to
address the security, economic and social challenges facing the country. The Group
called on all Lebanese leaders to adhere to its Constitution and to the Taif
Agreement and the National Pact, to put the country’s stability and national interests
ahead of partisan politics and to show the necessary leadership and flexibility to
urgently resolve the issue. The Group also agreed on the need for sustained, unified
international support to preserve the country’s stability and security.
6.
Syrians fleeing the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic continue to seek
shelter in Lebanon. As at 4 June, there were 1,171,929 Syrian refugees registered
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
in Lebanon. In May, the Government of Lebanon asked UNHCR to suspend
registration of new refugees.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
7.
Ground violations of the Blue Line, mostly by shepherds and farmers, were
consistent with the seasonal pattern of the corresponding period of the previous
year. The Blue Line violations took place mainly in the areas of Shab’a Farms,
Bastara (Sector East) and Rumaysh (Sector West). Most ground violations were
brief, but on occasion shepherds with their flocks and farmers stayed south of t he
Blue Line for several hours, despite calls by UNIFIL to return north of the Blue
Line.
8.
The most serious ground violation of the Blue Line occurred on 10 March,
when six men in civilian attire, later identified as part of the Lebanese Armed
Forces intelligence branch, crossed south of the Blue Line, south of Kafer Chouba
(Sector East). The Israel Defense Forces fired several warning shots before the men
returned north of the Blue Line. UNIFIL conducted an investigation into the
incident and shared its findings and recommendations with the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the Israel Defense Forces on 17 April.
9.
On 9 June, a small group of civilians, including a member of the Lebanese
Parliament and journalists, held a peaceful demonstration at the Blue Line t o protest
recent construction works by the Israel Defense Forces on a patrol track and the
placement of concertina wire south of the Blue Line in the Shab’a Farms area.
Several demonstrators briefly crossed south of the Blue Line and hoisted a Lebanese
flag on the wire located approximately seven metres south of the Blue Line, despite

2/15

15-10516

S/2015/475

calls by UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces for the protestors to remain north
of the Blue Line. UNIFIL used its good offices to impress upon the parties the need
to ensure that there was no rise in tension or escalation and prevent any
destabilizing activity.
10. Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued almost daily with unmanned
aerial vehicles, and often with fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets. UNIFIL
also observed a number of Israeli overflights using helicopters. The Lebanese
Government protested the violations. UNIFIL protested the overflights and urged
the Israeli authorities to halt those violations of resolution 1701 (2006).
11. Israel also continued to occupy northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of
the Blue Line, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty.
Further to my earlier reports, Israel has not responded to the proposal by UNIFIL,
submitted to both parties in 2011, concerning security arrangements aimed at
facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the area. The Lebanese
Armed Forces conveyed in July 2011 its approval of the proposal. UNIFIL has
renewed its efforts to facilitate the secure use by Lebanese civilians of the road
lying north of the occupied area.
12. The latter part of the reporting period has been characterized by escalatory
rhetoric involving claims by both Hizbullah and Israel of their preparedness for any
possible resumption of hostilities across the Blue Line. The Israel Defense Forces
continued to allege that Hizbullah was maintaining military infrastructure and
equipment inside populated areas in southern Lebanon and that unauthorized
weapons were being transferred into the UNIFIL area of operations. In a letter dated
27 May addressed to me (S/2015/382), the Permanent Representative of Israel stated
that Hizbullah was using “dozens of villages in southern Lebanon as military
staging grounds, civilian centres as weapons depots and its people as human
shields”. The letter referred to media reports as revealing of Hizbullah’s “varied
efforts to bypass” resolution 1701 (2006), asserting that “the threats are very real
and the danger is imminent”. The letter further stated that Israel would hold the
Government of Lebanon responsible for any attack originating from its territory and
reserved the right to take all necessary measures in self-defence. In a letter dated
10 June addressed to me (S/2015/428), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
recalled complaints of Lebanon about Israeli “standing contravention” and “ongoing
violations” of resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. The letter further
complained that Israeli officials had made “serious threats” on the Lebanese
Government, had sought to “intimidate its people” and had spread allegations “in
order to justify what they call the inevitable future war”.
13. In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL does not proactively search for
weapons in the south. UNIFIL cannot enter or search private property unless there is
credible evidence of a violation of resolution 1701 (2006), including an imminent
threat of hostile activity from that location. In situations in which specific
information is received regarding the illegal presence of armed personnel, weapons
or infrastructure inside its area of operations, UNIFIL, in cooperation with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, remains determined to act with all means available within
its mandate and capabilities. To date, UNIFIL has neither been provided with, nor
found, evidence of the unauthorized transfer of arms into its area of operations.
14. UNIFIL observed civilians with unauthorized weapons in the area of
operations, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). Those mostly involved

15-10516

3/15

S/2015/475

individuals carrying hunting weapons. However, there were a number of instances
where small arms, including rifles and, at least on one occasion, rocket -propelled
grenades, were fired during commemorative events, including funerals. In two such
instances, a falling bullet penetrated the roof of the living quarters within a UNIFIL
base, causing no injury to personnel. In addition, on 18 March, five men were
observed carrying assault rifles at a funeral in the vicinity of Jwayyaa (Sector West).
On 25 March, in Srifa (Sector West), UNIFIL observed four men carrying assault
rifles. On 26 May, UNIFIL observed two men in separate funeral convoys in Tibnin
and Yazire (Sector West) carrying weapons and firing in the air. On 2 June, UNIFIL
saw one man with an assault rifle near Marjayoun (Sector East). In all cases,
UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces of the violations. The Lebanese
Armed Forces has primary responsibility for ensuring that the area between the Blue
Line and the Litani River is free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons, other
than those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL.
15. UNIFIL continued generally to enjoy full freedom of movement throughout its
area of operations, despite three notable incidents. On 7 April, in the vicinity of
Majda Zun (Sector West) a group of civilians threw stones at a UNIFIL patrol and
one of its vehicles was rammed by another vehicle. On proceeding further, the
patrol was blocked in the neighbouring village of Shihin (Sector West) and the
UNIFIL personnel were threatened by a larger crowd. The obstruction was cleared
after discussions with the local population with the assistance of the Lebanese
Armed Forces. UNIFIL strongly protested the incident to the Lebanese Armed
Forces. In addition, UNIFIL freedom of movement was obstructed in one instance
when a UNIFIL vehicle patrol was denied access to a road close to At Tiri by a
group of civilians on 5 April. The Lebanese Armed Forces intervened and the
UNIFIL patrol was able to proceed.
16. In a case of unfriendly behaviour on 16 April, a civilian approached UNIFIL
military police personnel who were conducting speed checks in the vicinity of
Rumaysh, photographed them and demanded their speed detector. The UNIFIL
personnel refused to hand over the equipment.
17. On 18 March in the vicinity of Rumaysh, an Israel Defense Forces tank
pointed its main weapon across the Blue Line and tracked a foot patrol of Observer
Group Lebanon moving approximately 60 metres away. UNIFIL protested the
incident to the Israel Defense Forces.
18. UNIFIL relations with the local population remained largely positive as the
Mission sought to deepen its cooperation with the communities present in the area
of operations. UNIFIL, including the Head of Mission and Force Commander,
maintained intensive engagement with local authorities, religious leaders and civil
society representatives to promote better understanding of the Mission’s mandate
and activities. In accordance with the strategic priorities of UNIFIL (see
S/2012/151), UNIFIL collaborated with the United Nations Development
Programme in organizing training for 50 municipal police officials to further good
governance in southern Lebanon. A tree-planting campaign, in collaboration with
the Ministry of Environment, was aimed at reducing the Mission’s environmental
footprint. UNIFIL also participated in the “Greening the South” campaign, whereby
thousands of trees were planted across the area of operations. In addition to no -cost
initiatives, work on implementing quick-impact projects continued, and UNIFIL

4/15

15-10516

S/2015/475

contingents provided veterinary, medical and dental assistance to the local
communities.
19. UNIFIL conducted on average 11,000 operational activities monthly, including
patrols, checkpoints and observation tasks. Approximately 10 per cent of UNIFIL
activities were carried out in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
The deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces south of the Litani River remained
generally at the same level of approximately two brigades. UNIFIL conducted
166 joint exercises, workshops and courses with the Lebanese Armed Forces, with
the aim of improving the tactical and operational capabilities of the Lebanese
Armed Forces. The joint training efforts further developed the coordination between
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces and enhanced the effectiveness of
combined operations at operational and tactical levels.
20. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force, in accordance with its mandate, carried out
maritime interdiction activities and provided training for the Lebanese Armed
Forces Navy. During the reporting period, the Maritime Task Force hailed
1,745 ships and the Lebanese authorities inspected 363 vessels to ensure that no
unauthorized weapons or related materiel were transferred into Lebanon. In a
continued effort to strengthen the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces, the
UNIFIL Maritime Task Force conducted a total of 313 trainings and exerci ses for
the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy.
21. The maritime border between Israel and Lebanon is disputed, and incidents in
the area occurred that had the potential to increase tensions. During the reporting
period, UNIFIL maintained a visible presence in the southern part of its area of
maritime operations. UNIFIL has no mandate to monitor the line of buoys, which
was unilaterally installed by Israel and is not recognized by the Government of
Lebanon. During the reporting period, the Israel Defense Forces car ried out frequent
maintenance activity at the line of buoys, continuing at times for days. On several
occasions, Israel Defense Forces patrol boats, positioned south of the line of buoys,
fired machine gun rounds and flares in a westerly direction.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
22. UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements with the parties remain the key
mechanism to defuse tensions on the ground and to address issues of mutual
concern in order to safeguard the cessation of hostilities, ensu re respect for the Blue
Line and promote security and stability in southern Lebanon. The parties continue to
engage with UNIFIL on all levels in a constructive and positive manner to help
reduce tensions. UNIFIL urged the parties to further utilize the lia ison and
coordination mechanism by providing prior intimation through UNIFIL of any
planned activities close to the Blue Line in order to avoid any related
misunderstandings or apprehensions. There has been no progress towards the
establishment of a UNIFIL liaison office in Tel Aviv.
23. Palestinian commemorations of Land Day, Al-Nakba and An-Naksa took place
peacefully on 30 March, 15 May and 5 June after close liaison by UNIFIL with the
parties, bilaterally and through the tripartite mechanism, and as the Lebanese
authorities continued to exercise control on access and public gatherings near the
Blue Line on those occasions.

15-10516

5/15

S/2015/475

24. The tripartite forum continues to be convened regularly by UNIFIL with the
participation of representatives of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel
Defense Forces, serving as the Mission’s main liaison and coordination tool for
addressing all security and military operational issues relating to the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006). There have been two tripartite meetings , on 18 March
and 11 May, since my previous report.
25. The first meeting included a review of the outcomes of the UNIFIL
investigations into the 28 January incident, which was transmitted on 17 April to the
Israel Defense Forces and to the Lebanese Armed Forces. The UNIFIL
investigations reconfirmed the preliminary facts of the incident as set out in
paragraphs 9 and 10 of my previous report. In the tripartite meeting, UNIFIL
reiterated to the parties its recommendations aimed at, inter alia, preventing an y
further hostile activity from the UNIFIL area of operations, preserving the integrity
of the Blue Line, taking further steps to ensure that no illicit arms are present in the
area of operations and protecting the safety and security of UNIFIL personnel.
26. Other areas of focus at the tripartite meetings included ground violations of the
Blue Line, Israeli air violations and the lack of progress on the withdrawal of the
Israel Defense Forces from northern Ghajar. Israeli allegations of Hizbullah
activities near the Blue Line remained a contentious point of discussion between the
parties. Both parties expressed renewed interest in engaging bilaterally with UNIFIL
to find practical localized solutions to the seasonal violations of the Blue Line.
27. Progress in the visible marking of the Blue Line continued. As at 12 June, the
parties had agreed to mark 313 out of a total of 527 Blue Line points. Of the
313 agreed points, UNIFIL demining teams have cleared access to 312 points,
249 of which have been measured. Some 231 Blue Line markers have been
constructed and 216 have been verified by both parties.
28. In line with the strategic priorities of UNIFIL to increase the capacity of the
Lebanese Armed Forces, UNIFIL continued to support the Lebanese Armed Force s
in the implementation of the strategic dialogue plan, which is an integral part of the
Lebanese Armed Forces’ capabilities development plan and complements the efforts
of the International Support Group for Lebanon to bolster the capacity of the
Lebanese Armed Forces. The strategic dialogue steering committee, including
representatives of the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL, met on 28 April to
update a list of the imminent needs of the Lebanese Armed Forces for tasks
mandated under resolution 1701 (2006) in the area of operations, to be presented to
international donors. The strategic dialogue subcommittee on training decided to
adopt the “training of trainers” approach to enhance the sustainability of the joint
training activities between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces.

C.

Disarming armed groups
29. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control
of the Lebanese State, in violation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006)
and 1701 (2006), continues to restrict the State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty
and authority over its territory. During the reporting period, Hizbullah Secretary General Hassan Nasrallah acknowledged again publicly that Hizbullah has a
substantial and sophisticated military capacity, separate from that of the Lebanese
State, which Hizbullah claims serves as a deterrent against potential aggression

6/15

15-10516

S/2015/475

from Israel. Recent media reports have quoted Hizbullah sources purporting to show
the presence of military capabilities held by Hizbullah in southe rn Lebanon and
Hizbullah’s readiness to use such capabilities. There have been no meetings of the
National Dialogue during the reporting period and no other formal discussion of
Hizbullah’s arms among Lebanese parties.
30. Security forces reported several successful operations to prevent terrorist
activities and arrest alleged terrorists. Lebanese and Syrian nationals reportedly
belonging to a number of organizations, including the Nusra Front and ISIL, were
arrested in towns across Lebanon. On 20 May, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device was discovered and disarmed close to a Lebanese Armed Forces checkpoint
in Arsal.
31. Negotiations have continued for the release of the 26 hostages held by the
Nusra Front and ISIL, amidst concerns that some of the hostages held by ISIL may
have been moved to Raqqa in the Syrian Arab Republic. During the reporting
period, two Lebanese nationals and a Syrian national were arrested on suspicion of
having played a role in the abduction of the hostages.
32. There has been no progress on the dismantling of military bases maintained by
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada. In 2006, it was decided in the National Dialogue that the bases should
be dismantled. The existence of the bases continues to compromise Lebanese
sovereignty and impede the ability of the State to monitor and control effectively
parts of the Lebanese-Syrian border.
33. The situation in the Palestinian camp of Ein el-Helweh has been tense during
the reporting period following the murder of a Lebanese national affiliated with the
“Hizbullah Resistance Brigades” on 5 April and a series of other assassination
attempts. The Joint Security Force continues its efforts to maintain stability in the
camp and has now expanded its deployment to additional areas inside the camp.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
34. In its resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council decided that all States
should prevent the sale or the supply of arms and related materiel to entities or
individuals in Lebanon by their nationals or from their territories or using their flag
vessels or aircraft. In the same resolution, the Council also called upon the
Government of Lebanon to secure its borders and other entry points so as to pr event
the entry into Lebanon without its consent of arms and related materiel.
35. Representatives of the Government of Israel have consistently alleged that
there are significant ongoing arms transfers to Hizbullah across the Lebanese -Syrian
border, and that Hizbullah has now amassed an arsenal of over 100,000 missiles and
rockets, much of which Israel claims is located in civilian residential areas. In a
speech on 24 May, Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah stated that
Hizbullah possesses the highest military capability since the organization was
created and, in the event of an attack by Israel, it is prepared to use its capabilities
to respond from both Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations
takes the allegations seriously but is not currently in a position to verify them
independently.

15-10516

7/15

S/2015/475

36. Fighting in the Qalamoun region of the Syrian Arab Republic continued during
the reporting period, as did reports of the movement of fighters and arms trafficking
across the border between the two countries. Hizbullah has openly acknowledged its
engagement in the Qalamoun region and in fighting against the Nusra Front in the
un-delineated border area between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, including
near the Lebanese towns of Arsal, Brital and Tufayl. A number of funerals for
Hizbullah fighters killed in the Syrian Arab Republic were held during the reporting
period. There have also been reports of the deaths of Lebanese citizens, including
members of the Nusra Front and ISIL, in fighting in the Syrian conflict.
37. During the reporting period, there was an increase in cross-border fire from
the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon. There were 87 incidents of shooting,
10 incidents of shelling and 10 rockets fired into Lebanon, and at least 2 2 airstrikes
by Syrian Government aircraft on Lebanese territory.
38. The Lebanese Armed Forces deployed along the eastern Lebanese -Syrian
border to defend the civilian population living in those areas against infiltration
attempts by Syrian armed opposition groups and extremist elements from the Nusra
Front and ISIL. On 16 March and 2 April, the Lebanese Armed Forces clashed with
armed elements at Wadi Hmeid and prevented them from entering the town of Arsal.
On 7 April, Lebanese army units seized a position controlled by the Nusra Front at
al Mukhairmeh on the outskirts of Ras Baalbek, where there were further clashes on
16 April. The Lebanese Armed Forces have shelled areas around Arsal to prevent
positions from being established around the town. On 4 June the Cabinet authorized
the Lebanese Armed Forces to take the measures necessary to defend the country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
39. During the reporting period, international support was provided to the
Lebanese Armed Forces to enhance its capability to protect Lebanon from terrorist
threats and to secure the border with the Syrian Arab Republic. On 20 April, the first
shipment of French arms under the $3 billion grant from Saudi Arabia arrived in
Lebanon, and other bilateral partners have also provided military equipment and
training.
40. While the number of registered refugees remains at approximately the same
level as in my previous report, refugees are spread over 1,170 communities across
the country, including 55,833 in the UNIFIL area of operations. There are a further
18,849 non-Syrian refugees registered in Lebanon, predominantly from Iraq. There
is ongoing implementation of the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan and 100 partners
are now operating across 55 per cent of Lebanese territory. S ome 21,000 Lebanese
returnees from the Syrian Arab Republic have also been registered by
the International Organization for Migration but estimates suggest that around
50,000 nationals have returned to Lebanon.
41. New entry and residency rules for Syrian nationals since January 2015 restrict
admission to Lebanon to all but exceptional humanitarian circumstances. UNHCR
was requested by the Government of Lebanon on 5 May 2015 to temporarily
suspend new registrations of refugees and to deregister 2,626 refu gees from the
UNHCR registration database that had been registered since 5 January 2015.
UNHCR is presently leading discussions with the Ministry of Social Affairs on
future modalities to assist registered Syrian refugees.

8/15

15-10516

S/2015/475

42. Conditions for refugees in Lebanon are deteriorating. Refugees remain at risk
of eviction from their dwellings and face increased challenges in residing legally in
Lebanon, making them increasingly vulnerable to arrest and other forms of abuse.
Women and children constitute 80 per cent of the refugee population. There
continue to be reports of early and forced marriage, and survival sex, particularly
among refugee women and girls. Two thirds of the 53,000 children born to Syrian
refugee parents since March 2011 do not have a birth certificate.
43. Over the course of the past five months, funding shortfalls have reduced food
assistance to Syrian refugees by 60 per cent and over 103,000 Syrians no longer
receive cash assistance. Over 300,000 refugee children remain without access to any
education programmes. On 16 April, the Ministry of Education committed to
doubling enrolment rates by increasing enrolment of 200,000 children in formal
education and facilitating the admission of a further 100,000 refugee children in
accelerated learning programmes, contingent upon international financing.
44. Very few individual Palestine refugees have entered Lebanon from the Syrian
Arab Republic during the reporting period following the restrictions imposed on
their entry by the Government of Lebanon in May 2014. The total number of
Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic in Lebanon remains stable at
45,150 registered by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Those refugees continue to face restrictions
on renewing their legal status in Lebanon. On 22 May, cuts to assistance were
announced for the Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic, who will
have their $100 cash assistance for shelter suspended in July 2015. An estimated
3,000 Palestinian refugee children are currently out of school.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
45. Five manual mine clearance teams, one explosives ordnance disposal team and
one mechanical mine clearance team from UNIFIL troop -contributing countries
were validated and deployed in the UNIFIL area of operations. UNIFIL cleared
more than 468 square metres of contaminated land to provide access to Blue Line
points during the period from 28 February 2015 to 10 June 2015. In addition,
15 anti-personnel mines were located and destroyed. Furthermore, the United
Nations Mine Action Service team conducted 12 validation events, 26 quality
assurance visits to operational or completed sites, 6 training support events and
113 coordination meetings, briefings and demonstrations.
46. During the reporting period, three incidents related to explosive remnants of
war and landmines occurred in the UNIFIL area of operations. An explosion on
27 March, near Zibqin (Sector West), that was apparently caused by a cluster
munition, resulted in the death of one child and injured four other children. On
14 April, near Blida (Sector East), a civilian who walked into a marked minefield
lost his leg upon activating an anti-personnel mine. On 26 May, in Maroun ar Ras
(Sector West), a civilian truck using a local road was damaged by an anti-personnel
mine.

15-10516

9/15

S/2015/475

F.

Delineation of borders
47. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the
Lebanese-Syrian border during the reporting period, including in areas where it is
uncertain or disputed, as called for in Security Council resolutions 1680 (2006) and
1701 (2006). Extending the authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout all
Lebanese territory and enabling the Lebanese Armed Forces and security forces to
secure borders to prevent the entry of arms or related materiel necessitates the
delineation and demarcation of the border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic as soon as practicable.
48. There has also been no progress on the issue of the Shab’a Farms. In a letter
dated 16 March addressed to me (S/2015/184), the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic stated that the delineation of borders in the Shab’a Farms area
should take place after the Israeli occupation of that area has come to an end in
accordance with relevant resolutions. There has still been no reaction to the
provisional definition of that area contained in my report of 30 October 2007 on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2007/641) from either Israel or the
Syrian Arab Republic.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
49. UNIFIL continuously reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measure s
and closely coordinated them with the Lebanese authorities. Force protection works
to upgrade installations and assets are ongoing. Stringent security measures remain
in force in a part of Sector East of the UNIFIL area of operations.
50. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings at the Lebanese Military Court
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against
UNIFIL. In the case of a serious attack against Spanish peacekeepers in 2007, the
investigation against an arrested suspect has been concluded. In the case of a serious
attack perpetrated in 2008, a hearing at the Military Court of Appeal was conducted
on 17 March 2015, and the next hearing is scheduled to take place on 1 October
2015. In three cases of serious attacks perpetrated in 2011, the investigation is
ongoing. In a case of terror intent opened in January 2014, a hearing at the
Permanent Military Court is scheduled to take place on 10 July 2015. With a view to
enhancing the Mission’s cooperation with the highest judicial authorities, the
UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander met with the President of the
Supreme Judicial Council, the Prosecutor General and officials from the Military
Court on 22 May.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
51. As at 31 May 2015, UNIFIL consisted of 10,463 military personnel from
39 troop-contributing countries, including 398 women, as well as 272 international
and 600 national civilian staff, including 82 and 150 women, respectively. In
addition, 52 military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization, including 4 women, are also part of UNIFIL. UNIFIL is working to

10/15

15-10516

S/2015/475

increase the number of civilian and military women deployed, with a view to
reducing the gender imbalance in the Mission.

V. Observations
52. I welcome the current calm and stability in the UNIFIL area of operations and
along the Blue Line, particularly as it follows the serious breach of the cessation of
hostilities that took place on 28 January. I am concerned, however, by the escalatory
media and public statements from Israel and Hizbullah, which contribute to a
climate of tension. Renewed armed conflict is not inevitable. Both the Israeli and
Lebanese Governments have a responsibility, and indeed an obligation, to promote
stability, take all possible steps to prevent any risk of incident that could jeopardize
the cessation of hostilities and make good on their commitment to implement fully
resolution 1701 (2006) in all its provisions. I therefore renew my call on a ll
concerned to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric and threats of the use of force that
heighten the risk of escalation and miscalculation. I take this opportunity to recall
the consequences of the 2006 conflict and the even more dangerous scale of any
renewed confrontation and to remind all parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
53. The Security Council has repeatedly called upon both Israel and Lebanon to
take concrete steps towards a permanent ceasefire and the full implementa tion of
resolution 1701 (2006). In an increasingly volatile regional environment, and in the
light of the heightened risks of miscalculation, meaningful progress towards the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) is more important than ever. Building on
the confidence that has been established through the work of my Special
Coordinator and UNIFIL, I call on both parties to make a renewed, concerted effort
towards resolving the outstanding provisions of the resolution. I stand ready to
assist the parties in that regard. I also urge the parties to continue actively
participating in UNIFIL conflict-prevention and confidence-building initiatives in
order to keep southern Lebanon and the Blue Line stable. There are steps that the
parties could take to build confidence and I ask them to seize the moment to find
agreement on practical localized arrangements that would mitigate the risk for
tension and incidents along the Blue Line.
54. I regret that there has been no progress on the Shab’a Farms area in
accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006). Recent developments on
the ground have shown the potential for destabilization that comes from not
addressing that issue and underscore the need for constructive progress rather than
further delays. I reiterate my call on the Syrian Arab Republic and Israel to submit
their responses to the provisional definition of the Shab’a Farms area that I provided
in my report of 30 October 2007, and I encourage the parties to work with my
Special Coordinator and with UNIFIL to achieve resolution of the issue.
55. The occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line
by the Israel Defense Forces is a continuing violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
Israel has an obligation to withdraw its armed forces from the area, in accordance
with the resolution. I urge the Israeli authorities to take steps to that end and
encourage them to make further use of the presence of UNIFIL and its liaison and
coordination apparatus to facilitate a smooth and secure withdra wal from the area.

15-10516

11/15

S/2015/475

56. It remains a matter of serious concern that Israel continues to violate Lebanese
airspace on an almost daily basis, in complete disregard of the sovereignty of
Lebanon and the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006). I once again call o n the
Government of Israel to cease all overflights of Lebanese territory and territorial
waters.
57. I also remind the Lebanese authorities of their primary responsibility to ensure
that the area between the Litani River and the Blue Line is free of unaut horized
weapons. Recent incidents involving the use of assault weapons, small arms and
rocket-propelled grenades, and the missile attack on 28 January by Hizbullah on an
Israeli military convoy across the Blue Line, demonstrate that unauthorized
weapons are still present in the area. Those incidents, coupled with Hizbullah’s self declared capabilities in the south, are of grave concern. I once again call on the
Lebanese authorities to ensure that there are no unauthorized weapons in the
UNIFIL area of operations, in accordance with resolution 1701 (2006).
58. There continues to be progress on the visible marking of the Blue Line owing
to the commitment from both the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense
Forces. I encourage the parties to continue working on finding points of agreement
through constructive engagement with UNIFIL, including in relation to those
stretches of the Blue Line where marking is deemed contentious by the parties. The
visible marking of the Blue Line enhances the monitoring o f violations and greatly
contributes to its integrity. I also remind all parties that full respect for the Blue
Line is a critical factor in maintaining stability and calm in the area and that any
deliberate violation of the Blue Line is unacceptable.
59. I am deeply concerned that the vacuum in the presidency of the country
continues to seriously undermine the ability of Lebanon to address the security,
economic and social challenges facing the country. I commend Prime Minister
Salam’s leadership in upholding the unity of Government and call on all parties to
work constructively to enable the Government to function effectively. I call on all
Lebanese leaders to adhere to its Constitution and to the Taif Agreement and
National Pact, to put aside partisan politics by placing the country’s stability and
national interests first and to show the necessary leadership and flexibility to elect a
president. The presidency is and must remain a Lebanese process, free from foreign
interference. At the same time, it is crucial that international support for Lebanon is
paralleled by meaningful action by the country’s political leaders. The continued
boycott of parliamentary sessions by members of Parliament undermines the
country’s democratic tradition. Members of Parliame nt should fulfil their obligation
and convene to elect a president without further delay.
60. I remain deeply concerned by the threat posed by violent extremist groups to
the Lebanese population living in eastern areas bordering the Syrian Arab Republic.
I highly commend the strong and determined role of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
protecting the country’s border areas and defending its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and for upholding its independence as the sole legitimate State institution
in that regard. I also reiterate my call on those holding Lebanese soldiers and
security service personnel hostage to release them immediately. I urge all Lebanese
political leaders to remain united in support of the Lebanese Armed Forces and to
avoid creating further vacuums in senior military and security positions at this
crucial time for the country’s security and stability.

12/15

15-10516

S/2015/475

61. I welcome the ongoing international support to the Lebanese Armed Forces
and security forces to strengthen their capability to addre ss the multiple security
challenges Lebanon faces. I note that it advances a key component of work of the
International Support Group for Lebanon. In that regard, I welcome the arrival of
the first shipment of French support to the Lebanese Armed Forces un der the
generous grant from Saudi Arabia, as well as continuing bilateral assistance from
the United States of America and others. I encourage bilateral partners and donors to
continue their support where the Lebanese Armed Forces is most critically in nee d
in order to give it the necessary operational advantage to effectively address
security threats, including for counter-terrorism and the further capability to deploy
along the country’s borders, as well as in the context of the strategic dialogue plan
as an integral part of the Lebanese Armed Forces’ capabilities development plan.
62. I condemn the shelling, shooting and aerial incursions into Lebanese border
areas from the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the movement of armed fighters and
war materiel between the countries. The lack of a delineated, demarcated border
between the two countries is no justification for the continued violations of the
sovereignty of Lebanon. I call on the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
groups fighting in the Qalamoun and other areas bordering Lebanon to cease such
violations and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
63. I condemn the participation of Lebanese citizens in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic in breach of the policy of disassociation adopted by the Government
of Lebanon and of the principles in the Baabda Declaration, which had been agreed
by all of the country’s political parties in June 2012 and the importance of which
has been reaffirmed by the Security Council. I call on all Lebanese parties to step
back from any involvement in the Syrian conflict, consistent with their
commitments in that regard.
64. I am increasingly concerned at rising radicalization in the region and the threat
it poses to Lebanon. I welcome dialogue between Lebanese parties aimed at easing
tensions between and within communities and encourage the country’s leaders to
proactively advocate for moderation and compromise during this difficult period. In
a context of polarization, the proliferation of arms outside of the authority of the
Lebanese State is a serious threat to stability and security. I call on Member States
to uphold their obligation under resolution 1701 (2006) to prevent the sale or supply
of arms or related materiel to entities or individuals in Lebanon.
65. The maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups outside the control
of the State continues to pose a threat to Lebanese sovereignty and stability,
and contradicts the country’s obligations under resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006). Lebanon cannot afford the serious unforeseen consequences of the use
of those arms should they provoke conflict. It is vital that once a new president is
elected the National Dialogue meet again as a matter of priority to address issues of
national importance, including the arms held by Hizbullah and other groups. It
remains important that earlier decisions of the National Dialogue be implemented,
specifically those relating to the disarmament of non -Lebanese groups and the
dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.
66. The need to support the Lebanese judicial and security authorities is clear, and
I urge them to continue their efforts to combat impunity. In that regard, I note the
decision of 13 May sentencing former Minister Michel Samaha to prison for his part

15-10516

13/15

S/2015/475

in a plot to foment sectarian violence in Lebanon. I also call on all parties to
cooperate fully with the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The continuing t rial sends a
message that impunity will not be tolerated.
67. I thank the Member States participating in the International Support Group for
Lebanon for their continued commitment and welcome the Group’s statement
following the meeting convened on 19 May b y Prime Minister Salam at the Grand
Serail and co-chaired by my Special Coordinator. With the continued united support
of the Security Council as expressed in its presidential statement of 19 March 2015
(S/PRST/2015/7), the Group remains an important forum to ensure strong,
coordinated support for Lebanese resilience and generate momentum for the
assistance urgently needed to preserve stability and security in the country. That
support is particularly important to maintain given the increasing pressures on
Lebanon and the growing threats from regional developments. I encourage the
Group to continue to look for opportunities to meet at the appropriate level to
engage on its support agenda.
68. Five years into the Syrian crisis, I acknowledge the continued efforts by
Lebanon to host and assist refugees. I take note of the Government’s latest decisions
and urge the Lebanese authorities to continue working closely with the United
Nations, especially UNHCR, and partners, including the upholding of human rights
and humanitarian principles. On 31 March, I attended the Third International
Pledging Conference for Syria, held in Kuwait City, where international donors
pledged $3.8 billion to address the humanitarian needs caused by the Syrian
conflict. Given the scale of the refugee crisis in Lebanon and the potentially serious
implications for the country’s future stability, I reiterate my call on donors to
respond generously and as a matter of urgency to aid the country’s ability to manage
its refugee crisis. As at 26 May, only 21 per cent of the $2.1 billion in funding
requirements for the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan had been met.
69. I welcome the continued commitment of the Palestinian leadership to
disassociate the Palestinian camps in Lebanon from the violence in the region. The
need to improve the living conditions of Palestine refugees in Lebanon, without
prejudice to the resolution of the refugee question in the context of a comprehensive
peace settlement, is ever more urgent. Palestine refugees displaced in Lebanon from
the Syrian Arab Republic are becoming increasingly vulnerable. I encourage donors
to be forthcoming in their support of UNRWA to enable it to effectively assist them.
70. For both Lebanon and Israel, exploration and development of their respective
offshore oil and gas resources are national priorities. During the reporting period,
both countries indicated their wish to resolve the dispute over the maritime
exclusive economic zone, though no progress was made in that regard. I again
encourage both Lebanon and Israel to proceed with steps that would allow for
resolution of that issue and reiterate that the United Nations stands ready to assist if
both parties so request.
71. The challenges to the stability and security of Lebanon have become more
complex, including as a result of the situation in the region. The United Nations is
working as one in Lebanon with Lebanese and international partners to address
multiple challenges to peace and security, on stabilization and on the provision of
vital humanitarian and developmental support, with a strong and tangible
commitment to human rights. Particular emphasis is also placed on the needs of
vulnerable Lebanese host communities. I encourage all stakeholders to work with

14/15

15-10516

S/2015/475

my Special Coordinator and UNIFIL to achieve those goals through such a holistic
approach aimed at the whole of Lebanon. Progress on the implementation of
outstanding relevant Security Council resolutions will be central to longer -term
solutions to end conflict in the region, and to a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East.
72. I extend my sincere appreciation to all Member States contributing troops and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization. I thank my Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the
UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, and the personnel of their
respective missions, all of whom continue to play a critical role in helping to
promote stability along the Blue Line and in Lebanon at a critical time for the
country and for the region.

15-10516

15/15
