UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2230th

MEETING:

UN

uRA~‘f

13 JUNE 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2230)

. ... .. ... ... .. .. .. ... ... .. ... ... .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/13972 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2230

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been ,applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2230th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 13 June 1980, at 11 a.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

4. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

agenda (S/Ag&la/2230)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/13972 and
Add-l)
The meeting

was called to order at ii.35
Adoption

a.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/13972 and Add.1)

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the- consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mavrommatis
(Cyprus), Mr. Katapodis .(Greece) and Mr. Eralp
(Turkey) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to recall that, in
the course of. the consultations which took place
yesterday, -members of the Council agreed that the
Council should extend an invitation to Mr. Nail Atalay
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. If
I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decides to invite Mr. Atalay under rule 39.
It was so decided.

3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them the report by the Secretary-General on
the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the period
1 December 1979to 31 May 1980[S/Z3972 and AddJ].
Members of the Council also have before them the
text of a draft resolution [S/13993], which has been
prepared in the course of consultations.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted
none (resolution 472 (1980)).
One member
voting.

(China)

ey 14 votes to

did not participate

in the

5. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the SecretaryGeneral, who wishes to make a statement.
6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The Council has
just adopted a resolution extending once again the
stationing of the Unite’d Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP) and requesting me to continue
my mission of good offices. In this connexion, I deem
it fitting to give the Council a brief account of developments over the past fortnight relating to my efforts to
bring about a resumption of the intercommunal
talks.
7. In my report of 3 June [S/13972], I mentioned
that I had asked Mr. Perez de CuCllar, Under-Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, to undertake
on my behalf a visit to Cyprus for consultations with
the two sides in the framework of my mission of good
offices. I stated that the purpose of the visit would be
to clarify the situation as regards the difficulties that
stood in the way of a resumption of the negotiating
process .in Cyprus. Mr. P&z de CuCllar returned
from his mission yesterday and has reported to me in
detail of his efforts.
8. Mr. Perez de Cueliar arrived in Nicosia on 5 June
and held intensive high-level consultations there with
both parties during the period from 6 to 8 June. He
proceeded afterwards to visit Ankara and then Athens
for consultations at the ministerial level in Turkey and
Greece, as both countries are interested parties. The

thrust of the consultations was to explore the possibility of finding a mutually acceptable procedural
device that would enable the parties to return to the
negotiating table.

which the success of the search for an agreed settlement of the problem ultimately depends will extend
their increased co-operation to me, so as to overcome
the persistent difficulties that have hitherto impeded
our efforts.

9. Members of the Council will recall that on 28 March
I had presented to the parties a new suggestion
according to which my representative would open
the resumed talks by delivering a statement which
would be noted by the interlocutors. The Greek
Cypriot interlocutor would then, as requested, be
able to put on record his reservation concerning the
interpretation of the terms. Ibi-zonality” and “security”.

14. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Cyprus.
15. Mr. MAVROMMATIS (Cyprus): Mr. President,
I should like at the outset to extend to you the heartfelt congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June. During the last two weeks we have
been given ample opportunity to admire your many
skills and your handling of the consultations that
preceded the adoption today of resolution 472 (1980)
as further proof of the fact that the conduct of the
Council’s business is in very safe and competent hands.

10. Neither party accepted this suggestion in full. The
Turkish Cypriot side accepted the opening statement
but maintained that neither party should voice any
reservations to it. The Greek Cypriot side would
only accept the opening statement with amendments.
Alternatively, they offered to resume the talks
simply on the basis of the 19 May 1979 accord

16. I should also like to thank you and through you
all the members of the Council, not only for atfording
me the opportunity to address the Council but also
for renewing the mandate of UNFICYP, which renewal
was essential, given all the circumstances still
prevailing in Cyprus as a result of the complete disregard by Turkey of all the United Nations resolutions.

[S/13369, para. 511.

11. In the course of his consultations last week with
leaders of the two parties in Cyprus, Mr. P&ez de
CuelIar explored the possibility of resolving the
impasse by the following arrangement, which is, of
course, a procedural arrangement. -My representative
would deliver the opening statement I have .just
mentioned. The interlocutors would then remain
silent. My representative would then point out in addition that the statement represented the understanding
of the Secretary-General, and that both sides would
have the opportunity to express their opinion in depth
about certain concepts in the context of the discussion
related to the constitutional and territorial aspects.

17. The resolution just adopted calls for the resumption of the intercommunal talks in a “continuing,
sustained and result-oriented manner, avoiding any
delay”- words that were inserted upon our insistence
a whole year ago, and yet those talks have never
even begun. And this has been the tragedy of the
Cyprus drama ever since the invasion and occupation
of Cyprus in 1974.
18. I shall now attempt to give the chronicle of events
and efforts that have, unfortunately, not led to the
resumption of the talks, and the reasons therefor.

12. At ,approximately 1 a.m., on 7 June, President
Kyprianou informed Mr. Perez de. CuCllar that the
Greek Cypriot side had decided to accept that arrangement. When calling on Mr. Denktas late on the morning
of 7 June, Mr. Perez de CuCllar was informed that the
Turkish Cypriot side, having seriously considered the
proposed arrangements, now felt unable to accept
the additional remark by my representative. In the
Turkish Cypriot view that remark would have the
effect -of diminishing the significance -of the opening
statement by introducing de facto reservations. The
Turkish Cypriot side continued to accept without
reservations the opening statement by my representative, to which the two interlocutors would refrain
from responding. This procedure, omitting the
additional remark, continues to be unacceptable to
the Greek Cypriots.

19. Following the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 34130 and Security’ Council resolution 458
(1979), the Government of Cyprus made it abundantly
clear to the Secretary-General and to all concerned
that it favoured the immediate resumption of the
dialogue before the deadline set by the aforesaid.resolution, 34/30, rather than any other mechanism which
could also prove to be at least a pressure leverage in
the same direction. To achieve such a resumption, it
was of course necessary to overcome the dif&ulties
engendered by the interpolation into the, talks and the
existing agreements of two unacceptable pretonditions, namely bi-zonality and security;
20. Permit me to pause for a moment and state
that the aforesaid two notions are not merely innocuous terminology in: the absence of a better nomenclature but; in view of the interpretation given to them
time and again by their proponents, they have become
the resultant of the basic differences in the approaches
of the two sides. When we reach consensus ad idem

13. I shall of course pursue the mission of good
offices which the Council has again entrusted to me.
I hold to the opinion that the intercommunal talks, if
properly used, still represent the best available method
of negotiating a political settlement of the Cyprus
problem. It is my earnest hope that the parties .on
2

thereon, after many weeks, or months perhaps, of
painstaking negotiations, we shall certainly have
covered most of the ground for the resolution of the
internal aspect of the Cyprus problem. As a result,
it is not surprising that we find in paragraph 45 of the
Secretary-General’s report the following sentences:

was announced for 6 June. Our hopes were greatly
enhanced when all concerned were given to understand that the Turkish Cypriot side was ready to accpet
a new formula, which again was, if anything, certainly
not aligned with our approach. Again we accepted the
formula, only to find that--despite previous indications
to the contrary-it was to be rejected again the next
day. Could it be that they were expecting us to reject
the formula and that they never had any real intention
to accept it? If the answer is in the affirmative, is this
not yet another piece of tangible proof of the fact that
they do not want any talks, being content with what
they have acquired through resort to force?

“In my view, contentious issues such as ‘bizonality’ and the ‘security of the Turkish Cypriot
community’ could only be dealt with productively
within the framework of the intercommunal talks,
as part of negotiating the constitutional and territorial aspects. I therefore urged the parties to resume
the talks and proceed as soon as possible to the
consideration of concrete matters with a view to
achieving progress.”

25. Everything I have said points to one direction and
one direction only: that it is high time for the Council
to demand the resumption of the talks without preconditions and simply on the basis of the 19 May 1979
agreement. We are ready to do so today, as already
repeatedly stated.

Could there be a statement clearer than this? And yet
both Mr. Denktas and the Foreign Minister of Turkey
persist in their untenable position on these two issues.
21. I ask the indulgence of the Council members as
I repeat here much of what is given in the aforesaid report of the Secretary-General as well as in a
previous report of the Secretary-General of 2 April
1980,’ submitted in pursuance of General Assembly
resolution 34130.

26. The President of the General Assembly, wh.o was
given by Assembly resolution 34/30 a specific mandate
for the appointment of the members of an ad hoc
committee on Cyprus in case of a lack of progress
by 31 March, has received from us ample proof of both
our restraint and our responsible attitude regarding
the talks. That is well known to the Secretariat. In
the light of the rejection by the Turkish side of the
latest formula of the Secretary-General, I need hardly
remind the members of the Council that the decision
under the Assembly resolution to which I have referred
is still pending.

22. Our first gesture of good will and genuine interest
in the resumption of the talks took the form of a visit
by Foreign Minister Rolandis to the Secretary-General
in New York in early February 1980, when not only
did we explore the ground for such a resumption but
also offered, inter aliu, assistance to the Turkish
Cypriot community. This was followed by certain
ideas of the Secretary-General which we accepted,
though not without initial hesitation. We were given
to understand, at least initially, that they were offered
on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. We took them, but the
other side left them. And yet we agreed to receive
Mr. Perez de CuCllar in Cyprus in a further effort to
bridge the gap that came in the wake of the takethem-or-leave-them ideas. And yet the Turkish- side
rejected even the idea of such a visit at that time.
Even on the eve of the expiration of the 31 March
deadline, the President of the Republic made a renewed
effort to have the talks resumed, but this again met
with Turkish opposition.

27. I should now like to turn to two other serious,
indeed tragic, aspects of the Cyprus question.
28. The first concerns the situation created by the
continuing implantation of colonist-settlers from
Turkey in the occupied areas of my country. That is but
a scheme intended to bring about by force a change
in the age-long demographic character of Cyprus, in
furtherance of illicit and well-known designs against the
non-aligned Republic of Cyprus. Thus, almost six years
after the invasion, one third of the population of
Cyprus are still prevented from returning’ to their
homes and lands, which are occupied by settlers from
Turkey and others, whilst the owners continue to be
refugees in their own country. Even more appalling is
the fact that we keep hearing threats that Famagusta,
the return to which is a priority item under the IO-point
agreement of 19 May. 1979, may, under various pretexts and devices, also be colonized. It should not be
overlooked that the victims of this colonization policy
of Turkey are not only the thousands of expelled
indigenous Greek Cypriot inhabitants but also, and
equally, the Turkish Cypriots.

23. Following the failure of the attempts in March,
and in view of our respect for the contents of the last
paragraph of the Secretary-General’s report of 2 April,
we did not press for any other decisions immediately
but, instead, gave a further period.of time for renewed
efforts by the. Secretary-General. We reacted similarly
when Mr. Hugo Gobbi took over as Special Representative of the Secretary-General, following Mr. Galindo
Pohl’s relinquishing of his post on 30 April.

29. It is my earnest hope that the Security Council
will not lose sight of the gravity of this situation
created by Turkey’s continuing colonization policies,
which run counter to every basic norm of international

24. Hoping against hope, we opted to believe that the
Turkish side had adopted a new and constructive
attitude when Mr. Perez de~CuCllar’s visit to Cyprus
3

law and contradict the letter and spirit of repeated
United Nations resolutions onCyprus, the 1977guidelines [S/12323 of30 April 19771and the IO-point agreement of 1979.

and all the countries that contribute either contingents
or funds thereto.
34. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Greece, on whom I now call.

30. The agony and pain of the families of the missing
persons continue in the absence of any progress
towards the appointment of an effective investigatory
body to begin work to trace and account for them. It
is indeed deplorable that, even on that purely humanitarian issue, the Turkish side has chosen to adopt
a totally negative attitude, adamantly refusing to abide
by the agreement on the missing persons, concluded
on 19 May 1979 in the presence of Mr. Waldheim and
referred to in earlier reports of the Secretary-General.
Moreover, the Turkish side has again rejected certain
new ideas proposed by the Secretary-General in
December last, ideas which we have again accepted

35. Mr. KATAPODIS (Greece): Allow me, first of
all, Mr. President, to extend to you the warmest
congratulations of my delegation upon your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of June.
These congratulations are addressed not only to a
distinguished, experienced and wise diplomat, whose
contribution to the work of the Council has been outstanding, but also to the representative of a country to
which mine is bound by ties of long-standing and close
friendship, reinforced by their common commitment
to the ideals of peace, freedom, international security
and co-operation.

in tolo.

36. It is, I suppose, with a feeling of frustration that
the Security Council is meeting once again to renew
the mandate of UNFICYP for another six months
-frustration owing to the fact that, despite the untiring
efforts of the Secretary-General and his colleagues and
the readiness of the Government of Cyprus, the other
side persists in refusing to sit at the negotiating table.
This refusal became obvious once again during the
recent mission of Under-Secretary-General Perez de
Cutllar in Nicosia, when, as Mr. Waldheim just
informed the Council, Mr. Denktag turned down the
latest proposals of the Secretariat, which had been
accepted by the Government of Cyprus. At the same
time, both the Turkish Cypriot leadership and the
Turkish Government continue to disregard along series
of United Nations resolutions which call for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory of the
Republic of Cyprus, the return of the 200,000 refugees
to their homes and respect for the independence,
territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic.

31. Six years after the invasion, the families of the
missing still do not know whether their loved ones are
alive or dead. Am I not justified in asking: how much
more agony and pain will those families have to suffer
before Turkey and the Turkish-Cypriot leadership can
relent and decide to honour the agreement to trace and
account for our missing persons? I hope that the
United Nations and world opinion will exert further
pressure on them so that results can be obtained very
soon.
32. Six frustrating months have elapsed since the
last meeting of the Council on this subject, and if
Turkish intransigence persists and military occupation
continues, along with efforts to consolidate fairs
accomplis,
then the Council will be duty bound to
consider effective measures for the solution of the
Cyprus problem, principally by ensuring compliance
with its own decisions as well as the decisions of the
General Assembly.

37. Because of the intransigence of the Turkish
Cypriot side, no progress has been made towards
implementing the high-level agreement of 19May 1979,
the signing of which was hailed with such great
expectations by all those concerned with the fate of the
unfortunate, divided island of Cyprus. Yet that agreement was signed without reservations by the leader
of the Turkish Cypriot community. And, after all, it
does not purport to solve the many and intricate
problems facing the Republic of Cyprus today; it simply
constitutes a framework for discussing those problems
in a spirit of good will and mutual compromise.

33. Before concluding, I should very much like to
express once again our warm thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his continued efforts to obtain a solution
of the Cyprus problem. His keen personal interest is
greatly appreciated by the Government and people of
Cyprus. Our thanks go also to all his extremely able
colleagues, Messrs. Urquhart, Perez de Cuellar,
Gobbi, Sherry, Gorge and Picco; and, for obvious
reasons, I should like to single out for mention Ambassador Galindo Pohl, who retired on 30 April, and
Mr. Hugo Gobbi, who during his short tenure in
Cyprus has amply demonstrated his qualities by
working towards the creation of conditions which,
given the necessary good will, could have led to the
resumption of the talks. I plead with Ambassador
Perez de Cutllar not to be disheartened by the lastminute setback during his most important trip to my
country, and I ask him to persevere until the SecretaryGeneral, he himself and the whole team achieve
success. Appreciation is also rightly due to the
Commander, the officers and the men of UNFICYP

38. Why, then, does the Turkish Cypriot side try to
prejudge the outcome of the negotiations by raising
a priori fundamental issues, which would determine the
nature of the new constitution of the Republic and the
fate of one third of its population, who, since the
Turkish invasion of 1974, have lived as refugees, away
from their homes? It is not only we who urge the
Turkish Cypriot leaders to start negotiating without
pre-conditions. The Secretary-General himself has
4

taken the same position, as is clearly stated in paragraph 61 of his report to the Council:

43. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is
Mr. Atalay, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

“I also considered that contentious issues such
as ‘bi-zonaiity’ and the ‘security of the Turkish
Cypriot community* could be dealt with productively within the framework of the talks, as part
of negotiating concretely the constitutional and
territorial aspects in accordance with the 19 May
1979accord and the 12 February 1977guidelines. In
my view, this approach remains valid.”

44. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and each member of this body for having
given me the opportunity of addressing the Council
and of presenting the Turkish Cypriot view on the
current state of the Cyprus .conflict. I am indeed
grateful to you and to the other members of the
Council for this opportunity.

39. Frankly, we cannot understand why the Turkish
Cypriot leaders are so reluctant to resume the talks.
Are they overawed by the negotiating skill of their
Greek Cypriot counterparts? Do they reaiize that some
of their positions are such that impartial observers
will have no difficulty in apportioning the blame,
should the talks fail? Or do they honestly believe
that by their intransigence they can intimidate the
Government of Cyprus into acceding to demands
which would lead to the virtual partition of the island?

45. Allow me also, on behalf of my Government
and on my own behalf, to express our gratitude to
the Secretary-General, to his staff in the Secretariat
and in the field, and to those military and civilian
personnel who have been involved in efforts to find a
just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem.
Furthermore, I should like to thank Mr. Reynaido
Galindo Pohi, who has completed his tour of duty as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Cyprus. His patience and skill in the conduct of a
very difficult task will never be forgotten by the
Turkish Cypriot side. We wish him the best of happiness and successin his future endeavours. I take this
opportunity also to welcome Mr. Hugo Gobbi as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus and to assure him of our fullest co-operation
in the difficult task that lies ahead of him.

40. The position of the Greek Government as regards
the problem of Cyprus is clear, consistent and, we
believe, helpful. The solution to that problem resides
in the implementation of the many resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, which
were ail adopted by overwhelming majorities and have
a common basis: respect for the Charter and its
fundamental principles. Furthermore, my Government
is convinced that an equitable solution can be reached
only through negotiations between the two communities, without outside interference. And finally,
we believe that these negotiations should be conducted
without pre-conditions, on the basis of the agreement
of May 1979.

46. The Council has just adopted resolution 472
(1980). It is most regrettable that the third preambuiar
paragraph of that resolution makes a reference to the
so-called-Government of Cyprus. The Turkish Cypriot
side objects to the use of the term “Government of
Cyprus”, which is simply an alias for the Greek
Cypriot administration. Such a Government ceased to
exist after the Greek Cypriot component of that bicommunal institution expelled its Turkish counterpart
from the machinery of government by force of arms,
in December 1%3. Since then two autonomous
administrations have existed in the island, pending a
final solution to the Cyprus problem. Furthermore,
the existence of those two separate administrations
in Cyprus was recognized in the Geneva Declaration
of 30 July 1974 [S/11398], agreed to among the three
guarantor States: Turkey, Greece and the United
Kingdom. Therefore, the reference to a non-existent
entity in the resolution just adopted makes it completely unacceptable to us. The Government of the
Turkish Federated State of Kibris has nevertheless
declared its decision to give its consent to the extension
of the mandate of UNFICYP until 15 December 1980.

41. Until a final settie~ment has been reached in
Cyprus, until all foreign occupation forces have left
the Republic and until the two communities have
freely laid the foundations of a new, just and lasting
relationship, the presence of UNFICYP will be necessary if only in order to reassure the victims of the
invasion and to remind them of the continued concern
of the United Nations for their security. My Govemment therefore subscribes to the renewal of the
mandate of the Force for another six months.
42. 3efore concluding, I should like once more, on
behalf of my Government and my delegation, to
express our most sincere thanks and our deep gratitude
to the commanding officer, the officers and the men
of UNFICYP for their unfailing dedication to their
important task and the exemplary way in which they
are carrying it out. Our thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral and his able assistants, both in New York and
in Cyprus, for their untiring and imaginative efforts
to keep alive the prospects of a negotiated settlement.
And I take this opportunity to express our special
appreciation to Mr. Gaiindo Pohi, for the excellent
job he did during his two pars as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus.

47. The Secretary-General states, in paragraph 66
of his report, that
“the continued presence of UNFICYP remains
necessary. . . in creating the conditions in which the
search for a peaceful settlement can go forward*‘.
5

We are not sure whether this conclusion holds true,
particularly at a time when one of the parties to the
negotiating process keeps setting its eyes on a target
date for the creation of new ways of imposing a solution
instead of on the intercommunal talks on an equal
footing. In our view, so long as the Greek Cypriot
leadership in Cyprus deliberately continues its attempts
to take the peace-making efforts off their normal track,
namely that of the intercommunal talks, the continued
presence of UNFICYP in the island will not be effective
in facilitating the search for a peaceful settlement
through intercommunal negotiations, but will merely
consolidate the claims and the position of the Greek
Cypriot administration. If UNFICYP is maintained in
the island without its modus operandi being changed
and without its present mandate being revised, then
this situation will, we fear, create a vested interest
in the perpetuation of the status quo in Cyprus. The
circumstances prevailing at, present in the island and
the chronic deficit of the UNFICYP account are
factors which have an important bearing on the
mandate of the Force as originally defined in Security
Council resolution 186 (1964).

an abuse of the real aims and objectives of the Council but is also a waste of its valuable time and, at the
same time, is unconstructive and counterproductive,
in that such propaganda tactics tend to be provocative
and evoke reactions from the other side.
50. I do not think I shall answer the accusations of
the representative of Greece, and I doubt that they
deserve any reply. I would remind him to reread my
previous statement in the Council.
51. Now, coming to the intercommunal talks, I should
like to present to the Council the views of the Turkish
Cypriot side on the resumption of those taIks with a
view to finding a just and lasting solution to the
problem of Cyprus. In this connexion, my President,
Mr. Denktag, after meeting with Mr. Perez de CuCllar,
last Friday, 6 June, made the following statement
to the press:
“Mr. Perez de Cutllar and his colleagues are
making explorations for the resumption of the
Cyprus intercommunal talks, which have been
recessed since last June. It should be recalled that,
while the talks were under way last June, the Greek
Cypriots broke them offand, as part of their annual
campaign of misleading the world, they went to the
Non-AIigned Conference and then to the United
Nations General Assembly and extracted in our .
absence a harmful resolution for Cyprus and ran
away from the negotiations.

48. The problem of Cyprus is a dispute between
the two national communities-namely, the Turkish
Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots. This is a fact well
known to the whole world. But, unfortunately, we
observe that paragraph 52 of the report of the Secretary-General gives a different impression to an outside
reader. In that paragraph, it sounds as if the SecretaryGeneral further pursued his initiatives by consulting
the Prime Minister of Turkey and the Greek Cypriot
leader and ignoring the Turkish Cypriot side.
Personally, I do not believe that the foregoing was
the intention of the Secretary-General, in whose good
faith and understanding of the issues involved we have
full confidence.

“As a result of the initiatives by the SecretatyGeneral for the resumption of the intercommunal
talks, last March the Turkish Cypriot side made it
clear that, if the Secretary-General prepared a
positive basis for the talks which would be binding
on the parties, the Turkish Cypriot side would
be prepared to resume the. talks immediately. And
finally, on 30 March, as a further sign of good
will, we stated that the talks could be resumed, if
the parties did not put reservations and maintained
silence on the opening statement to be delivered by
the representative of the Secretary-General. This
was yet a further display of good will on the part of
the Turkish Cypriot side. The Greek Cypriot side,
however, wanted to maintain the freedom to put
reservations on the statement, and insisted on doing
so, and thus the talks could not be resumed in March.
And ever since, the Greek Cypriot side has been
insisting on this. We continue to maintain our
position of good will of-30 March and maintain the
position that the parties should keep silent on the
opening statement of the Secretary-General. If this
is accepted, the talks can be resumed.

49. It is most regrettable that the representative of
the Greek Cypriot administration, unlawfully and
unconstitutionally posing as the representative of the
Government of Cyprus, has once again thought fit,
in line with that administration’s declared policy of
intemationalizing. the Cyprus problem-that is to say,
making propaganda in all international forums-to
abuse the machinery of the Security Council and to
take up the valuable time of the Council by raising
here today the so-called question of missing persons,
the “question of refugees”, “suffering of the Greek
Cypriots”, “question of colonization” and so on, for
purposes of pure propaganda, well knowing that these
outstanding humanitarian issues in Cyprus stem from a
long history of troubles between the Turkish Cypriot
and Greek Cypriot communities and are so closely
interwoven with and form such a staple element of the
Cyprus problem itself, that they can be effectively
resolved only with the settlement of the Cyprus
problem through intercommunal talks between the two
national communities. Therefore, raising’these humanitarian problems in international forums, such as the
Council, purely for their propaganda value is not only

“Since 30 March, the Greek Cypriots have unfortunately continued their inhuman economic
embargo against the Turkish Cypriots. They continue to display their bad faith--against the Turkish
Cypriot people and maintain their aggression against
the Turkish Cypriot people by hiding behind the
6

false slogan of “government”. They rejected our
proposal for the reopening of Nicosia international
airport. They have done everything within their
power to undermine our tourism, and, finally, they
ha;zeven resorted to bombing the Turkish tourist

53. During the period under review-from 1 December 1979 to 31 May 1980-the Greek Cypriot
administration has, as it has always done since 1963,
continued its economic extermination against the
Turkish Cypriots. With the Council’s permission,
I shall have to mention some of these cruel and
inhuman incidents.

“In spite of these realities we are facing, we
propose that the delivery of the statement of the
Secretary-General be followed by silence by the
parties in order not to bring up new points of dispute.
We defend the view that, if this course is followed
and if the dispute is not widened by putting reservations, the talks can be ‘resumed.”

54. First, as I indicated on earlier occasions, once
again I have to bring to the Council’s attention another
recent attempt by the Greek Cypriot administration to
curtail the freedom of travel of the Turkish people of
Cyprus by preventing, through devious means, the
aircraft rented by the Turkish. Cypriot Airlines from
Sobelair of Belgium from making flights to and from
the Turkish Federated State of Kibris. With that
recent. attempt the Greek Cypriot side is undoubtedly
aiming at one of the vital areas of the Turkish-Cypriot
economy-transportation-and
endeavouring to deal
a fatal blow to it.

52. The following day, Saturday, 7 June, after the
latest round of talks held with Mr. Perez de C&liar,
my President also said the following:
“We have stated before and we repeat now, as
the Turkish Cypriot co-founder of Cyprus, we are
fighting for an equitable and balanced peace that
will protect our rights, partnership, life and property
against the Greek Cypriot community, which
destroyed the peace in Cyprus and launched
genocide for the extermination of the Turkish
Cypriot people, has maintained this armed aggression for 11 years and continues to maintain ruthless
economic aggression against us.

55. Secondly, Mr. Abraham Mildik, a Dutch national
acting on behalf of the British firm, Nottingham Fruit
Packers, has been gaoled for two months by a Greek
Cypriot court for entering Cyprus through Ercan State
Airport in the north, which the Greek Cypriot administration , masquerading as the “Government of
Cyprus”, has declared illegal, together with all the
other ports of entry situated in the north.

“Greek Cypriots are playing with words in order
to give the impression that they favour peace and
talks. Through their strong propaganda machine
they have managed to mislead the world for some
time.*‘-Even as late as 8 June.-“However,
it is
essential to come to the conference table with the
sincere intention of finding peace, and not playing
with words. We have not yielded to the ploy of
playing with words. We fully explained our cause to
Mr. Perez de Cueliar, as he has said himself, in
the efforts for the resumption of the talks.

56. Thirdly, a Belgium company, Transair, was
forced by the Greek Cypriot administration to cancel
the reservations it had made for 1,000 tourists who
were due to visit the Turkish Federated State of Kibris.
57. Fourthly, the Greek Cypriot administration continues to pose before the world as the “Government of
Cyprus” and exploits this illegal status, which it
usurped by force of arms in 1963 to its advantage and
at the expense of the Turkish Cypriot community.
This involves, among other things, the usurpation
of practically all international and binational aid,
including credits and loans, which is given to Cyprus
for use by both communities, and the consequent
deprivation of the Turkish Cypriot community of an
equitable share in such assistance.

“Now, there is a danger: believing that they have
scored a point, the Greek Cypriots may take a step
too far. Then it becomes imperative for us,
naturally, to take the necessary protective political
measures. Thus, separation becomes more consolidated. The objective, however, is to find a
realistic peace, and not the consolidation of separation.

58. It should be noted that the inequitable distribution of foreign aid between the two Cypriot communities and the unilateral exploitation of such aid by
the Greek Cypriots were among the prime causes of
the wide economic gap that existed between the two
communities prior to 1974. While at the time that only
served to promote the isolation of the two communities from each other, it only serves today to
perpetuate such isolation by making a peaceful
solution in the island more difficult. It is a well-known
fact that the Greek Cypriots, having failed to subjugate the Turkish community by brute force, are at
present engaged in an intense economic and political
campaign against the Turkish Cypriots with a view
to bringing about their eventual collapse. Usurpation

“At dinner last night, I had the opportunity to
have a sincere and detailed discussion with Mr. Perez
de Cuellar. I am pleased with these contacts. A
phase is over. The formula put forward by Mr. Perez
de Cueliar was strange and unnecessary, in that it
completely eradicated the former formula on which
the two sides could reach a compromise. . . . Anyway, we hope that efforts for the resumption of the
intercommunal talks will continue, and that these
efforts will yield a positive outcome in the near
future .”
7

of all foreign assistance and its unilateral exploitation
for the economic development of the Greek Cypriot
community are part of this campaign and, so long as
the efforts of the Greek side in this direction continue
unabated, that party will see no reason to sit at the
negotiating table to talk peace terms with the Turkish
Cypriots.
59. Those are some of the cases to which I had to
refer today. As a matter of fact, the target of these
embargoes and this blockade is nothing but economic
extermination. Extermination is not always carried out
by means of the gallows and executions. Sometimes
it takes the form of pushing a community to
destruction by cutting off its links with the world
and throwing it into isolation, just as the Greek side
is trying to do to the Turkish Cypriot community.
60. Does the Council know that almost all tourism
agencies refrain from organizing tours to northern
Cyprus and shipping agencies refrain from calling at
northern Cyprus ports? They all know that, if they act
otherwise, they will be threatened by Greek Cypriot
administration officials and their gangs and that their
Governments will submit to this.
61. Such destructive activities, which are part of the
overall economic embargo that has been imposed on
the Turkish Cypriot people by the Greek Cypriot
side since 1963, are in utter violation of the Denktap
Kyprianou agreement of 19 May 1979, point 6 of which
states that the two sides would
“abstain from any action which might jeopardize
the outcome of the talks, and special importance
will be given to initial practical measures by both
sides to promote good will, mutual confidence and
the return to nqrmal conditions”.
62. Whereas the Turkish Cypriot people have
exercised utmost care not to harm prospects for the
resumption of the talks and have shown the necessary
good will for reconciliation between the two peoples
of Cyprus, the Greek Cypriot side has unfortunately
been bent on destroying the Turkish Cypriot people
politically and economically, in spite of the abovementioned agreement.
63. In conclusion, despite the political activities and
economic embargoes against the Turkish Cypriots
which the Greek side continues to promote at all
levels, the Turkish Cypriot side is ready to resume the
intercommunal talks in accordance with the agreements reached at the 1977 Denktas-Makarios highlevel meeting and the 1979 Denktas-Kyprianou highlevel meeting. We accepted unconditionally the text
of the statement to be made by the representative
of the Secretary-General. But the Greek Cypriot side
wanted to add to that statement some pre-conditions
which would change the meaning and remove the
value of the whole statement. We asked them-and
I ask my counterpart now-to abandon their pre-

conditions and we invited them to accept the text
unconditionally, just as we did. Our invitation is still
valid.
64. Becauseof the negative attitude of the Kymianou
tigime, many opport&ities have been lost. Very
recently, on 24 May. the Greek Communist Party,
Akel, delivered a strong attack against the policies
of Mr. Kyprianou and his Administration and accused
him personally of acts of commission or omission,
among them, failure to activate the intercommunal
talks. Even Akel believes that opportunities have
existed for resumption of the intercommunal talks,
under the auspices of the Secretary-General, since
August last, but it says:
“Unsuitable handling, lack of courage and indecision on the part of the Greek Cypriot leadership
and various expediencies had the result of nonfruition of the possibilities for the resumption of
the talks.”
In that statement, Akel quotes from the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the Security Council, according to
which Mr. Waldheim told Mr. Kyprianou that
Mr. Denktag had accepted the proposals of August
last, and Akel,says that further opportunities appeared
in February, March and April this year which, however, were not utilized.
Both the Kyprianou regime and the GreekCypriot people of southern Cyprus have to accept
this reality and the fact that this realistic approach of
the Turkish-Cypriot people, calling for a lasting and
honourable solution based on the equal partnership
of the Turkish and Greek communities of the island
in an independent, non-aligned, bicommunal and bizonal federal republic without giving either party the
right to persecute or exploit the other, deserves a
serious and reasonable approach in good will.
65.

66. Before making their final decision on this appeal,
the Greeks will have to try to guess and to evaluate
the possible developments that can take place in the
political scene. in the island in case of a continuation
of the present deadlock in the talks, a deadlock that
has been intentionally created by the Greeks-in order
to be able dramatically to blame the Turkish side for
the failure of Mr. Perez de CuCllar’s mission. This is
a repetition of the annual Greek campaign and preparations prior to every General Assembly session since
1974. B-ut the Greeks have to understand that, like
everything else in the.world, the good will and patience
of the Turkish Cypriots have a limit. Nobody has
a right to expect the continuation of the one-sided
Turkish understanding and sacrifices in the island for
the sake of the realiiation of the Greek dream
-Megalo
Idea and enosis.
67. My final ,word is to appeal to the Greek-Cypriot
leadelship to accept unconditionally Mr. Waldheim’s
text of 28 March and return to the intercommunal talks.
This is up to them.

68. In concluding, I should like to pay tribute and2o
extend our heartfelt gratitude, on behalf of my President, on behalf of my Government, on behalf of-the
Turkish Cypriot community and on behalf of myself,
to the retiring Ambassador of Turkey, Mr. Eralp,
for the dedicated, untiring efforts and personal sacrifices he made for the national cause of the Turkish
Cypriots. We recall his name in this connexion
since the 194Os, and the Turkish Cypriot history
books will always mention him as one of the gallant
defenders of Turkish Cypriot rights, both at home and
abroad. We wish him and his charming wife the best
of luck in their future endeavours.
:
69. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I now call.

settlement of the Cyprus problem lies in the conduct
of inter-communal talks within the framework of the
good-offrces mission of the Secretary-General. It is,
therefore, encouraging for us to note from the report
that the Secretary-General has once again expressed
his reliance on the intercommunal talks by stating
that the process represents the best available method
for negotiating a just and lasting settlement of the
Cyprus problem based on the legitimate rights of the
two communities. That is the reason why my delegation
beheves that the Secretary-General will eventually
succeed in overcoming the remaining obstacles
standing in the way of a resumption of the intercommunal talks on the basis of the approach the contents
of which were presented to the parties on 28 March.
73. Having made these comments of a general nature,
I should like to make a clarification for the record
with regard to a particular paragraph of the report.
In paragraph 52, there is a reference to an exchange
of views between the Prime Minister of Turkey and the
Secretary-General that took place during a fortuitous
meeting in Belgrade on the sad occasion of the funeral
of President Tito. However, the context in which that
fortuitous meeting is mentioned in paragraph 52 generates a misleading impression as to who the parties
are to the intercommunal negotiating process in
Cyprus. I should like to stress once again the fact
that the counterpart to the Greek Cypriot community
and to its leader, Mr. Kyprianou, is the Turkish
Cypriot community and that the consultations
designed to explore the possibilities for a resumption
of the intercommunal talks are carried out with the
two Cypriot communities and their leaders. However,
I am gratified to be able to state that the SecretaryGeneral was gracious enough to explain to me the
circumstances of that chance meeting, and I am convinced that the paragraph in question was not intended
to throw a false light on the problem.

70. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to extend to you my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. In doing so, I wish to- underline the
satisfaction we feel in seeing as President of the Council the representative of a country with which Turkey
traditionally enjoys cordial and constructive relations
in all fields. I hasten to add how grateful we are to you
for the discretion, objectivity and wisdom you have
displayed during the consultations.
71. The situation in Cyprus has been described once
again in the Secretary-General’s recent report, on the
basis of which the Council is today reviewing the situation in Cyprus, as being calm through the period under
review. We do believe that continuing calm and
tranquillity in the island would facilitate the search
for a negotiated settlement between the two Cypriot
communities. We also note from the report that, in
the course of-the consultations between the two sides
.within the framework of his mission of good ofices,
the Secretary-General has been successful in narrowing
the gap between the two divergent positions to the
point where the only remaining obstacle in the way of
a resumption of the negotiating process at present is
one side’s continuing insistence of expressing reservations in one way or another to the text of the opening
statement that was suggestedto the parties. As amatter
of fact, after the present version of the opening statement had been presented to the parties on 28 March,
President Denktag demonstrated once again his side’s
willingness to negotiate by announcing, on 30 March,
that the Turkish Federated State of Kibris accepted
without any reservations the suggested text as it stood
and that, if the Greek Cypriot side also acceptrd them
without any conditions or reservations, in other words,
simply by listening to the text.and maintaining silence
once it. had been read out by the representative-of the
Secretary-General-the
intercommunal talks. could
resume within a few days. However, this constructive
attitude of the Turkish Cypriot side-which it still
abides by-has yet to be reciprocated.

74. I should also like to say a few words about the
consultations that took place almost a week ago with
the two communities in Cyprus. This matter has been
taken up by the representative of the Greek Cypriot
administration and the representative of the Turkish
Federated State of Kibris and was extremely well
outlined in the opening statement of the SecretaryGeneral. I shall not go into detail.
75. The Council must be familiar with the fact that
the Under-Secretary-General, Ambassador Perez de
Cdllar, set out for Cyprus for the purpose of consulting
with the two parties in an effort to iron out the only
remaining obstacle standing in the way of a resumption
of the intercommunal talks. As we all know, that
obstacle is the Greek Cypriot side’s insistence on
expressing reservations to the text of the opening
statement. It has been reported to us that Ambassador
Perez de CuelIar’s mission to Cyprus was not successful in inducing the Greek Cypriot leadership to take
up the same position as the Turkish Cypriot side has
done and to accept the proposed opening statement

72. My Government has consistently held the view
that the key to progress towards a comprehensive
9

without reservations and conditions. The formula
which was considered by the parties in Cyprus and
known as the 4 June formula, was apparently intended
to make the opening statement a palatable approach
for the Greek Cypriot side. The Turkish Cypriot
leadership could not fmd it possible to go along with
.the proposed additional statement of the 4 June
formula, since its result would have been to under.mine the contents of the opening statement. In the
meantime, the Greek Cypriot leadership, in a
transparent attempt to gloss over its record of intransigence, has launched an intensive propaganda campaign in order to convince world opinion of its contention that the Turkish .Cypriot side has torpedoed
the resumption of the intercommunal talks. The party
which is now being accused of rejecting the plan to
resume the talks is the same party which, in the
course of the intensive consultations over the last
11 months, has accepted various suggestions put
forward by the Secretary-General for the resumption
of the negotiations. To mention but a few, there are
the 23 August suggestions and the 28 March opening
statement. The side which has now engaged in a
campaign of vilification against the other negotiating
partner is ‘the one whose leadership has repeatedly
‘turned down all the suggestions coming from ihe
Secretary-General during the same period.

vant and misleading reference to a “Government of
Cyprus*‘. The Council must be familiar with our
basic, unchanged position in that respect. Therefore,
without going into the details of what we have stated
before the Council on this point, because they are
already on record, I should like to stress once again
that any compliance or co-operation with the peacekeeping effort in Cyprus on our part would be conditional upon the exclusion of the concept of an
existing Government of Cyprus.
80. In its operative part, the resolution first gives
UNFICYP a mandate for another six months. We
concur in that extension, having heard Mr. Nail Atalay ,’
representative of the Turkish Federated State of
Kibris, who informed the Council of the consent of his
Government in that respect. It should, however, be
noted that Mr. Atalay has once again underlined the
necessity of reviewing the mandate of the Forcz, as
established in 1964 in order to adapt it to the circumstances now prevailing in Cyprus and to the new and
redyced dimensions of the problem.
81. Paragraphs 2 and 3 relate to the intercommunal
talks and the continuation of the mission of good
offices of the Secretary-General, respectively. As has
already been stated on numerous occasions, the
Turkish Government fully supports the mission of
good offices of the Secretary-General. My Govemment is determined to encourage all efforts designed
to achieve a viable solution within the framework of
the Denktas-Makarios four-point guidelines [S/Z2323
of30 April 1977, para. 51, and the Denkta$-Kyprianou
lo-point agreement, which, in:our view, have laid the
foundations for a. solution based on the fundamental
and legitimate rights of the two communities within
an independent, non-aligned, bicommunal and bizonal federal republic. The Turkish Government
welcomed and supported, and still welcomes and supports, the position of the Government of the Turkish
Federated State of Kibris which, in its desire to find a
speedy solution to the Cyprus problem through intercommunal talks, has announced that it is ready to get
down to the intercommunal: dialogue with the best
intentions and to that effect has accepted the SecretaryGeneral’s suggested opening statement without any
objection, as it is. We ardently hope that the position
of the Turkish-Federated State-of Kibris will eventually
open the way for the resumption of the intercommunal
talks on. the basis of that opening statement in which
both communities reaffirmed the validity of the
Detitas-Makarios and Denktas-Kyprianou agreements. The Turkish Government continues to believe
that-Turkey and Greece should assist and encourage
the two national communities in Cyprus to fitid a just
and lasting solution of their problem through intercommunal -talks.

76. During the thirty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, I had this to say at the plenary meeting on
19 November 1979:
“The record of the intercommunal talks shows
very clearly that it has tiever been possible to engage
in serious negotiations during the summer preceding
General Assembly proceedings. This fact certainly
cannot be explained by the need of the negotiating
parties in Cyprus for summer vacations. Nor is it a
mere coincidence that the two major breakthroughs
in the intercommunal negotiations have taken place
in the winter and spring, well in advance of General
Assembly sessions.“*
I sincerely wish that this view would not be confirmed by the developments to take place this summer.
77. My delegation believes that it is not the time to
engage in a vitriolic campaign and an attempt to put
the blame on one party or the other. On the contrary,
it is hight time for the two communities in Cyprus
to get down to serious negotiations with a view to
exploring the avenues conducive to a just and lasting
settlement of the problem that still eludes us. Mr. P&z
de CuCllar’s mission to Cyprus was merely an episode
in the entire process of consultations with the two
parties which we earnestly hope will continue.
78. Turning now to resolution 472 (1980), which the
Council has just adopted, I should like to explain the
position of my Government with regard to it.

82. 3efore concluding, I should like to- take this
opportunity to perform a pleasant duty by highly
commending the Secretary-General for his. untiiing
efforts in connexion with the United-Nations-activities

79. In the third .preambular paragraph there is, as
in previous resolutions on the same subject, an irrele10

in Cyprus. Despite the enormous difficulties he has
encountered, the Secretary-General has been able to
keep the negotiating process alive between the two
communities. I should like to reiterate our admiration
for his tenacious endeavours, his patience and his
skilful diplomacy.

devotion and urgency as it faces the many thorny
problems which infest the world. In this it may consider
itself fortunate in having as chief executive offtcer of
the Organization an exceedingly able, efficient, hardworking and devoted diplomat in the person of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim.

83. Our thanks go also to the Under-SecretariesGeneral, Mr. Brian Urquhart and Mr. Perez de CuelIar,
and to Mr. George Sherry and Mr. Picco and their
staff for the devotion and competence they have shown
in the discharge of their respective duties.

90. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Unionof Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russiun): The delegation of the Soviet Union did not object to the Council’s
extending the stationing of the United Nations Forces
in Cyprus for a further six-month period inasmuch
as the Government of the Republic of Cyprus had
given its consent to that extension. It is also our
understanding that the financing of those forces in
Cyprus wilI continue to be based upon voluntary contributions .

84. I should be remiss if I did not strike a special
note of gratitude to Ambassador Galindo Pohl, who
relinquished his post as the Secretary-General’s
special representative in Cyprus on 30 April. During
his two-year tenure, he has distinguished himself by
his remarkable diplomatic tact and his ability to
inspire confidence in all parties concerned and has
made aconsiderable contribution to the cause of peace
in Cyprus.

91. In connexion with the decision just taken by the
Council, the Soviet delegation would like to confirm
the position of principle of the Soviet Union on the
question of a settlement in Cyprus.
92. From the very beginning of the Cyprus crisis the
Soviet Union has firmly supported, and continues to
support, the solution of the Cyprus question on the
basis of ensuring the. genuine independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus and strict observance of its policy of nonalignment. We are in favour of the withdrawal of all
foreign troops and the elimination of all foreign military
bases situated there. The Soviet Union considers that
a settlement with regard to Cyprus should ensure the
demilitarization of the island.

85; My Government has welcomed the appointment
of Ambassador Hugo Gobbi as special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We know that he has distinguished himself both as a diplomat and as,a lawyer,
and we are confident that he will carry out his new
assignment with success.
86. I should like to express once again the appreciation of my Government to the Member States.which
have contributed to UNFICYP. Last but not least,
I wish to thank the Force Commander, Major-General
James J. Quinn, and the officers and men of UNFICYP
for the competence they have shown in the discharge
of their duties.

93. The Soviet Union vigorously condemns foreign
intervention in the internal’ affairs of Cyprus and
opposes any .attempts to infringe the sovereignty of
the Republic of Cyprus and to resolve the question of
Cyprus behind the backs of its people to the detriment
of its vital interests and to suit external imperialist
forces.

87. May I now crave the indulgence of the Council
to say a word of farewell. As I am due to retire from
the Foreign Service. next month, this meeting of the
Council will, barring unforeseen consequences, be
the last occasion on which I shall be representing my
country in this august body. I would therefore like to
say a word of farewell, as well as to express my thanksfor the understanding shownby present and past members of the Council on the various problems with which
my country has been faced.

94. An end must be put to any manoeuvres designed
to exploit the fact that the situation in Cyprus remains
unresolved in order to subvert the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the State of Cyprus so as to
impose upon the Cypriots plans and decisions entirely
alien to them. The two national communities in Cyprus
should be given the opportunity themselves to decide
the internal arrangements of their State, reasonable
account being taken of the interests and rights of
both the Greek and the Turkish community, without
any outside interference. The earliest possible resumption of the intercommunal dialogue in a spirit of mutual
understanding and good will could play a positive role
in this regard. The possible positive results of the intercommunal talks should be consolidated either in
decisions of the Security Council or by means of the
convening of an international conference within the
framework of the United Nations. We remain convinced that the convening of such a conference could

88. I have the honour of having been associated with
the United Nations since the San Francisco Conference in 1945, which I attended as a second secretary
on our delegation. Having served for a non-consecutive
period of nearly eight years as Permanent Representative, it is a source of satisfaction for me to round
off a long career in this prestigious body, which, in
spite of its shortcomings, still remains the only hope
of bringirg peace, security, economic development
and mutual understanding to the peoples of the world.
89. Farewell, thanks once again, and may the Council
continue to be guided in its deliberations by a sense..of
11

be an important factor in a just and lasting settlement
of the Cyprus problem and an improvement of the situation in the eastern Mediterranean area. The proposal
for the holding of an international conference on
Cyprus has met with widespread international support,
which is reflected in, among other documents, General
Assembly resolution 34/30.

UNFICYP for another six months because, as the
Secretary-General points out in his report to the Council, the presence of UNFICYP is necessary to maintain
a calm and stable situation in Cyprus, in which the
search for a peaceful settlement to this long-standing
dispute can go forward.
101. The United States wishes at this time to pay a
tribute once again to the officers and men of UNFICYP
for the exemplary manner in which they have performed their duties. The international community owes
them, and the countries which have so generously
contributed their services, a debt of gratitude for
their unselfish service to the cause of peace.

95. The Soviet Union believes that the United
Nations should play a decisive part in a Cyprus
settlement, and we support implementation in full
of the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly on Cyprus, which lay down the
fundamental principles for a just settlement of the
Cyprus problem and stress the inadmissibility of
foreign intervention in the internal affairs of the
Republic of Cyprus.

102. My Government also again expresses to the
Secretary-General its gratitude for his untiring efforts
to bring peace to Cyprus. As outlined in his report,
the Secretary-General and his representatives have
proceeded in a determined and cogent manner to
narrow the difference between the parties to the Cyprus
conflict. In particular, I wish to extend the commendation of my Government to Mr. Galindo Pohl, who,
during his two years of persevering efforts, displayed
imagination and dedication of high value to this effort.

96. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): My
Government regrets that the intercommunal talks
remain stalled a year after they were so briefly resumed
in Nicosia. We are seriously concerned at the continuing delay. We hope that the talks will be resumed
promptly. We agree with the Secretary-General that,
properly used, they still represent the best available
method for negotiating a political settlement of the
Cyprus problem.

103. We have- followed with close interest the
Secretary-General’s recent dispatch of UnderSecretary-General Perez de CuCllar on a visit to the
area to conduct consultations with a view to resuming
the intercommunal talks. We are disappointed that his
mission was apparently unsuccessful. We urge the
parties to the Cyprus dispute to co-operate fully with
the Secretary-GeneraIand to agree to resume sustained
and serious negotiations. We have been encouraged to
hear in the Council today the statements of the parties
acknowledging the necessity of a resumption of the
intercommunal talks.

97. I congratulate the Secretary-General on yet
another clear and lucid report on UNFICYP operations
and on the exercise of his good offices. It is abundantly clear that the failure to resume intercommunal
talks does not reflect any lack of effort by him, by
successive Special Representatives in Cyprus or by
members of the Secretariat here in New York. On
the contrary, I pay a tribute to their intensive efforts.
We are also grateful to the officers and men of
UNFICYP for their dedication to their task.
98. My Government supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that UNFICYP’s mandate
should be extended for a further six months. We will
continue to contribute to UNFICYP during that period.
We welcome the Secretariat’s intention to carry out a
review of UNFICYP’s functions and procedures. We
hope that all possibilities of worthwhile savings,
compattble with the Force’s efficient functioning in
its important task, will be energetically pursued, thus
reducing the burden on troop contributors.

104. The United States is deeply disturbed to note the
continuing deterioration of the financial situation of
UNFICYP. Since 1964, the United States has contriiuted almost 50 per cent of the total amount pledged
to support UNFICYP. We think it neither fair nor
proper that a single Member State should furnish
such a high proportion of the funds for a. peacekeeping force that serves the common interests of us
all. We greatly regret that many countries in a position
to do so, including permanent members of the Council,
have still not responded to the repeated appeals by the
Secretary-General for funds to offset UNFICYP’s
growing-deficit, which places even-greater burdens on
the troop-contrtbuting nations. We ask all nations to
respond generously to the Secretary-General’s urgent
request.

99. In this connexion, I should like to echo the
concern expressed by the Secretary-General about
the financial situation of UNFICYP. The deficit continues to mount. Repayment of the claims of troop
contributors is seriously in arrears. My Government
in any case claims only a fraction of the actual costs
incurred in maintaining the British contingent. I therefore urge that the Secretary-General’s latest appeal for
voluntary contributions [S/13692 of 14 December
19791should meet with a generous response.

105. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (inferprefution from
French): My delegation’s vote today in favour of the
draft resolution just adopted by the Council, extending
for six months the mandate of UNFICYP, was an
indication of how much it still wishes to see the
problem of Cyprus settled by negotiation. But it is a

100. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): The
United States has voted to extend the mandate of
12

m-e-condition of any kind of negotiation that the parties
agree on the procedures that will govern their
exchanges of view towards the reaching of an agreement. That presupposes that all sides are motivated
by the political will to succeed. It presupposes also
that the parties are prepared to demonstrate the understanding and open-mindedness that are indispensable
to any search for a settlement. In any event, the
settlement must be in accordance with justice and
international law; it cannot be achieved unless the
parties make an effort at compromise at the same
time. We are of course all aware of the difficulties of
such an undertaking, but there can be no doubt that
it will be of benefit to everyone.

further six months because the Government of Cyprus
took a favourable attitude towards this. But that
constant extending of UNFICYP’s mandate in Cyprus
is not a solution to the problem itself and should not
lead to a situation where United Nations decisions
with regard to a settlement of the Cyprus problem are
bypassed or not complied with.
111. At their last meeting, the States parties to the
Warsaw Treaty stressed with the utmost vigour in their
Declaration that they have consistently favoured
“the just and lasting peaceful settlement of conflict
situations, in whatever part of the world they might
arise. There are no problems, global or regional,
that they would consider impossible to solve by
political methods. Such a solution requires strict
respect for the sovereign rights and independence
of ail States and total renunciation of interference
in their internal affairs, of the use of force or the
threat of force against them and of attempts to
establish foreign domination over them and turn
them into bases for aggression against other
countries.” [S/13948, annex II, part III.]

106. Nevertheless, the fact that my country wishes to
see a negotiated settlement of the question of Cyprus
does not mean that we regard the extension of the
mandate of the Force as a mere technical operation
aimed at endorsing a situation. Even if the situation
remains fairly calm, it is nevertheless a matter for
concern and must not be allowed to continue.
107. The French authorities wish to express once
again their support for the mission of-good offices that
the Council has. entrusted to the Secretary-General.
My delegation would like on this occasion to thank
the Secretary-General for the constant and tenacious
efforts he has made, with the valuable support of
his associates. We would also assure him of the support of the French authorities.for a resumption of the
intercommunal talks.

112. The people of Cyprus, both the Greek Cypriots
and the Turkish Cypriots, are faced by serious dangers.
As we know, certain circles of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) are pursuing political
and military goals inimical to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus, despite
the fact that in its resolution 34/30, the General
Assembly once again demanded the immediate withdrawal of all foreign armed forces and foreign military
presence from the Republic of Cyprus, as well as the
cessation of any foreign intervention in the affairs of
Cyprus.

108. In expressing once again our confidence in the
Secretary-General, we wish also to extend our best
wishes to his new Special Representative in Cyprus,
Mr. Gobbi, and our thanks to his predecessor,
Mr. Galindo Pohl. We also express all our gratitude
to the Under-Secretary-General for Special Political
Affairs, Mr. Perez de CuCllar. We thank, too, General
Quinn and ail the officers, men and civilian personnel.
of the Force. Every one of them is contributing with
exemplary devotion to the work done by the United
Nations for peace.

113. Particular problems arise in connexion with the
dangerous machinations of leading circles of United
States imperialism and other reactionary forces; they
go so far as to use military potential in order to
expand their sphere of influence in the Middle East
and in the areas of the Persian Gulf and the
Mediterranean.

109. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
(inrerpretarionfiom Russian): The fact that the Council
is today once again dealing with the question of
extending the mandate of UNFICYP illustrates that
the situation in the island. remains complicated. In
paragraph 66 of his report to the Council, the Secretary-General states:

114. A few days ago Cypriot newspapers reported
that the United States intended to use its military
bases, the Mediterranean bases of other NATO countries and the military bases of the United Kingdom in
Cyprus for so-called punitive operations in the Middle
East. The idea is obviously to station there detachments of the so-called rapid deployment forces, trained
by Washington in order to achieve Washington’s
ambitions in the Near and Middle East. The newspapers expressed the great concern of the people of
Cyprus with regard to those plans.

“In the light of the situation on the ground and
of political developments, I have concluded once
again that the continued presence of UNFICYP
remains necessary, both in helping to maintain calm
in the island and in creating the-conditions in which
the searchforapeaceful settlementcangoforward.”

115. The current visit of the President of the Republic
of Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, to the German
Democratic Republic, on the invitation of the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Socialist

110. The German Democratic Republic agreed that
the mandate of UNFICYP should be extended for a
13

.

Unity Party of Germany and President of the Council
of State of the German Democratic Republic, Erich
Honecker, expresses once again the close identification
of the German Democratic Republic with the just
cause of the Cypriot people. In a toast, the head of the
German Democratic Republic stated:

our view, a conference within the framework of the
United Nations, as proposed by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and supported by Cyprus and
other States, is still today the appropriate forum for
achieving a just settlement of the problem of Cyprus,
in keeping with the interests of the people of-Cyprus.
118. Mr. WECKMAN (Mexico) (interpreration from
I should like, at the outset, to express the
appreciation of my delegation to the SecretaryGeneraI, for his constant efforts to bring about a
resumption of the negotiations between the two
Cypriot communities. He has been assisted in those
efforts by the effective collaboration of three distinguished Latin Americans: Messrs. Perez de Cuellar,
Galindo Pohl and Gobbi. There is no doubt that intercommunal negotiations, under the aegis of the Secretary-General, represent the best means of restoring
peace in Cyprus.

“To make detente comprehensive and allembracing as a process, we need a peaceful resohrtion of international conflicts. The limitation and
reduction of military presence and activity in the
Mediterranean, Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans,
in the Persian Gulf and the Caribbean, would serve
the cause of peace in those areas. The withdrawal
of warships carrying nuclear weapors from ‘the
Mediterranean, and an undertaking not to place
such weapons in non-nuclear-weapon States in the
Mediterranean region, would be in keeping with the
spirit of the Helsinki Final Act.

Spanish):

119. Mexico has joined the other, members of the
Council in extending the mandate of UNFICYP for
six more months. The work of that Force over the
years has been exemplary. Moreover, it has been
almost a year. since, the intercommunal talks were
interrupted, and that has,created a situation which, if
allowed to continue, will alter the original purpose
for which UNFICYP was created.

“We are convinced that the problem of Cyprus,
and indeed other global or regional international
problems, could be solved simply by political
means, There can be no doubt that the sovereign
rights and independence of all States must be
respected, that there must be no intervention in
their internal affairs and that the use or threat of
the use of force must be renounced.”

120. The stationing of the Force must not serve to
perpetuate a division of Cyprus. Sixteen years ago, its
presence was intended to encourage the parties to reach
a solution to the problem. Indeed, the original justification for the Force was that it would prevent
clashes between the two communities and, at the-same
time, facilitate contacts between them with a view to a
return to normal conditions.

Erich Honecker assured the people of Cyprus of the
firm solidarity and active support of the German
:
Democratic Republic in the future, as well.
116. The German Democratic Republic supports a
peaceful solution of the problem of Cyprus, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 34130. The
German Democratic Republic views the talks between,
the.two Cypriot communities, with the assistance of
the Secretary-General, as an important step towards a
settlement of the internal political aspects of the
problem of Cyprus. We regret that the talks were
suspended in June 1979and have not yet been resumed,
as was pointed out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the Council. Good will and readiness to
compromise are essential for the successof those talks.
The exclusion of all foreign intervention in the internal
atfairs of Cyprus is of equal importance. In that regard,
the delegation of the German Democratic Republic
would IIke to draw attention to the important proposal
of the President of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, with
regard to the total disarming and demilitarization of
Cyprus. The withdrawal of all foreign troops and the
cessation of the foreign presence in the isIand would
be decisive steps forward towards solving the problem
of Cyprus and would at the same time promote the
cause of dCtente and strengthen the security of peoples
in the Mediterranean area.

121. -‘However, given the present circumstances, in
whichthe two communities have effected a separation
between them, the Turkish Cypriots being concentrated in the north and the Greek Cypriots in the
remainder of the island, and in spite of the fact that
for more than a decade and a half, the Council has
renewed the mandate of the Force twice yearly, in
almost ritual fashion, the present functions of the
Force are not those which it was originally created
to carry out: its primary task at present is that of
overseeing the cease-fire. In those circ.umstances,
my delegation wonders whether the perennia!$roblemof the’Force’s deficit might not be solved by adapting
the Force to its practical functions.
122. The problem is basically political. We note with
regret that events do not live up to the expectations
of the intemationa1 community. The intercommunal
negotiations have periods of stagnation and have never
been characterized ,by dynamism. The lo-point agreement of May 1979 between Mr. Kyprianou and
Mr. Denktag provides an excellent basis for those
negotiations. However, clear political will.on the part
of those directly concerned to resolve the problem is
absent.

117. The United Nations is in duty bound to assist
in bringing about a settlement of the problem of Cyprus.
It can play an effective role in ensuring the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus. In
14

123. It is regrettable that the younger generations
of Cypriots have gradually lost contact with the community to which they do not belong. Although ties
between the communities are being reaffirmed, the
sense of nationality is being lost. Should this tendency
continue, Cyprus may confront us as a nation divided
under the auspices of the United Nations; unfortunately, we have today several examples of such
divided nations.

129. We take this opportunity to express appreciation to the Secretary-General, as well as to Mr. Perez
de Cdllar and other members of his staff, for their
untiring efforts to bring about peace in Cyprus. Our
gratitude goes also to his Special Representative,
Mr. Galindo Pohl, who relinquished his post in April,
and to the new Special Representative, Mr. Hugo
Gobbi, to whom we extend our best wishes. To MajorGeneral Quinn and the men of the Force we express
our thanks for their efficiency and for their dedication
to duty.

124. My delegation wishes to express its hope that
negotiations between the two communities, on a basis
of equality, will resume without delay and that they will
be directed to substantive questions, in accordance
with repeated resolutions of the Security Council and
of the General Assembly. It would of course also be
desirable if other resolutions on the problem were
implemented, particularly those concerning the fate
of displaced persons and the withdrawal of all foreign
troops from the island.

130. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Cyprus, who has asked to be allowed to make a
statement.
131. Mr. MAVROMMATIS (Cyprus): It is not my
intention to reply to the individual who appears before
the Council by virtue of the provisions of rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure, or to reply to the
distorted presentation of facts well known to each and
every one of the members of the Council,
including what transpired last weekend in Cyprus
during the mission of Mr. Perez de CuCllar and the
necessity for the reservations which were referred to
by us, as well as by the other side. Suffice it to state
that the reservations became imperative, or essential,
when the other side refused to negotiate on the basis
of the IO-point agreement.

125. A number of fundamental principles are involved in the question of Cyprus. Of course, our duty
is to preserve peace and security in the region.
However, the heart of the matter is that it is the very
survival of a State and respect for the self-determination of all its citizens that we must guarantee.
126. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): My ,delegation supported the resolution just adopted, which extends the
mandate of UNFICYP. We did so because we share
the view expressed by the Secretary-General in his
report that the continued presence of the Force remains
necessary, both in helping to maintain calm in the
island, and, in crealing the conditions in which the
search for a peaceful settlement can go forward.
127. My delegation has followed with interest the
efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about a
resumption of the intercommunal talks. We regret the
fact that, in spite of the narrowing of the gap between
the positions of the parties, so far it has not been possible to agree on the modalities which would take into
account the common ground existing between them
and facilitate concrete negotiations to resolve the
tragic situation in Cyprus.
128. We wish to reiterate our position that direct
intercommunal talks under the auspices of the Secretary-General and based on the lo-point agreement of
19 May 1979 constitute the best possible approach to
a just settlement which would bring about reconciliation and harmony and would guarantee the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of Cyprus.

132. But there was another, perhaps positive, side to
that false presentation of facts: it led me to appreciate
even more the extremely delicate and difficult task of
the Secretary-General and his team, to admire them
even more for their perseverance and to thank them
once again for trying to help Cyprus.
r133. Similarly, I should like once again to thank the
members of the Council for adopting the resolution,
and to thank those representatives who, through their
statements, reiterated the interest of their Govemments in a solution of the Cyprus problem.
The meeting

rose at 1.25 p.m.

NOTES

’ A/35/161.
z Oflcial

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Ses-

,slon.Plenary Meetings, 72rd meeting.para. 78.

!
15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

’

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNTES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairics et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOjIYgEiTh

EI3AAHHII

OPI-AHZi

BAItHI

OG-hELWHEHHhlX

HAlMa

H3fiaiwa
Opraxwsauua
06ZennHeHnbrx
HauaR
MOX(HO xynw-rb
a xrrnaor~rx
rdarasar-rax w arenrcreax
BO acex pationax
anwpa. HaeonnTe
cnpaaxn
06 nsnanuax
a
eauresl KHWXCHOM Marasune
HJIU rmrua~e
no anpecy:
Oprannsauna
06’aenunexrtbrx
HaunR.
Ce~uxn
no npo&tawte nsnauuR,
HLM-Mopa
HIIH XCeueaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en libretias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

L&o

.\.

in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-61462-September

19862,050
