4

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

Convinced that Security Council resolution 242
(1967) of 22 November 1967 should be implemented
immediately in all its parts in order to achieve a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East in which every
State in the area can live in security,
Determined that the territory of a State shall not be
the object of occupation or acquisition by another State
resulting from the threat or use of force, which is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and to the
principles enshrined in Security Council resolution 242
(1967) as well as in the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security adopted by the General
Assembly on 16 December 1970,
Expressing its appreciation of the efforts of the Committee of African Heads of State undertaken in pursuance of the resolution adopted on 23 June 1971 by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its eighth ordinary session,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of Israel's
occupation of the Arab territories since 5 June 1967,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
1. Reaffirms that the acquisition of territories by
force is inadmissible and that, consequently, territories
thus occupied must be restored;
2. Reaffirms that the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East should include the
application of both the following principles:
(a) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict;
( b) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency, and respect for and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of every State in the area and its right to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries free from
threats or acts of force;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to reactivate the mission of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Middle
East in order to promote agreement and assist efforts to
reach a peace agreement as envisaged in the Special
Representative's aide-memoire of 8 February 1971;16
4. Expresses its full support for all the efforts of
the Special Representative to implement Security Council resolution 242 (1967);
5. Notes with appreciation the positive reply given
by Egypt to the Special Representative's initiative for
establishing a just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
6. Calls upon Israel to respond favourably to the
Special Representative's peace initiative;
7. Further invites the parties to the Middle East conflict to give their full co-operation to the Special Representative in order to work out practical measures for:
(a) Guaranteeing freedom of navigation through
international waterways in the area;
( b) Achieving a just settlement of the refugee problem;
(c) Guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and
political independence of every State in the area;
B. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly, as ap16 A/8541. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971, document
S/10403, annex I.

propriate, on the progress made by the Special Representative in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Security Council to consider, if
necessary, making arrangements, under the relevant
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations, with
regard to the implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
2016th plenary meeting,
13 December 1971.
2817 (XXVI).

Scientific work on peace research

The General Assembly,
Considering that the fundamental purpose of the
United Nations is to save mankind from the scourge of
war and to maintain international peace and security,
Considering that scientific research on the problems
of war and peace has expanded and that many national
and international institutions have made them the subject of their studies,
Noting with interest the work undertaken in this field
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Conscious of the importance that States attach to
the study of the means and recourses to implement
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in order to build peace, security and co-operation in the world,
Considering it desirable to bring to the notice of the
international community the work done in the field of
peace research by national and international institutions and to promote on a permanent basis, in the light
of the purposes and principles of the Charter, a recording of the studies devoted to this subject,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare every
other year an informative report on scientific works
produced by national and international, governmental
and non-governmental, public and private institutions
in the field of peace research;
2. Invites the Governments of Member States and
the institutions referred to in paragraph 1 above to
provide the Secretary-General, to the best of their
ability and competence, with all the information he may
require;
3. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Research and those specialized agencies which
are active in the field of peace research to lend their
assistance in the drafting of the report referred to
above;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, at the beginning of its twenty-eighth
session, the first report prepared under paragraph 1
above.
2018th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2833 (XXVI). World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for disarmament and the consolidation of peace,
Convinced that all peoples of the world have a vital
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
