S/2020/273

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 April 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 2 April 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a paper on the working methods of the
Security Council for the month of April 2020, during the presidency of the Dominican
Republic (see annex). The paper has been agreed upon by the members of the Council
in the light of the continued challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic to the Council’s usual procedures.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
President of the Security Council

20-05220 (E)

070420

*2005220*

S/2020/273

Annex
Working methods of the Security Council during the presidency of
the Dominican Republic, April 2020
1.
The Dominican Republic will assume the presidency of the Security Council on
1 April 2020 in unprecedented circumstances.
2.
The State of New York has requested all non-essential personnel to remain in
their homes in order to limit physical exposure and therefore stop the spread of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Social distancing has been proved to be the most
effective way to control the spread of the virus, thus saving the lives of those most
vulnerable to its effects.
3.
The Secretary-General has issued a series of measures aimed at limiting the
presence of United Nations staff within the United Nations premises until 12 April 2020.
4.
Given the seriousness of the circumstances, under the leadership of the President
of the Council for the month of March (China), the Council held numerous
consultations on the issue of the continuity of its work.
5.
The meetings were held virtually, with the participation of all Council members
and representatives of the Secretary-General and the Security Council Affairs Division.
6.
After consultations with the Secretariat and all Council members, the
Dominican Republic plans to utilize the following guidelines for the month of April,
which are aimed at continuing the work of the Council to the greatest extent possible.
The guidelines are provided in addition to the measures outlined in the letter dated
27 March 2020 from the President of the Council addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Council (S/2020/253), which are in effect until
the end of April.
7.
The guidelines are only a response to the current exceptional and unprecedented
circumstances. They must and will be revised, should circumstances change during the
course of the presidency of the Dominican Republic, in close consultation with all
Council members and in the light of updates to and developments in the COVID-19
pandemic.
Informal video teleconference plan of the Council
8.
In the spirit of transparency, during the month of April 2020, the Dominican
Republic intends to conduct Council video teleconferences on the items reflected in
the informal plan issued by the presidency after consultations with Council members
during the first working day of its presidency. The informal plan will include the open
and closed video teleconferences that usually appear as briefings and consultations in
the Council’s programme of work.
9.
For purposes of transparency and inclusiveness, and in line with the working
methods of the Council, the informal plan will be circulated by the Permanent Mission
of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations to the wider membership of the
Organization and published on the Council’s website on an exceptional basis, as well
as on the website of the Permanent Mission.
Discussions
10. It is intended that the following nomenclature be utilized for the virtual
discussions held during the presidency of the Dominican Republic: “open video
teleconference on [item on the agenda to be discussed]”, followed by “closed video
teleconference on [item on the agenda to be discussed]”.
2/5

20-05220

S/2020/273Error! No document variable supplied.

11. Consultations will be referred to as “closed video teleconference on [item on
the agenda to be discussed]”.
12. With the assistance of the Security Council Affairs Division, the presidency of
the Dominican Republic plans to work in the spirit of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, ensuring that all Council members participating in a virtual discussion
are represented by appropriately credentialled delegates, pursuant to rule 13; that the
agenda is adopted at the outset of the video teleconference, pursuant to rule 9; and
that any other relevant rules are observed as a matter of practice, under chapter VI,
entitled “Conduct of business”.
13. The President of the Council may invite Member States, members of the
Secretariat or individuals who are not members of the Council to participate in a video
teleconference within the principles of rules 37 and 39 if there are no objections from
Council members. Such an invitation will not apply to a closed video teleconference.
14.

Given technical constraints, the virtual discussions will be conducted in English.

Video teleconference announcement
15. The day before an event, the presidency of the Council will share with the wider
membership of the United Nations, through email, a message from the President of
the Council, in which the video teleconference will be announced.
16. The message will also be available to the wider membership and the general
public in the programme of work on the website of the Council.
17. Unless the situation changes, there will be no announcement of the meetings in
the Journal of the United Nations.
Records of video teleconferences
18. Unless the situation changes, verbatim records of the events will not be
published.
19. Given that there has been no agreement to consider the discussions of th e
Council held on the virtual platform as formal meetings, and to ensure the
transparency and legitimacy of the Council, the Dominican Republic will encourage
briefers, where appropriate and according to their own practice, to share their
presentations with the President of the Council. Special representatives of the
Secretary-General, special envoys of the Secretary-General and department heads
may also wish to publish their statement to the Council on the web page of their
mission or department on the United Nations website.
20. The President of the Council will circulate as a document of the Council a
compilation document within 48 hours containing the interventions of the briefers
and those of the members and non-members of the Council participating in the video
teleconference who ask for the inclusion of their statement in the document. To that
end, members are encouraged to send their statement to the presidency in a timely
manner. Circulation of a compilation document will not apply to the closed vide o
teleconferences of Council members.
Live feed of briefers through United Nations webcasts
21. When substituting a regular briefing of the Council, the Dominican Republic
considers that the open video teleconference will be divided into two parts. As in
regular practice in open briefings in the Security Council Chamber, the first part will
be a public live feed of the relevant briefers, moderated by the President of the
Council, streamed by United Nations webcast. The feed will allow the international
community, including the wider United Nations membership, to be informed of the
20-05220

3/5

S/2020/273

latest developments pertaining to issues on the Council’s agenda. The President will
be connected to the same feed in order to moderate the presentations and, upon their
conclusion, invite the Council to hold an open or a closed video teleconference, which
will not be webcast. In consultation with members, open video teleconferences will
be fully webcast as soon as is technically feasible.
Recordings of the public portion of open Council video teleconferences
22. In coordination with the Secretariat, the President plans to request that the
webcasts of the statements delivered by briefers during the public portion of the
Council’s video teleconferences be archived as United Nations webcasts.
Outcomes of open video teleconferences followed by closed video teleconferences
23. To the extent possible, and in agreement with Council members, the Dominican
Republic will facilitate the negotiation of press statements or element s for the press
after every Council discussion. The President will thereafter orally deliver any agreed
elements for the press through United Nations webcast.
Adoption of decisions
24. As President of the Council, the Dominican Republic will be bound by the
agreement reached by Council members under the leadership of China as President of
the Council for the month of March 2020 and outlined in the letter dated 27 March 2020
from the President addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Council, which establishes a written procedure for the adoption of resolutions, if
necessary. These temporary, extraordinary and provisional measures will enable the
Council to discharge its mandate and will not be considered as a precedent in the future.
Presidential statements
25. In the absence of objections, presidential statements that have been
electronically agreed upon by consensus following a non -objection procedure of no
less than 48 hours will be read out by the President during an open video
teleconference. The statements will have the same status as those adopted in the
Security Council Chamber. They will also be published as an official document of the
Council.
26. The procedure for the adoption of presidential statements is a temporary,
extraordinary and provisional measure to enable the Council to discharge its mandate
and will not be considered as a precedent in the future.
Conduct of video teleconferences by the members of the Council
27. In order to make the discussions as efficient as possible, the Dominican
Republic requests all participants to see to it that both principal and alternate
delegates are logged in at the same time, thereby ensuring that, if a principal ’s
connection is dropped, an alternate can take his or her place immediately. The
procedure will minimize the need to suspend the event if participants lose their
connection.
28. It is highly recommended that all principals, alternates and briefers test their
microphones and video equipment 30 minutes before the beginning of a video
teleconference, including by connecting through the links provided, and follow the
technical guidance provided by United Nations technicians.
29. Following general practice, the order of speakers for the video teleconferences
of Council members will be established by a draw.

4/5

20-05220

S/2020/273Error! No document variable supplied.

30. To allow for more interactive and focused interventions by Council members,
briefers are asked by the presidency to share their statements in advance and through
the presidency.
31. Briefers will be encouraged to be succinct and to limit their remarks to seven
minutes.

20-05220

5/5
