Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

15. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2705 (XXV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territorietl

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2556 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,21 prepared under the terms of General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Mindful of the need to provide increased educational
and training facilities, at all levels, for the inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites Member States to make generous offers
of study and training facilities to inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories;
4. Requests those Member States offering scholarships and those which might subsequently do so to
inform the Secretary-General of the details of the offers
made under this programme and, if possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
give widespread publicity in Territories under their
administration to offers of study and training facilities
made by Member States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves
of such offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
1. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2706 (XXV). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Mrica
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, 2431 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968
and 2557 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 concerning
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 22

21 Ibid., agenda item 70, document A/8162.
22 A/8151.

97

Referring to paragraph 14 of its resolution 2707
(XXV) of 14 December 1970 concerning the question
of Territories under Portuguese administration, in which
the Secretary-General is invited to develop and expand
training programmes for the inhabitants of those Territories,
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December
1970 by which it decided to establish a comprehensive
United Nations Fund for Namibia,
Noting that the financial situation has improved only
slightly during 1970 and that available funds are therefore still far from adequate to meet the objectives of
the Programme,
Welcoming the information that the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, established in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2431
(XXIII), has commenced its work during 1970,
Strongly convinced that the provision of assistance
for the education and training of persons from the
Territories concerned is as essential as ever and that
it is therefore highly desirable further to strengthen
and expand the Programme,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
contributed to the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa;
2. Strongly appeals to all States, organizations and
individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa and within the terms of paragraph 2 of General
Assembly resolution 2431 (XXIII), to take all ~ssible measures for the promotion of adequate contnbutions to the Programme;
4. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under section 12 of the regular
budget of the United Nations for the financial year
1971, for an amount of $100,000 to ensure the continuity of the Programme pending the receipt of
adequate voluntary contributions;
5. Notes with approval that co-operation between
the Programme and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has been further
strengthened and that it is the intention of the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the Organization of African Unity, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organisation with a view to
further strengthening co-operation with them;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the
progress of the Programme.
1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2707 (XXV). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having heard the statements of the petitioners, 23
23 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Fourth Committee, 1888th, 1889th, 1892nd and
1897th meetings.

98

General A11embl1-Twenty-6.fth Session

Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaratiou on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of Territories under Portuguese
domination, 24 and the report of the Special Committee's delegation of observers to the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Portuguese
Colonies, held at Rome from 27 to 29 June 1970,211
Bearing in mind the views expressed by representatives of national liberation movements of the Territories
under Portuguese domination, including those expressed
to the Ad Hoe Group of the Special Committee which
visited Africa in 1970 to contact leaders of liberation
movements,28
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, as well as those adopted by the
Special Committee,
Recalling further the relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Gravely concerned at the defiant attitude of the Government of Portugal towards the international community and the persistent refusal of that Government
to recognize the inalienable right of the peoples of the
Territories under its domination to self-determination
and independence and to implement the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Deeply disturbed by the increasingly explosive situation created by the measures of oppression carried out
by the Government of Portugal and, in particular,
by its intensified military operations in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau),
Deeply concerned at the continued and intensified
activities of foreign economic, financial and other interests which are impeding the realization by the peoples
of the Territories under Portuguese domination of their
legitimate aspirations for self-determination and independence, contrary to the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly,
Deploring the continued assistance received by the
Government of Portugal from its allies in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and from other Governments, which it uses to pursue its policies of colonial
dominatfon and oppression of the peoples of Angola,
MozamHque and Guinea (Bissau),
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau) and other Territories under Portuguese domination to self-determination and independence, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and the legitimacy
of their struggle to achieve that right by all necessary
means at their disposal;
2. Strongly condemns the persistent refusal of the
Government of Portugal to implement resolution 1514
(XV) and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, and the
colonial war being waged by that Government against
24 /bid., Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/
Rev.I), chapter VII.
21i /bid., annex II.
• 26 Ibid., Supplement
No. 23B (A/8023/Rev.1/ Add.2),
annex n.

the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau) which also threatens the security and violates
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the independent African States, in particular those States
bordering the Territories;
3. Condemns the collaboration between Portugal,
South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia, since this is designed to perpetuate
colonialism and oppression in southern Africa;
4. Condemns the intervention of South African
forces against the peoples of the Territories under
Portuguese domination;
5. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to apply
without further delay to the peoples of the Territories
under it~ domination the pnnciple of self-determination and independence in accordance with resolution
1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, and in particular:
(a) To cease forthwith all acts of repression against
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau) and to withdraw all military and other forces
employed for this purpose;
( b) To cease immediately all practices which
violate the inalienable rights of the indigenous population, including arbitrary eviction of the African population and the settlement of immigrants in the Territories;
(c) To proclaim an unconditional political amnesty,
to restore democratic political rights and to transfer
powers to freely elected institutions representative of
the population, in accordance with resolution 1514
(XV);

{d) To refrain from all attacks on, and violations of,
the security and territorial integrity of neighbouring
sovereign countries;
(e) To release the men and property of those
sovereign States now being held by PortuJal following
the attacks and violations committed agamst them;
6. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to treat
the freedom fighters of An~ola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau) captured dunng the struggle for freedom as prisoners of war in accordance with the Geneva
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of
War, of 12 August 1949,27 and to comply with the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;28
7. Reiterates 'its appeal to all States, particularly
to members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
to withhold from Portugal any assistance which enables it to prosecute the colonial war in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), and in particular:
(a) To desist forthwith from the training of Portuguese military personnel which encourages that Government to continue its repression of the African
peoples in the Territories under its domination;
( b) To prevent the sale or su~ply of weapons,
military equipment and material, mcluding aircraft,
helicopters and vehicles, ;o the Government of Portugal,
as well as all supplies enabling it to manufacture or
maintain weapons and ammunition which it uses to
perpetuate its colonial domination in Africa;
(c) To desist from any collaboration with the
ground, air and naval forces of Portugal which might
thwart the achievement of the objectives contained in
resolution 1514 (XV);
21 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 15 (1950), No. 972.
28 United Nations, Treaty S.ries, vol. 15 (1950), No. 973.

Re..,ladom adopted on the reporll of the Foarth Committee

8. Calls upon all States to take all effective measures
to put an end to all practices which exploit the Territoiies under Portuguese domination and the peoples
therein and to discourage their nationals and companies
from entering into any activities or arrangements which
strengthen Portugal's domination over, and impede the
implementation of the Declaration with respect to,
those Territories;
9. Calls upon the Government of Portugal not to
use chemical and biological methods of warfare against
the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau), contrary to the generally recognized rules of
international law embodied in the Protocol for the
Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,• and to
General Assembly resolution 2603 (XXIV) of 16 De-

cember 1969;
10. Welcomes the action taken by the financial
~ps in certain States to withdraw their participation
m the Cabora Bassa project, but requests the Governments which have not yet done so to withdraw from
the activities relating to the Cabora Bassa project in
Mozambique and the Cunene River Basin proJect in
Angola and to take all the necessary measures to prevent the participation therein of any companies or individuals under their jurisdiction;
11. Invites all States and the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, in co-operation with the Orpnmltion of African
Unity, to render to the peoples of the Territories under
Portuguese domination the financial and material assistance necessary to continue their struggle for the
restoration of their inalienable rights;
12. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the grave situation in the Territories of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) created by the continued violation by Portugal of its obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and the growing
collaboration between Portugal, the racist Government
of South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia, which constitute a threat to international peace and security;
13. Recommends that the Security Council should
continue to give special attention to the problems of
Portuguese colonialism in Africa and of the collaboration between Portugal and the racist minority regimes
of southern Africa, and to take effective measures, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter,
to ensure the full implementation of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and its own resolutions relating thereto;
14. Invites the Secretary-General, in the light of
General Assembly resolution 2557 (XXIV) of 12
December 1969 and in consultation with the specialized
agencies and the Governments of the host countries,
to develop and expand training programmes for the
indigenous inhabitants of the Territories under Portuguese domination, taking into account their needs for
qualified administrative, technical and professional personnel to assume responsibility for the public administration and the economic and social development
of their own countries, and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the progress
of these programmes;
29 League

No. 2138.

of Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. XCIV (1929),

99

15. Requats the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all States and to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on steps
taken or envisaF, by States in the implementation of
the various promions contained therein;
16. Reqwns the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territories under review.

1928th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.

2'709 (XXV).

()uesdon of Amerlean Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Vlrpl
Islands, Brunel, Cayman lalands, C ~
(Keeling) hlands, Dominica, Gilbert and
EWce laland1, Grenada, Guam, Montaerrat,
New Hebrlde1, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St.
K.lt11-Nevu-Anpilla, St. Luela, St. Vincent,
Seychelles, Solomon hland1, Tokelau
hlands, Turkl and Caleoe hlandl and the
United States Virgin hlande

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamasista~uda, British Virgin Islands,
Brunei, Cayman
s, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Dominica, Gilbert and B1lice Islands, Grenada, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides; Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vmcent,
Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks
and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
HavlnR uamined the cha_pters of the report of the
~ Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 80
RecalUng its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
otfier relevant resolutions, as well as the relevant proviaions of itl resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970 containing the programme of action for the full
implementation of the Declaration,
Deeply concerned 'at the' policy of SODJ.f' administering Powers in establishin and maintaining mill
bases in some of the erritories under their
ministration, in contravention of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Deploring the attitude of those administering Powers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations visitinir missions to visit the Territories under their ad-

f

1:1-

ministration,

Reaffirming the vital importance of visiting missions
as a means of securinJ adequate and first-hand informa-

tion in regard to political, economic and social conditions in the Territories and to the views, wishes and
aspirations of the people in these Territories,
Conscious that these Territories require the continued attention and assistance of the United Nations
in the achievement by their peoples of the objectives
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and
lo Official Records of the General ..4uembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1), chapters XVlI
anc1 xvm.
