A/RES/66/62

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 December 2011

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 102

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2011
[on the report of the First Committee (A/66/416)]

66/62.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/89 of 8 December 2010,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and the entry into force of the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects 1 and its amended article 1, 2 the Protocol on Non-Detectable
Fragments (Protocol I),1 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)1 and its amended version, 3
the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons
(Protocol III),1 the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV) 4 and the
Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V), 5
Welcoming the results of the Third Review Conference of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects, held in Geneva from 7 to 17 November 2006,
Welcoming also the results of the 2010 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention, held in Geneva on 25 and 26 November 2010,
Welcoming further the results of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, held in Geneva on 24 November 2010,
Welcoming the results of the Fourth Conference of the High Contracting
Parties to Protocol V, held in Geneva on 22 and 23 November 2010,
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
3
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
4
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
5
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
2

11-46254

*1046254*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/62

Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in
the elaboration of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the
particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other organizations
in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of explosive remnants of
war,
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to
1.
become parties, as soon as possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects1 and the Protocols
thereto, as amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these
instruments at an early date and so as to ultimately achieve their universality;
Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so
2.
to express their consent to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the
amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the Protocols thereto to
include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on
3.
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V);5
4.
Welcomes the additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to
the Convention, as well as the consents to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
5.
Also welcomes the adoption by the Third Review Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention of a plan of action to promote universality of
the Convention and the Protocols thereto, 6 and expresses appreciation for the
continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as depositary of the Convention and the
Protocols thereto, the Chair of the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention, the President of the Fourth Conference of the High Contracting Parties
to Protocol V and the President of the Twelfth Annual Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the High Contracting
Parties, to achieve the goal of universality;
Recalls the decision of the Third Review Conference of the High
6.
Contracting Parties to the Convention to establish a sponsorship programme within
the framework of the Convention, 7 and, with recognition of the value and
importance of the programme, encourages States to contribute to the Sponsorship
Programme;
Welcomes the decision of the 2010 Meeting of the High Contracting
7.
Parties to the Convention to convene the Fourth Review Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention in Geneva from 14 to 25 November 2011;
Acknowledges the work of the Implementation Support Unit within the
8.
Geneva Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, which was
established following a decision of the 2009 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention;
Welcomes the commitment by States parties to continue to address the
9.
humanitarian problems caused by certain specific types of munitions in all their
aspects, including cluster munitions, with a view to minimizing the humanitarian
impact of these munitions;
_______________
6
7

2

See CCW/CONF.III/11 (Part II), annex III.
Ibid., annex IV.

A/RES/66/62

10. Also welcomes the preparatory work for the Fourth Review Conference
conducted by the Group of Governmental Experts of the High Contracting Parties to
the Convention, acting under the overall responsibility of the President-designate,
and notes that the issue of urgently addressing the humanitarian impact of cluster
munitions, while striking a balance between military and humanitarian
considerations, will be further addressed at the Fourth Review Conference in
November 2011;
11. Further welcomes the commitment of States parties to the Protocol on
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V) to the effective and efficient
implementation of the Protocol and the implementation of the decisions of the First
and Second Conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the Protocol establishing
a comprehensive framework for the exchange of information and cooperation, 8 and
also welcomes the holding of the Meeting of Experts of the High Contracting
Parties to the Protocol, in Geneva from 6 to 8 April 2011, as a mechanism for
consultation and cooperation among the States parties;
12. Notes the decision of the Tenth Annual Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to establish an informal open-ended
group of experts, 9 and welcomes the holding of the third session of the Group of
Experts of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, in Geneva on 4 and
5 April 2011, to exchange national practices and experiences and to assess the
implementation of the Protocol;
13. Also notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention,
conferences may be convened to examine amendments to the Convention or to any
of the Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other categories
of conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope
and application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any
proposed amendments or additional protocols;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance and to
provide such services, including summary records, as may be required for the
Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, to be
held from 14 to 25 November 2011, and other annual conferences and expert
meetings of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as
well as for any continuation of the work after the meetings;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly
periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions
to the Convention, its amended article 12 and the Protocols thereto;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session
the item entitled “Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
71st plenary meeting
2 December 2011

_______________
8
9

See CCW/P.V/CONF/2007/1 and Corr.1 and 2 and CCW/P.V/CONF/2008/12.
See CCW/AP.II/CONF.10/2, para. 23.

3
