S/2001/600

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 June 2001
Original: English

Report of the Security Council Mission on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
16-18 June 2001
I. Terms of reference of the Mission
1.
At the invitation of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kosovo, Hans Haekkerup, the
Security Council decided to send a mission there, as
conveyed to the Secretary-General by the President of
the Council in his letter of 15 May 2001 (S/2001/482).
The visit took place from 16-18 June 2001. An earlier
Council Mission to Kosovo took place in April 2000.
The present one marked the first ever Mission
comprising all fifteen members of the Security
Council. It was also the first mission to be led by the
President of the Security Council.
2.

The Mission had the following objectives:

(a) To find ways to enhance support for the
implementation of Council resolution 1244 (1999);
(b) In this context, to observe the operations of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the situation on the ground,
including difficult challenges faced by UNMIK, and
report its conclusions to the Security Council;
(c) In this regard, to look at the impact of the
regional situation on the work of UNMIK;
(d) To convey a strong message to local leaders
and all others concerned about the need to reject all
violence, ensure public safety and order, promote
stability, safety and security, inter-ethnic reconciliation
and inclusion; support the full and effective
implementation of Council resolution 1244 (1999) and
fully cooperate with UNMIK to these ends; and

01-41578 (E) 190601

*0141578*

(e) To review ongoing implementation of the
prohibitions imposed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1160 (1998).

II. Composition of the Mission
3.
The Mission was composed of the following
members:
Ambassador Anwarul K. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Head of Mission
Ambassador Guofang Shen (China)
Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso (Colombia)
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte (France)
Ambassador Richard Ryan (Ireland)
Ambassador M. Patricia Durrant (Jamaica)
Counsellor Mamounou Toure (Mali)
Ambassador Anund P. Neewoor (Mauritius)
Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby (Norway)
Ambassador Sergey V. Lavrov (Russian
Federation)
Minister-Counsellor Christine Lee (Singapore)
Ambassador Othman Jerandi (Tunisia)
Minister-Counsellor Volodymyr Krokhmal
(Ukraine)
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock (United
Kingdom)

S/2001/600

Ambassador James B. Cunningham (United
States)

III. Activities of the Mission and
summary of meetings
4.
Upon arrival on 16 June 2001, the Mission
received a comprehensive briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as
briefings
by
the
Principal
Deputy
Special
Representative and Deputy Special Representatives of
UNMIK’s Pillars, security and justice (United
Nations), civil administration (United Nations),
institution-building (Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)) and economic
reconstruction (European Union).
5.
UNMIK outlined the main achievements and
challenges, as it marks its second anniversary. The
Mission discussed a wide range of issues, including the
Constitutional Framework, preparations for Kosovowide elections, the security situation, efforts to enhance
law enforcement, including the newly created Pillar I
(Police and Justice), problems in inter-ethnic relations,
such as the situation in Mitrovica, and efforts to
improve reconciliation. The discussion focused on
UNMIK’s initiatives to encourage all communities,
particularly the Kosovo Serb community, to participate
in both registration and elections. One important
element in this discussion was UNMIK’s developing
dialogue with the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and efforts to facilitate the latter’s
encouragement of the Kosovo Serb community to be
part of the UNMIK-led process.
6.
Another important element, which was identified
as one of the greatest challenges, was promoting multiethnicity. UNMIK believed that the next six months
would be decisive for the future of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo. Within this context, it was currently pursuing
parallel political and security tracks to improve the
situation for all of Kosovo’s communities in an effort
to encourage participation in the UNMIK-led process.
It was imperative that all communities, particularly the
Kosovo Serb community, participated in Kosovo-wide
elections and the ensuing institutions of provisional
self-government in order to create a forward-looking
and cooperative political climate and curb extremism.
7.
The security situation for Kosovo’s minority
communities remained of great concern. An important

2

initiative recently undertaken by UNMIK was the
recent establishment of Pillar I under the interim
leadership of the Principal Deputy Special
Representative to improve the coordination of police
and justice matters. The objectives of Pillar I included
the increase of the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) from
4,000 to 6,000 officers by the end of 2002; and at least
doubling the numbers of international judges and
prosecutors. Welcoming the continued support of the
Security Council for Pillar I, as well as its support for
an increase in the number of international judiciary,
UNMIK underlined that it would require additional
resources, such as funds to increase detention capacity.
A further initiative had been the promulgation of
several key pieces of legislation to combat organized
crime, illegal weapons possession and terrorism.
UNMIK underscored that despite continuing instances
of ethnically motivated violence, UNMIK had had
some success in arresting those suspected of
involvement in the 16 February 2001 Nis Express
bombing and the 18 April 2001 attack on the head of
the passport office of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia’s Committee on Kosovo.
8.
Preparations have begun for Kosovo-wide
elections on 17 November, with a focus on
inclusiveness. UNMIK noted that all of the
communities, with the exception of the Kosovo Serbs,
had committed to participation in the elections,
including the Kosovo Turkish community, which had
not participated in last year’s municipal elections in
any great numbers. Special efforts were currently
focused on securing the participation of the Kosovo
Serbs, including a joint venture with the Commissariat
for Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)
in Serbia and Montenegro to reach out to IDPs.
UNMIK highlighted several encouraging signs,
including the participation by Kosovo Serbs in some
areas in the Municipal Election Committees (MECs)
which they boycotted last year, and requests by some
Kosovo Serb political leaders for procedural
clarification on how to register their parties. UNMIK
welcomed the encouragement to register by President
Kostunica. The leadership in Belgrade was being
cautious, but firm, in its approach, calling for
registration, whilst making participation in elections
contingent on progress in several areas.
9.
One of the areas of Kosovo Serb concern was that
more progress needed to be made on the return of
refugees and IDPs to their homes. UNMIK noted that it

S/2001/600

had been very difficult to make progress in this area
and that it remained cautious with regard to large-scale
return until the security situation was more conducive.
The Framework for Return endorsed by the Joint
Committee for Return of Kosovo Serbs (JCR) last
January reflected that cautious approach, by promoting
conditions that were conducive to return, rather than
return itself. Some progress had been made: ten target
locations had been identified, almost all in rural
villages where Kosovo Serbs were currently residing.
The prospects for return were better towards the east,
for example, in the Slivovo, Gnjilane and Kamenica
areas. At the beginning of June, the Interim
Administrative Council (IAC) endorsed a Statement of
Principles on Kosovo Serb return, an action UNHCR
underlined few would have believed possible only a
few months ago. It identified the main challenge ahead
as eradicating the fear associated with return, but
emphasized its belief that the protection of the minority
communities and the longer-term prospects of return
were linked to the willingness on the part of the
communities to participate in provisional selfgovernment. This point was echoed by UNMIK, which
believed that integration by the communities into the
institutions of provisional self-government would help
create the preconditions for return.
10. The issue of missing persons, crucial to all
communities, was identified as another area requiring
progress. On 17 June the Head of Mission met with
representatives of the Kosovo Albanian families of the
missing and detained, who delivered a petition to the
Mission and requested that the international community
redouble its efforts to resolve the issue. Progress had
been made: UNMIK had engaged with the International
Committee for Missing Persons (ICMP) on DNA
testing. Although distressing, this is one of the issues
which could be used as an instrument for
reconciliation. UNMIK had also established a working
group on the missing with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, underlining the benefit of
growing dialogue.
11. The Special Representative has now met with
President Kostunica four times and several times with
Foreign Minister Svilanovic. One of UNMIK’s first
priorities, the establishment of an office in Belgrade,
had now been accomplished. The office was currently
operating under the Status of Mission Agreement
(SOMA) of the United Nations Liaison Office in
Belgrade as it prepared the negotiation of its own

SOMA. The Special Representative estimated that his
personal relationship with the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia would be an important factor in
moving the process forward.
12. The Mission highlighted that a key factor in
reconciliation efforts could be the role played by civil
society, NGOs and women’s groups, who could prove
helpful in reaching across the ethnic divide. In that
regard, UNMIK highlighted the recent decision of the
Central Election Commission (CEC) to accept one
third of women on the electoral (closed) lists, which
was classified as a spectacular result for Kosovo’s first
post-conflict Assembly. A further example was the
moderating influence women had played in the KPS.
13. At the initiative of the Head of Mission, a
representative group of Kosovo women’s NGOs met
with members of the Mission. During a meeting, a
number of issues of concern were raised. Within the
context of resolution 1325 (2000) the representatives
underlined the need to involve women in peace
negotiations and in the political decision-making
process. The importance of the international
community’s support for the economic empowerment
of women, tackling discrimination and providing
employment and equal opportunities were identified as
equally important. Emphasis was placed on the need
for regular dialogue and enhanced cooperation between
local women’s groups and the United Nations. The
Mission highlighted the need for effective follow-up to
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). UNMIK
agreed on the need to enhance existing mechanisms for
cooperation.
14. Kosovo was in transition from reconstruction to
sustainable economic development. UNMIK’s present
challenge was to replace the largely donor-driven
reconstruction effort with employment, productive
enterprises and self-sustaining economic activity. The
two main objectives to achieve this goal were
privatization and the creation of a banking system for
credit and investment.
15. On 16 June, the Mission met the President of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Committee on Kosovo,
Mr. Momcilo Trajkovic, Mr. Dusan Celic, Deputy
President of the Committee, and Mr. Alekesandr Simic,
Kosovo Serb representative in the Joint Working Group
on the Constitutional Framework. The members of the
Committee on Kosovo underscored that the
establishment of the committee was a demonstrable act

3

S/2001/600

by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia aimed at conveying to the international
community its keen interest in being a constructive
facilitator in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and in finding a sustainable
solution to the Kosovo question. They noted that the
FRY Committee on Kosovo would continue to liaise
between the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and UNMIK, and that the Kosovo Serb
community was ready to get involved in the political
process. The Committee expressed serious concern
about the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the lack of a political
process leading to the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government. They informed the
Mission that some key proposals that had been made
by the Serb representative on the Joint Working Group
(JWG) during the drafting of the Constitutional
Framework, which included the means of arriving at
consensual democracy, were not accepted by UNMIK.
Also, the Serb representative’s opposition to the
inclusion of judiciary and the Presidency in the
Constitutional Framework had not been taken into
account. They underscored that the Constitutional
Framework in its present form was unacceptable and,
as they saw it, excluded all non-Albanians from the
political process. Furthermore, they considered that the
inclusion of the judiciary and Presidency provisions in
the Constitutional Framework had set the basis for
Kosovo’s independence.
16. The Committee members expressed great concern
at the continuing lack of security for Kosovo Serbs and
considered that the issues of Serb missing persons and
return were not being expeditiously addressed. More
than 1,300 Serbs were still unaccounted for after two
years, and 30,000 Serb homes had been lost. With
regard to the elections, they recalled that the
Parliament of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had
passed a resolution and a declaration encouraging the
Serb population to register, and claimed that UNMIK
had yet to initiate a process with the Committee to
facilitate the registration of Serbs. They cautioned that
Serb registration should not be prejudged as an
indication that they would participate in the
forthcoming elections. Finally, they reminded the
Mission that it was the Security Council’s
responsibility to ensure the correct interpretation and
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), and stressed that there should be a symbolic
return of the Serbian military and police since this was

4

the only means of guaranteeing Serb security and
engendering a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.
17. The Mission underscored that it fully recognized
the legitimate concerns of security and return and noted
further progress was needed on the missing. The
Mission delivered a firm message on the importance of
Kosovo Serb participation and integration into the
political process. One of the views expressed was that,
although the Kosovo Serbs did not want to commit to
the political process until the process had produced
improvements, the process could not produce results
unless the Kosovo Serbs committed to it. The only way
out was to accept the structures UNMIK was putting in
place and take some risks in working with moderate
views on the other side. To this end, the Kosovo Serb
community should now engage constructively by
registering and certifying their political parties and
evaluate where this takes them, rather than turning
their backs on the process. Filling the political vacuum
was identified as the only way forward and the Mission
urged the Kosovo Serbs to engage step-by-step in
building the political process.
18. On 17 June, the Mission met the United Nations
Regional Administration in Mitrovica and separately
with
Kosovo
Albanian
and
Kosovo
Serb
representatives. Mitrovica was identified as a
challenge, which must be addressed cautiously to avoid
an exodus of Kosovo Serbs. UNMIK’s strategy on
Mitrovica was to address the key concerns of all
communities: freedom of movement, security, returns,
access to public services and economic development.
These concerns were enumerated by both the Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb representatives with whom
the Mission met. It was clear from the presentation of
both parties, however, that dispelling the continuing
climate of mutual distrust remained a major challenge
for inter-communal activities and attempts at
reconciliation.
19. UNMIK
was
currently
developing
a
comprehensive strategy aimed at improving security
and the quality of life for both communities. The
central focus in its approach aimed at removing parallel
structures that undermined UNMIK’s efforts to
implement Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
An essential element of UNMIK’s strategy on
Mitrovica involved the assistance of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in persuading the Kosovo Serb
community to participate in the UNMIK-led process.
UNMIK would encourage the close cooperation of the

S/2001/600

authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
implementing this strategy.
20. The second strand of UNMIK’s policy was to
implement a series of confidence-building measures
(CBMs), both specific to Mitrovica and Kosovo-wide,
as Mitrovica was viewed as a microcosm of the
problems affecting Kosovo as a whole. CBMs would
focus on multi-ethnic initiatives, such as Kosovo
Albanian access to the hospital in the north, and the
creation of a communal marketplace, as well as
targeted economic development. In this regard,
UNMIK solicited support from the Mission to seek
additional funding for the Village Economic
Rehabilitation Programme (VERP), which was due to
end in July. The VERP, funded by the European Union,
had proved one of the most effective tools in getting
ethnic groups working together. The Mission believed
that to overcome the stalemate in Mitrovica, all
communities must come together in social, economic
and religious projects. The Mission told the Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb representatives it met that
the only future for Mitrovica was in reaching out and
coming together. The Mission emphasized to both sides
that they must rein in extremists. The specific message
to the Kosovo Serbs was to submit their parties’
application for participation in elections now in order
to give the process a chance. In response to questions
raised by the Kosovo Serbs about the registration
process, it was confirmed by UNMIK to the Mission
that only applications were required to be submitted for
participation in the elections, and that no separate
registration of parties, which were already registered in
Belgrade, was necessary.
21. On the same day, the Mission attended a special
session of the Interim Administrative Council, which
included selected members of the Kosovo Transitional
Council. Key issues raised by the Kosovo leadership
included the Constitutional Framework, Mitrovica,
return, detainees and missing persons, security,
elections, extremism, lack of freedom of movement,
and unemployment. IAC and KTC members expressed
broad appreciation to the Security Council for
remaining engaged in Kosovo and reiterated their
support for the work of UNMIK. The majority
acknowledged that discernable progress had been made
since the Security Council’s last visit in April 2000.
Disappointment was expressed at the pace of change
and UNMIK’s handling of the Constitutional
Framework and its implementation of Security Council

resolution 1244 (1999). While the representatives of
Kosovo Albanian parties praised the adoption of the
Constitutional Framework, and expressed the hope that
it would lead to greater stability in Kosovo, the
representative of the Serb National Council-Gracanica
expressed the view that there were double standards on
the part of the international community, which, in turn,
fomented Kosovo Albanian extremism.
22. There was near consensus among the IAC and the
KTC members about the need for broad participation in
the political process as a step towards creating a multiethnic society. The Serb representative, however,
claimed that an enabling environment for Serb
participation in the political process, and particularly in
the elections was lacking. With regard to Mitrovica, the
IAC and the KTC members were in agreement that the
current status of the city posed great difficulty for
everyone, especially their respective communities and
that a solution was urgently needed. The
representatives of the Bosniac, Roma and Turkish
communities reaffirmed their commitment to the
political process and acknowledged the improved
relations with the Kosovo Albanians, but highlighted
several issues of concern to their respective
communities, including limited access to education,
media and health care. They were also concerned about
Kosovo’s high unemployment rate and its parlous
economy. The Mission stressed that its message was to
urge the representatives to do their utmost to create a
multi-ethnic community in Kosovo. It stressed that the
elections in November would be a unique opportunity
for those still on the margins of the political process to
join the mainstream and called on the Serbs to register.
The Mission promised to take up the issue of returns,
detainees, and missing persons with President
Kostunica when they visited Belgrade.
23. On 17 June, the Mission met with Russian
President Vladimir Putin, who was visiting the region.
A wide-ranging exchange of views took place on
several issues, including the means for establishing a
multi-ethnic Kosovo; strategies for combating
extremist and terrorist activities; conditions for the
return of non-ethnic Albanians, in particular the
Kosovo Serb community, and participation in the
forthcoming Kosovo-wide elections. The Mission
recalled that in its meetings with its Kosovo Albanian
and Serb interlocutors it had firmly rejected violence
and extremism and had emphasized the importance of
significant
efforts
by
both
sides
towards

5

S/2001/600

communication and cooperation. It emphasized the
need to support the moderate political leaders on both
sides, and underlined the importance of relations with
Belgrade in that regard. President Putin expressed
serious concern with regard to the security situation in
Kosovo, arms and drug trafficking and the need to
prevent regional destabilization. He noted the need to
strive towards a multi-ethnic Kosovo, maintaining that
that was an even more pressing task than the
establishment of law and order. He stressed the need
for the international community to work together more
closely, noting that only through joint action and a
united approach could resolution 1244 (1999) be
successfully implemented.
24. At KFOR Headquarters, the Mission was briefed
by the new KFOR Commander, Lieutenant General
Thorstein Skiaker, on the security situation and main
tasks and challenges of the international security
presence. He focused in particular on the regional
situation, welcoming the cooperation KFOR had
received from the Yugoslav authorities in dealing with
the crisis in Southern Serbia, and outlining KFOR’s
strategy vis-à-vis the current situation in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and KFOR’s steppedup presence and efforts along the common border with
Kosovo. He also commented on the role of the Kosovo
Protection Corps, minority return and the forthcoming
elections.
25. The Chairperson of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1160 (1998) addressed the issue of the
implementation of the arms embargo, given KFOR’s
responsibility for conducting border monitoring duties,
in accordance with paragraph 9 (g) of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). She recalled that the issue had
been raised in a letter from the Chairperson to the
Secretary-General on 20 June 2000, and had not yet
received a response from KFOR. She underscored the
need for detailed information pertaining to the origin,
type and quantity of weapons that had been seized to
be provided to the Committee. General Skiaker noted
that KFOR operations continued to result in frequent
weapons seizures during its border monitoring. Upon
further clarification with regard to the requirements of
the Committee, he undertook to provide the Committee
with the requested information in the future.
26. On 17 June, at the end of the visit, the Mission
and the Special Representative held a joint press
conference at Pristina. The Head of the Mission

6

provided a general overview of activities of the
Mission. Thereafter he, other members of the Mission
and the Special Representative responded to questions.
27. On 18 June the Mission, accompanied by the
Special Representative, had meetings in Belgrade with
the President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Vojislav Kostunica, Foreign Minister Svilanovic and
Interior Minister Zivkovic. The Mission welcomed the
increasing dialogue between UNMIK and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In
this regard it thanked the latter for their permission in
the opening of the UNMIK Office in Belgrade, which it
believed
would
promote
communication
and
cooperation. The discussion focused on issues of
mutual concern, including security, return, the missing
on both sides, the Constitutional Framework and
elections, as well as the need for confidence-building
measures. The Mission noted that the security situation
was a legitimate concern of the Kosovo Serb
community and underlined the efforts UNMIK was
undertaking to address this, notably the recent
establishment of Pillar I and legislation to combat
terrorism. The Mission emphasized the importance of
an improved security situation for return and noted the
significance of the ten sites identified for return later in
the year. The Mission underlined that participation in
the political process was a prerequisite to progress in
these areas of mutual concern and called on the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
assist in reinforcing this message with the Kosovo Serb
community. It emphasized the role that the Yugoslav
authorities had to play in healing inter-communal
relations, specifically in Mitrovica, but also Kosovowide.
28. The authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia showed a genuine desire for cooperation
and were supportive of the Mission’s message on a
multi-ethnic Kosovo. President Kostunica highlighted
the need for progress in the following areas to enable
the authorities to encourage Kosovo Serb participation
in the political process: the need for additional
confidence-building measures for the protection of
minority communities; the immediate commencement
of return of refugees and IDPs; the need for
institutional links between UNMIK and Belgrade,
particularly in the areas of education, media, the
protection of culture and historical monuments;
establishing cooperation between KFOR, UNMIK
Police and the Yugoslav police; and the need to move

S/2001/600

tax collection points from the boundary line to
locations inside Kosovo. Both sides agreed on the need
for enhanced dialogue and cooperation on issues of
mutual concern.

IV. Findings of the Mission
29. UNMIK has made considerable progress in
implementing Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
in the two years since its establishment, although there
remains a lot to be done. UNMIK has now reached a
critical stage in the implementation of its mandate and
continued effectiveness requires a major effort by
UNMIK, KFOR and UNMIK Police, backed up by
close attention from the Security Council and the
sustained input of resources from the international
community.
30. While the Mission was left in no doubt that
strong reservations exist, not least in Belgrade, about
the difficulties involved in taking forward elections in
Kosovo on the basis of the constitutional framework, it
also recognizes that the status quo is unacceptable and
that a political process has to be taken forward in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). In that regard the Mission took note of the
promulgation by the Special Representative of the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional SelfGovernment and considered it an important step in the
implementation of resolution 1244. It commended the
work of the Special Representative and noted that
Kosovo-wide elections have been scheduled by the
Special Representative for 17 November 2001. The
Mission underlined that elections will enhance the
democratic process in Kosovo and the stability of the
region and stressed that secure conditions for the
elections should be ensured. The participation of all
communities in the elections, the return of refugees and
displaced persons and their participation in elections
should be encouraged.
31. The current political process is crucial to
combating extremism and encouraging moderates on
all sides. Key to the success of this process is the active
engagement and participation of all communities. The
Mission supports UNMIK’s efforts for the creation of a
multi-ethnic Kosovo, which remains one of the main
challenges. Current obstacles include inadequate
physical, social and economic security for the
communities in particular, alongside a lack of freedom
of movement and equal access to public services. The

Mission emphasizes the need for a coordinated
approach to these issues in an effort to show all
Kosovo communities the tangible benefits of
cooperation with the international community.
32. In recognition of the need to improve security and
law enforcement, the Mission welcomes the
establishment by the Special Representative of Pillar I
and key legislation to combat organized crime, illegal
weapons possession and terrorism. It notes the need for
additional resources in the key areas of justice and
policing and the need to create a new Assistant
Secretary-General (ASG) position to head Pillar I. It
underlined the need to provide an increased number of
international judges and prosecutors and funding for
additional detention facilities.
33. The Mission recommends that a formal request be
sent to KFOR to regularly provide detailed information
including that pertaining to the origin, type and
quantity of weapons seized, in order to enable the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1160 (1998) to pursue any possible
violations.
34. The Mission recommends that more intensified
efforts should be put into the issue of the missing of all
communities and detainees, which continues to be a
major impediment to reconciliation and was an issue
raised by almost every Kosovo representative the
Mission met. The Mission believes it is clearly vital
that further progress should be made in this crucial
area.
35. Mitrovica was a further issue raised by all of the
Kosovo representatives with whom the Mission spoke.
The Mission, in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999), supports efforts to develop a comprehensive
strategy to resolve the complex situation in Mitrovica.
Recognizing that the continued division is based on
fear and mutual distrust, and that there is a necessity
for a careful approach, the Mission places emphasis on
the need for multi-ethnic initiatives in the social,
economic and religious areas to start rebuilding
confidence between the communities. Further
recognizing that economic development would be a
major contributor to stabilization, the Mission
recommends that additional funding is found to
continue the VERP projects, which it has noted have
proved an effective tool of inter-ethnic economic
cooperation.

7

S/2001/600

36. In supporting the efforts currently undertaken by
UNMIK and KFOR, the Mission underlines the
responsibility carried by the Kosovo leadership for
creating conditions conducive to improving intercommunal relations and promoting reconciliation. The
challenge is also to Kosovo society to overcome the
hatred that has stymied progress in the past and move
collectively forward. The Mission conveyed firm and
balanced messages to all community leaders that the
responsibility lies with them to clearly and openly
reject violence, extremism and terrorism. It is
important that the majority ensures that the rights of
the minority communities are respected. The Mission’s
strong message to the Kosovo Albanian leadership was
the need to be more forthcoming with regard to
improving the treatment of the minority communities.
The people of Kosovo, of all communities, should not
allow the past to pull them back and should look ahead
encouraged by the potentials of the future. Promoting a
culture of peace and non-violence is crucial for the
success of these efforts.
37. In turn, minority communities too must realize
that there is no alternative to establishing a multiethnic society. The Mission acknowledges that the
minority communities have legitimate grievances and
urges UNMIK and KFOR to address these, but believes
that the only viable future for all communities lies in
participation. The Kosovo Serb community, in
particular, must integrate into the structures being set
up by UNMIK, rather than attempt to set up parallel
structures.
38. The Mission believes that UNMIK must continue
and enhance its dialogue with the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose influence in
Kosovo is key on the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).
39. The Mission notes the enormity of the tasks faced
by UNMIK. Further efforts to ensure full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) remain a high priority of the Security Council.
The Mission pays a well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Haekkerup for his outstanding leadership of
UNMIK and his commitment to the success of the
Security Council objectives in Kosovo. The Mission
also expresses appreciation to General Skiaker,
ComKFOR, for his determined efforts and
commitment. The Mission praises the hard work and
dedication of the staff of UNMIK, both local and

8

international, and of KFOR and deeply appreciates all
the support provided, which was crucial to its success.
