United Nations

S/PV.6659

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6659th meeting
Tuesday, 15 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 November 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2011/682)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-59360 (E)

*1159360*

S/PV.6659

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Accords — are integrally respected and implemented,
and that internal reforms to implement those
agreements is not endangered.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

(spoke in English)

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 November 2011 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2011/682)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/682, containing a letter dated
3 November 2011 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting the fortieth report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko (spoke in French): I appreciate this
opportunity to introduce my sixth report as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina — the
fortieth report of the High Representative (see
S/2011/682). My briefing today is my first statement as
High Representative since my duties as European
Union Special Representative were assumed by the
new Head of the European Union Delegation to Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Peter Sørensen. We are working
together in close and even friendly relations. through
that collaboration, I expect us to demonstrate the
international community’s unity and strong support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina as it pursues its aspirations to
Euro-Atlantic integration, while fully ensuring that the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina — the Dayton-Paris Peace

2

When I spoke to the Council one year ago (see
S/PV.6421), I noted with reserved optimism that, in
spite of all the difficulties that Bosnia and Herzegovina
was facing, the previous year had brought a number of
positive developments, especially in the context of
regional cooperation and reconciliation and visa-free
travel to the European Union (EU). I would note that
Serbian President Boris Tadić and Croatian President
Ivo Josipović have continued their policies of positive
engagement, and that the regional situation remains
better than at any other point since the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Since my last report (S/2011/283), however,
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself has continued to see
political stagnation and some backsliding. When I
spoke to the Council in May (see S/PV.6529), I was
forced to submit a special report that detailed serious
violations of the Dayton Agreement by one of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s two entities. Sadly, since that time
and in spite of the good will of the international
community, the challenges to the Dayton Agreement
have continued. One of the basic reasons for those
challenges lies at the core of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political culture, in which politicians show little
willingness to compromise, avoiding dialogue on
crucial issues and regularly misusing the system.
More than 12 months after the general elections,
the State-level Council of Ministers has yet to be
formed and many State institutions are under serious
political, institutional and economic pressure, with a
clear impact on their efficiency and functionality. A
State-level budget for 2011 has yet to be passed, and
the State-level institutions are struggling under
temporary financing. The prospect of a budget being
adopted soon for 2011, or for 2012, appears distant.
The European Union and the Euro-Atlantic integration
processes effectively remain blocked due to the
continued adherence to narrow ethno-nationalist
policies. Not surprisingly, the economy continues to
suffer.
In that context, international credit-rating
agencies downgraded the country’s outlook, not for
economic reasons but specifically citing the negative
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In its

11-59360

S/PV.6659

annual progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
European Commission also noted the country’s
political problems.
During the reporting period, Republika Srpska
continued its legal and political actions and sharp
rhetoric
that
have
challenged
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina’s State-level institutions, competencies
and laws, and my authority under the Dayton
Agreement, as well as relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
Although the 13 April adoption by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly of a referendum decision
was repealed on 1 June, the controversial conclusions
of the same date continue to influence Republika
Srpska policies in regard to both the institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and my Office and mandate. I
should point out that the Republika Srpska repealed its
referendum decision only after the direct, personal
intervention of Lady Catherine Ashton, the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy.
I would like to take this opportunity to publicly
thank Lady Ashton for her efforts, which enabled me to
avoid the use of my executive mandate, which at this
point is a process that I am keen to refrain from using
whenever it is possible to resolve difficulties by other
means.
In that regard and in keeping with the principle of
local political ownership, during the reporting period I
maintained the long-standing policy of refraining from
the use of my executive mandate unless absolutely
necessary, despite the ongoing political difficulties. In
fact, the only case in the past six months in which I
used my executive authorities was in order to lift
sanctions imposed by my predecessors in connection
with non-cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I did this
following the capture and transfer to The Hague of
Ratko Mladić, the last ICTY fugitive accused of crimes
connected to the Bosnian war. I therefore lifted the
ban, which was my only use of my executive powers
over the past six months.
Unfortunately, the arrest of Mladić was not
accompanied by a decline in the use of inflammatory
nationalistic rhetoric, including further statements by
officials of the Republika Srpska in support of State
dissolution and chauvinistic comments directed against
other ethnic groups. In this regard, I would like to

11-59360

express my deep concern about recent public
statements from the Republika Srpska that challenge
the statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
characterizing it as a “state union” — “drzavna
zajednica” — ignoring the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, together with Slovenia and Croatia, was
admitted as a Member State to the United Nations on
22 May 1992, through a direct and unanimous
recommendation of the Security Council on 18 May of
that year. These statements, which undermine the
constitutional arrangements provided for under the
Dayton Peace Agreement, need to be taken seriously,
especially in light of other actions directly challenging
the Agreement, as set out in my current and previous
reports.
Some Federation officials and politicians have
also used unwelcome rhetoric, as detailed in my report.
The two leading Croat parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to question the legality and
legitimacy of the incumbent Federation Government.
Some Bosniak political leaders have escalated their
rhetoric in response to statements from the Republika
Srpska leadership and warned of possible conflict were
there an attempt to divide the country. I have long
warned about the serious damage this rhetoric is doing,
and I take this opportunity to again call on Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders to contribute to fostering
reconciliation, dialogue and coexistence, rather than
spreading chauvinism, fear and mistrust.
Given the aforementioned negative trends and
actions, it is not surprising that there has not been
significant movement on the EU agenda or on NATO
membership. Nor has there been any movement
towards fulfilling the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of my Office.
I am also deeply concerned about the situation
with respect to the rule of law, as Republika Srpska
regularly questions the very competences of the Statelevel judicial institutions, including the jurisdiction and
role of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court itself. The authorities have also continued to
undermine and question other key State-level
institutions in the country. It is difficult to avoid a
perception that the intention is to portray institutions as
dysfunctional and therefore not needed at the State
level.
This is the wrong approach. Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entities will turn a corner

3

S/PV.6659

decisively only when political leaders understand that
the entities and State will be strong only when both
levels of Government are strong; both will go from
strength to strength only when they work together and
the State is given the support it needs to be effective.
Difficulties have also arisen in the Federation,
and 16 years after the Peace Agreement was signed
there continues to be a need for my Office to step in to
address large gaps in the country’s legal system that
create significant legal and political problems for the
country. I had to intervene in July in the Central Bosnia
Canton to address an attempt to ignore the Constitution
and form a Government that could have raised tensions
to an unacceptable level. Due to my intervention — not
using my Bonn powers but in the form of a letter — the
local parties have been able to resolve the situation in
line with the constitution, and pave the way for the
formation of Governments in other cantons and
possibly even at the State level.
Given what I continue to see, there is still a clear
need for my Office to remain in place in order to fill
such legal gaps and maintain stability. This need will
continue until such time as Bosnia and Herzegovina is
self-sustainable and firmly and irreversibly on the path
towards EU and NATO integration. Something similar
to this approach played out in my own country, Austria,
after its liberation by American, Russian, French and
British soldiers in 1945. The allied forces stayed until
they were sure there would be no revival of Nazism
and that democracy was firmly rooted in the country.
My core mandate is to oversee the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The Dayton Agreement is at its heart a
peace treaty, and every day we see signs that, should it
unravel, serious consequences could emerge not only
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also for the region
and the broader international community. Given the
continued negative trends and political instability, it is
essential that the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with a Chapter VII executive mandate,
remain in place and continue to assist the Office of the
High
Representative
and
other
international
organizations to fulfil their respective mandates.
While we must now focus on the immediate
difficulties, I believe that it is also important to take a
critical look at what we need to do to secure a
functional and viable country in the long term. It is
clear that we need to support the ownership principle in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this regard, allow me to

4

say a few words on how I think the international
community should approach Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the future.
We all agree that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is within the European Union and EuroAtlantic institutions. The EU and NATO therefore have
an important role to play in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
assisting the country to fulfil the requirements for its
aspirations to membership of both organizations. It is
important that Bosnia and Herzegovina remain on the
international community’s agenda until the job is
complete. There are some who believe that it is time
now to leave Bosnia and Herzegovina on its own; some
talk about international fatigue in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I do not share this view, and believe that
such moves would open the door to those who would
attempt to weaken and eventually divide the State, and
could lead to renewed disorder.
The international community has achieved
tremendous results in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the
past 15 years. However, it is clear from the current
political situation that we have not yet achieved a
lasting and sustainable political settlement that would
ensure a durable prospect for peace. Our continued
commitment to and focus on Bosnia and Herzegovina
is the way to get to the objective that we all want to
reach — a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is stable, safe
and solving its problems institutionally as it moves
towards full Euro-Atlantic integration. I am truly
convinced that this can become a reality if we remain
committed to the cause and if we finally see a
fundamental change in the way politics are conducted
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with dialogue and healthy
compromise becoming the rule rather than the
exception.
In spite of the challenges Bosnia and
Herzegovina faces today, I would like to congratulate
the country on its tenure as a member of this body and
for the excellent job it has done. Security Council
membership has given Bosnia and Herzegovina the
opportunity to make new friends around the world and
gain the respect of many countries, and should be
counted as a significant foreign policy success. In my
personal opinion, it is the country’s biggest foreign
policy success since Dayton.
I would also like to thank personally Ambassador
Ivan Barbalić for his dedicated work, his commitment,
his professionalism and his idealism.

11-59360

S/PV.6659

As we look to the future, I wish to assure the
Council that I am fully committed to carrying out my
mandate to the letter and ensuring that the Peace
Agreement is fully respected. The way forward is not
to go backwards. I am also committed to assisting
Peter Sørensen in his duties as European Union Special
Representative, in every way possible to advance the
EU agenda. I look to the Security Council and to the
Peace Implementation Council to support me fully in
doing my job, in keeping with the mandate the Council
has given me, and in building on a successful peace
effort in the country so that we may reach the point
where peace, stability and the country’s Euro-Atlantic
future are irreversible beyond any shadow of a doubt.
Let us work together, the entire international
community, to scale the last remaining metres of the
mountain to secure the peace and to secure Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s EU future. Together, we can do it.
Together, we will succeed.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. As
indicated in his report (S/2011/682, annex), the
situation in the country is still complex. However, a
number of positive achievements must also be noted.
Although we have not achieved all that was
planned with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
integration into European Union (EU), strong
commitment, support and dedication to that aim exists,
not only among the political leadership but also among
the wider population of the country. We are dedicated
to fulfilling remaining conditions to receive candidate
status for European Union membership as early as
possible.
Furthermore, we welcome the decision of the
European Union to appoint Mr. Peter Sørensen as its
Special Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That decision represents a welcome consolidation of
the European Union’s presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which should result in better guidance of
the reform process towards the country’s accession to
the European Union.

11-59360

We welcome the decision of the High
Representative to lift the sanctions against certain
individuals from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unfortunately, since the holding of elections on
3 October 2010, a new Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has not yet been formed. However,
we have established all of the country’s other
institutions, which are fulfilling their responsibilities.
Moreover, the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has played an important role in advancing
and promoting relations with neighbouring countries
and
strengthening
regional
cooperation.
The
Presidency has also met important challenges with
regard to foreign policy, such as extending the mandate
for Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces in the
International Security Assistance Force, as well as the
decision to recognize the National Transitional Council
of the Libyan Republic.
Regardless of the political difficulties, we have a
secure and safe environment and a positive security
situation. The overall security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been calm and stable for several
years, as reflected in reports of the European Union
Force and European Union Operation Althea, with
which our armed forces have very good and productive
cooperation. During the reporting period, law
enforcement agencies in our country have had good
cooperation with the European Union Police Mission,
particularly in fighting organized crime and corruption,
as well as in promoting accountability within police
bodies.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has also had good
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, not only during the
reporting period but for years. The State strategy for
processing war crimes has contributed significantly to
reconciliation in our country. Furthermore, a database
on war crimes has been established, while
categorization and determination as to the level —
whether State or entity — at which identified war
crimes cases shall be investigated and/or tried is under
way. The prosecution of all those responsible in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a precondition not only for
reconciliation, but for the peace and stability of our
country and entire region.
The economic and social situation in the country
is difficult. In our view, one of the main causes for
such a situation is the world economic and financial

5

S/PV.6659

crisis. However, as indicated in the report, economic
data for 2011 show some signs of improvement.
Exports from Bosnia and Herzegovina have increased,
while total industrial production rose by 7.7 per cent.
Bearing in mind the positive developments, we
are convinced that there is a way to overcome the
current situation, which is complex but not
un-resolvable. We must build a constructive
atmosphere that will foster positive political processes
and a spirit of cooperation in resolving existing
political issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same
time, we appreciate the valuable support of the
international community in realizing our goals of
Euro-Atlantic integration.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me, at the outset,
thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his comprehensive and informative
briefing. We welcome the contribution to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina that the High
Representative and his Office have made in the course
of the past 16 years.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to offer three brief observations on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
First, the security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to be calm and stable. The
European Union Force (EUFOR) and European Union
Operation Althea and the preceding military
operations, namely, the Multinational Military
Implementation Force and the Stabilization Force, have
never had to intervene to restore peace. There are no
indications of violent destabilization. Looking back
less than two decades, when Bosnia and Herzegovina
was on the brink of violent disintegration, this positive
development deserves explicit recognition.
Against that backdrop, the European Union has
decided to reconfigure EUFOR and Operation Althea.
The mission’s main focus will be directed towards
providing capacity-building and training to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s armed forces so that they can
themselves maintain peace and stability.
However, the continuing political paralysis gives
us a reason for concern. The recent EU progress report
highlighted the stalemate in the reform process. The
lack of a shared vision of the political leadership on the

6

overall direction
worrisome.

of

the

country

is

particularly

That brings me to my second observation,
namely, what the international community can do to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s resumption of the
reform process, and thus also its return to the path
towards Europe. It is up to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political leaders themselves to place the well-being of
their county as a whole, and that of all of its citizens, at
the top of their agendas, to form a new State-level
Government as a matter of urgency and to tackle the
outstanding reform projects. That should happen
without further delay. Since Dayton, however, the
international community has often ended up rectifying
shortcomings in the domestic political processes. That
cannot continue.
Given Bosnia and Herzegovina’s history, close
monitoring and far-reaching supervision by the
international community have undoubtedly been
necessary in the past. But that approach has not
succeeded in creating incentives for local politicians to
choose the route of compromise over advancing their
nationalist agendas. In fact, the international
community’s approach at times serves as an
impediment to political leaders’ accountability to their
electorates and to their assumption of ownership of the
reform process.
We should not continue that way. Our focus
should be on employing instruments that are better
suited to initiate positive developments. Obsolete
approaches should be discontinued. Decoupling the
High
Representative
and
the
EU
Special
Representative and endowing the latter with a sound
mandate was an important step. Further steps must
follow. The European Union and Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s EU perspective should become the only
game in town. That will include the continued
reconfiguration of EUFOR and Operation Althea. In
addition, we are of the view that the Office of the High
Representative should be downsized and relocated
abroad. Its staff levels should be commensurate with its
remaining tasks.
Thirdly, in order to save the footprint of the
Office of the High Representative in stabilizing Bosnia
and Herzegovina, a sustainable and comprehensive
answer to the question of immunity from legal
proceedings for present and former staff of the Office
has to be found. We intend to initiate a more thorough

11-59360

S/PV.6659

discussion on the issue and to invite members to
participate.

impact on the economy and delays reforms towards the
European path.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that we fully
support the extension of the mandate of EUFOR and
Operation Althea for another year, to be decided by the
Security Council tomorrow. The mission provides an
important contribution to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
epitomizes our joint commitment to the peaceful,
democratic and prosperous future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its people. Such a Bosnia and
Herzegovina, willing and able to conduct the EU
accession process on its own strength, is the best
guarantee for peaceful development in the region.
Germany will continue to support all efforts to advance
that goal.

We therefore call on all Bosnian leaders to
rapidly find the necessary compromises to establish a
central Government and return to the reform process,
beginning by calibrating the Constitution with the
European Convention on Human Rights. Not to do so
would mean Bosnia and Herzegovina turning its back
on any European prospect, while all States of the
region, one after the other, are taking this opportunity
to prepare themselves, each at its own pace, to rejoin
the European family one day.

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
presence and for the report that he has just presented to
the Council (S/2011/682, annex). I also take this
opportunity to welcome the contribution of the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Council’s work. Lastly, I associate myself with the
statement to be made by the head of the delegation of
the European Union a little later.
We are preparing to renew for a year the mandate
of the activity of the European Union Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR) and Operation Althea in a
political context weighted with uncertainty for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The security situation has been calm and stable
for several years. That is attributable to the Bosnians
themselves and their institutions. The arrest of Ratko
Mladić, on 26 May, and of Goran Hadzić, on 20 July,
and their immediate transfer to The Hague to be tried,
constitute a positive development that ends a phase. All
those sought by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia have now been arrested. I note
that those arrests did not lead to any significant
reaction on the ground.
However, for more than a year now, since the
elections of October 2010, the country has been unable
to form a new central Government. The outgoing
Council of Ministers manages day-to-day matters and
the budget operates on a temporary basis. That lack of
Government is starting to have a significant negative

11-59360

That requires, first and foremost, the resumption
of political dialogue and, on the other hand, an end to
resorting to nationalist rhetoric, which today is still too
common. It goes as far as denying the legitimacy of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Member of the
United Nations and the Security Council, or attacking
the legality of the decisions of the High
Representative. The latter means that the staff of the
Office of the High Representative must enjoy sufficient
immunity guarantees.
Apart from words, there are deeds. In that regard,
France remains very concerned and warns Bosnian
leaders against any initiative that contravenes the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement and that would threaten
the stability and integrity of the country. More
generally, France again calls on the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to return to dialogue, overcome their
divisions and work towards consolidating a functioning
State that upholds democratic principles. They must
shoulder the primary responsibility. They were elected
by Bosnian voters to that end.
In that context, I would also like to reaffirm my
country’s commitment to the independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
High Representative, keeper of the peace accords on
behalf of the international community, and his action
and dialogue with Bosnian political representatives has
our full support.
In that regard, I wish to particularly note the
increased commitment of the European Union to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Last spring, the European
Union agreed an intensified approach for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and its presence on the ground has thus
been strengthened. A new European Union Special
Representative and delegate, Mr. Sørensen, assumed
his duties a few months ago to help support the country

7

S/PV.6659

in its consolidation process and reforms. Mr. Sørensen
has our full support. Furthermore, as the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the European Union decided on
10 October, EUFOR and Operation Althea will be
restructured so as to again focus on training and
advising the Bosnian armed forces, while maintaining
the means to handle, if necessary, executive tasks in
support of the work of the Bosnian authorities.
In order to improve the effectiveness of our
action, we owe it to Bosnia and Herzegovina to
consistently work to adapt our presence to the situation
on the ground, be it the civilian or military presence of
the European Union or the restructuring of the Office
of the High Representative. France will fully
participate in those efforts.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): We, too, would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for the comprehensive presentation of his
report (S/2011/682, annex). We congratulate him and
his team for their sustained efforts for lasting peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context
of implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement and the
reforms so necessary to that country’s integration
within the European Union.
Gabon continues to support the unwavering
commitment of the international community to the
building of a Bosnia and Herzegovina founded on the
rule of law and supported by stable and lasting
institutions.
The
Dayton
Agreement,
whose
implementation we strongly supported, is the basis for
the entire political process in the country. We would
like to make some remarks on security and political
aspects.
With regard to security, we welcome the central
role that the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) continues to play in ensuring a
stable environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
presence and numerous actions of the ground are very
commendable despite the increasingly difficult
political and security situation.
The political climate remains strongly affected by
the inability of the main political parties to have a
shared vision, making it possible to form a federal
Government. We are concerned about that political
stalemate, itself exacerbated by the nationalist rhetoric
that hampers the normal functioning of institutions and
prevents the federal State from assuming its

8

governmental duties. Gabon deplores that situation and
urges all parties to dialogue and to tolerance. We also
call for constructive dialogue in favour of national
reconciliation.
Gabon welcomes the cooperation between
EUFOR and the other international organizations in
implementing the United Nations mandate in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We urge the international community
to maintain its commitment and to increase its
assistance to the parties in order to achieve the five
objectives and to meet the two conditions set by the
Council for implementing peace, in accordance with
the Dayton Agreement.
However, we remain convinced that the task of
building a stable and prosperous Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the primary responsibility of the
Bosnians themselves. We therefore call upon them to
strengthen their cooperation with the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, NATO, the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, and EUFOR, the renewal of whose
mandate, once again, we support. Likewise, we would
call upon the international community to intensify its
support for the various parties in order to encourage
them to implement the five objectives and the two
conditions under to the Dayton Agreement.
Gabon will continue to support the efforts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to move towards unity and
stability.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would also like to join
others in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
very succinct briefing. We appreciate very much his
contributions to the efforts to consolidate peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, indeed, in the
entire region.
Nigeria welcomes the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
Despite persistent political challenges, the Federation
Government continues to function effectively. The
dexterity with which General Ratko Mladic was
arrested and subsequently transferred to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is indeed an affirmation that with profound
commitment residual issues can be resolved amicably.
We are, however, concerned by the continued
attacks against Bosnia and Herzegovina’s State-level

11-59360

S/PV.6659

institutions, competencies and laws, as well as against
the authority of the High Representative under the
General Framework Agreement for Peace. Indeed, the
sustained use of inflammatory nationalistic rhetoric not
only fuels mistrust; it also constrains the
implementation of the mandates of both the High
Representative and the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board.

Herzegovina. We believe that it is only when all parties
commit to and take practical steps towards the
consolidation of peace that the challenges of nationbuilding in the country can be overcome. The
supportive role of the Security Council in attaining
lasting peace, security and stability in the country
cannot be overemphasized. I believe that we must seize
every moment to make that peace realizable.

This prevalent political climate compels national
leaders to exercise restraint and refrain from divisive
and anti-Dayton rhetoric. They should demonstrate the
political will that is so necessary to the promotion of
conciliation, peace and development in the country and
in the region. They should also commit to dialogue and
show flexibility and compromise in resolving their
many differences.

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the High
Representative
for
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his informative briefing and for
the report before us (see S/2011/682). We welcome his
work and his contribution to peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are pleased with the momentum generated by
the commencement of negotiations on Government
formation and the adoption of the reforms that are
necessary in order to fast track European Union and
NATO membership. This momentum should spur
further progress, not only on the implementation of
constitutional reforms, but especially on outstanding
items from the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.
In the first six months of this year, economic
indicators pointed to signs of progress. That, we
believe, is a welcome development. To consolidate
those gains, efforts must be made to address the
stalemate in the 2011 budget, the growing
unemployment rates and the decreasing foreign direct
investment figures. The formation of a new Council of
Ministers would undoubtedly boost confidence in the
system.
While the main responsibility for making
progress and achieving economic success in the
country lies with the Government and the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, international support must
remain steadfast and unrelenting. In that connection,
we welcome the role of the European Union Force,
which, in collaboration with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina armed forces, is helping to foster security
and stability. We also welcome the engagement of the
European Union and NATO in the country.
I want to take this opportunity to reiterate my
country’s strong support and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and

11-59360

Brazil is firmly committed to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support all efforts to strengthen the State at the national
level while preserving the rights and prerogatives of all
communal entities. Respect for the international and
legal frameworks for the division of power is key to
stability.
We welcome the positive developments during
the reporting period. We encourage further efforts
towards the consolidation of institutions. Priority
should be given to reconciling different views and
establishing
a
fully
functioning
State-level
Government. We join previous speakers in expressing
concern at statements and measures by the entities that
question the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and its institutional arrangements, as well
as divisive rhetoric, should be avoided. We hope that
the dialogue among the stakeholders can move
decisively away from such statements and towards
constructive suggestions on the way forward. In that
regard, we call on all actors to respect the authority of
and cooperate with the High Representative.
We are encouraged by the initiation of talks
between party leaders on Government formation and
reforms. We encourage further efforts to consolidate
such talks and achieve inclusive participation. We are
also pleased that the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has remained calm despite confrontations
and rhetoric. We fully support the renewal of the
Security Council’s authorization for European Union
Force.
A divided leadership in Bosnia and Herzegovina
can only bring more difficulties to the well-being of its

9

S/PV.6659

populations. We encourage all parties to put differences
aside and work towards a solution that strengthens
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country should continue
to be supported in its pursuit of political stability and
socio-economic development. We remain convinced
that, with international support, the Bosnian people
will succeed in reaching that goal.
In concluding, let me associate myself with the
remarks made by Mr. Inzko on the very positive impact
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Security Council
membership and on the quality of the work and the
contribution being made by Ambassador Ivan Barbalić
and his team to the work of the Council.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
the presentation of his report (see S/2011/682) and for
the dedication and commitment that he shows to his
mission. We would also like to join the voices of
thanks for the serious and able contribution of
Ambassador Ivan Barbalić and his delegation to the
work of the Security Council.
Today, we are again considering the situation and
future possibilities for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
report submitted to the Council (see S/2011/682) alerts
us to important matters still to be dealt with, but it also
points out that the people of the country, in the midst of
great challenges, are enjoying stability and have great
hopes for their future. The report states that,
“In spite of tensions and controversy surrounding
its formation, the Federation Government has
functioned well during the reporting period.”
(S/2011/682, p. 4)
This is an achievement that we must protect in
order to avoid situations that affect the country’s
security and that of the region. That is why Colombia
feels that it is important to maintain that friendly spirit
of unity, encouraging the parties involved to avoid
using nationalistic and inflammatory rhetoric. We call
for the strengthening of dialogue in order to solve
differences and thus consolidate a process that includes
many years of effort and commitment on the part of the
international community. We hope that progress will
continue to be made in strengthening Government
institutions and administering justice. The United
Nations can play a fundamental role in supporting
national institutions. Like the European Union, it has a

10

responsibility to collaborate in the reform process and
to engage politically with that great region.
If local authorities and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina show commitment, the resulting increased
governability will lead to realizing the objectives of the
Dayton Peace Agreement with regard to development
and peace. Bosnia and Herzegovina has natural allies
in Europe. That friendship also extends to other parts
of the world. At the same time, conversely, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has played and can play an important role
in peacebuilding in other countries around the world,
which in turn binds the international community to
help them with their well-being and development. This
is an apt occasion to welcome the appointment of the
European Union Head of Delegation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Peter Sørensen, and we express our
willingness to cooperate with him to the best of our
ability.
We would like to reiterate our support for the
Dayton Agreement in the establishment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the decisions arising from it.
We stress the importance of the strict implementation
of the Agreement in accordance with its annex 10 and
of cooperating with the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, and we call on all actors
to scrupulously fulfil their commitments as stipulated
in the Agreement.
Meanwhile, if the objectives and conditions for
closing the Office of the High Representative are not
fulfilled — such as an agreement on the distribution of
State property, the issue of the military property
registry and the special status of the district of Brcko,
among others — we believe that that Office should
continue its work in implementing the Agreement, in
fostering good inter-ethnic relations and in creating a
political climate conducive to the better functioning of
institutions that fully represent the various regions and
give equal rights to all citizens. That is tied to the
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Althea, the continuation of whose mandate we
deem necessary.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank Mr. Inzko, the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his briefing and for his report
(S/2011/682, annex). We welcome the stability in the
security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
regional cooperation with neighbouring States. We
hope that the upcoming efforts will lead to the

11-59360

S/PV.6659

formation of a representative Government that provides
momentum to a number of necessary constitutional and
economic reforms and that will positively affect the
political climate and economic stability of the country.
The establishment of a new Government will also
hopefully have a positive effect on Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s efforts to fulfil the conditions and
objectives established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. We hope that will happen soon
and will ultimately lead to the closure of the Office of
the High Representative.
While it is important to find common solutions
for the various issues between the local parties, with
great care and mutual respect for the common interests
of the various groups, it is also important that that
takes place within the legal framework established by
the Dayton Peace Agreement and the country’s
Constitution. Therefore we hope that the parties refrain
from taking steps outside that legal framework. In fact,
the creation of national institutions and strong
representative structures will be beneficial to all
citizens of all groups and identities.
In this context, I would like to mention and
commend the concept paper prepared by the delegation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina when they held the
presidency of the Council, which indicated that the
creation of solid institutions, if carried out
appropriately, would help re-establish and reaffirm the
pillars of security, legitimacy, accountability and
efficiency, and thus peace will bring dividends. It is
also important for political leaders to avoid divisive
and strident rhetoric, which is an obstacle to dialogue
and reconciliation, both of which are important for the
creation of sustainable peace.
The political leaders are capable of playing an
effective role in negotiating controversial issues and
offering mutual compromises to reach solutions that
will be satisfactory to all parties. That approach,
although difficult, is important and indispensable in
diverse societies and it is important that local parties
and actors play a principal role in such settlements.
In another context, we commend the role of the
Serbian Government in arresting General Ratko
Mladic. We hope that bringing him to justice will be a
further step towards holding all perpetrators
accountable, as a firm pillar in restoring justice, in
consolidating reconciliation and in the creation of a
sustainable peace in the West Balkan area.

11-59360

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and we hope that it
will qualitatively progress towards a peaceful and
prosperous future, as its citizens deserve.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, we have no choice but to
recognize that High Representative Inzko’s analysis of
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina can hardly be
called objective. His report (S/2011/682, annex) again
reflects considerable prejudice against the Bosnian
Serb leadership. In order to gain a more balanced idea
of the events taking place in Bosnia, we recommend
that members of the Council also read the letter from
the President of the Republika Srpska, Mr. Dodik, to
the Secretary-General on 10 November, and the sixth
report of the Republika Srpska to the Security Council.
The report of the High Representative creates the
impression of destabilization in the internal political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which in fact runs
counter to the agreed provisions of the draft resolution
on the extension of the EUFOR mandate. The primary
threat to the functioning of the Bosnian State —
according to the High Representative, who does not
offer proof — is the Republika Srpska and the actions
of its leadership, which is accused of violating certain
paragraphs of the Dayton Agreement. Such a
characterization of the actions taken by the Bosnian
Serbs is never mentioned in any communiqué of the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.
Otherwise, it would have stirred a swift response from
the High Representative himself, which did not in fact
happen.
Russia has noted on numerous occasions a lack of
proof regarding alleged violations of the Dayton
Agreement in the activities noted in the report, in
particular in connection with legislative measures on
State property, reform of the justice system and the use
of legal machinery to clarify the mandate of the High
Representative. Accusations about the provocative
rhetoric of the leader of the Republika Srpska do not
take into account his public commitment to the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Furthermore, there have been threats of
the use of force against Republika Srpska by Bosnian
political and State actors. As far as violations of the
Dayton Agreement and actions that threaten the
functioning of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
concerned, such violations are more likely to be found

11

S/PV.6659

in the hostile statements of the Bosnian leaders, and
should evoke a response from the international
community.
A typical example of his approach is the mention
in the High Representative’s report of the removal of
the flags of Bosnia and Herzegovina in front of the
Government buildings of the Republika Srpska in
Banja Luka. Yet no mention is made of the many cases
of the exclusion of Serbian symbols in State and
cantonal entities of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation, nor of incidents where writing in Cyrillic
was erased from road signs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The intervention of the High Representative in
areas outside his Dayton mandate also raises questions,
in particular in matters of budget and tax collection.
We believe that the use of his extraordinary powers in
January by the High Representative to adopt the budget
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina was unjustified and set
back the search for compromise among the peoples of
the State.
Worthy of note was the episode involving the socalled crisis in the judicial and constitutional system of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The compromise reached
between the leaders of the Republika Srpska and the
European Union Directorate-General for External
Relations and the resulting beginning of a structured
dialogue under the aegis of the European Union
highlight the unjustified and counter-productive nature
of the use of coercive measures with respect to the
Bosnian parties and underline the effectiveness of
decisions reached through dialogue. In his report,
however, the High Representative was critical,
interpreting the situation from a deliberately negative
point of view as one that was getting worse.
We are surprised at the segment of the report
dealing with Croatia. The accusations levelled at the
main Croatian parties by the High Representative are
absurd, in particular as he contributed to the nearexclusion of those parties in the formation of the
leading Government bodies of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The patronizing tone of the High
Representative is unacceptable with respect to the
process of forming the new Council of Ministers based
on last year’s general elections. At the most recent
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board, held on 6 and 7 July, all international
participants in the settlement recommended that
Mr. Inzko refrain from intervening in that process.

12

Also of concern is the High Representative’s
categorical claim regarding the impossibility of
positively resolving the issue of eliminating the post of
the Brcko District Supervisor. Like many of its partners
on the Steering Board, Russia believes that all
substantive issues in that regard have been solved. The
High Representative’s imposition of additional
conditions runs counter to the agreed provisions
detailed in the outcome communiqués of the Steering
Board’s meetings on 30 March and 7 July.
At the same time, the High Representative makes
no reference to a number of positive processes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The substantive agreement
between Dodik and Lagumdzija on the financing
programme under the instrument for pre-accession
assistance in the framework of the EU allowed for a
break in the stalemate and paved the way for a
disbursement of €96 million. Since October, Bosnians
and Croatians have been working diligently to reach an
agreement on the establishment of Government bodies
in the cantons of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation.
All of those positive elements attest to the ability
of the parties to agree and find a compromise, precisely
without international pressure or intervention. It would
seem that the bureaucracy of the Office of the High
Representative is deliberately drawing attention in the
report to the negative quantitative aspects of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while ignoring
the qualitative progress made by the various Bosnian
parties in finding common ground. In doing so, the
High Representative seeks to validate the continued
existence of his Office.
Along those lines, we continue to believe that an
important task for the international community at the
current stage of the Bosnian settlement is the transfer
of responsibility for the future of the country to
Bosnians themselves. In practical terms, that means
abolishing the Office of the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and implementing the
agreements established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board and the 5+2 formula.
In view of the continuing negotiations of EU
member States on the future of the Office of the High
Representative, we once again to express our serious
concern at the planned gradual closure, including the
idea of transferring the Office outside the borders of
Bosnia.

11-59360

S/PV.6659

We note the decoupling of the post of the
European Union Special Representative from the
Office of the High Representative, as well as the
appointment of Mr. Sørensen. We are convinced that a
sine qua non condition for success in the work of those
two international presences in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is strict compliance with their mandate. We believe that
their respective responsibilities should not overlap. We
are convinced that any decision critical to the country’s
future should be taken by the Bosnian people
themselves, with broad agreement among the three
constituent peoples — Bosnians, Serbs and Croatians.
We believe that the work of resolving key issues
in the Bosnia and Herzegovina should be based on the
internationally agreed framework consisting of the
Security Council and the Peace Implementation
Council.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank High Representative Inzko for his
briefing. The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
visibly improved since the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, 16 years ago.
At present, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is generally stable. Progress has been
made in security, constitutional reform, the rule of law
and economic development. China welcomes those
positive developments. However, we have also noted
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently facing certain
difficulties in its efforts to achieve stability and
promote development.
China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the choice made by its people
for their country’s future. We hope that the various
ethnic groups of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be
guided by the well-being and long-term interests of
their country to actively resolve their difference
through dialogue, enhance mutual political trust and
promote national reconciliation, so as to fully
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and to make
further steady progress in the various areas concerned.
China wishes to see the early establishment of a new
and broadly representative Government in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country of major
importance in the Balkan region. Maintaining peace
and stability in the country and promoting its economic
and social development is in the common interest of

11-59360

the international community, especially the countries in
that area. China hopes that High Representative Inzko
will continue to maintain close contact with the
international community, including the European
Union, and to play a constructive role in furtherance of
the Dayton Peace Agreement.
At the same time, however, we believe that the
issues surrounding Bosnia and Herzegovina are
extremely complex and sensitive. The international
community must therefore adopt a prudent approach in
dealing with the various issues concerning the country
and be highly attentive to the various concerns and
views of all parties.
China supports the extension of the presence of
the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
for another term.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join previous speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko to the Council. I thank
him for his detailed, accurate and objective report
(S/2011/682, annex).
The United Kingdom would like to express its
gratitude to the High Representative for his ongoing
efforts to uphold and ensure implementation of the
Dayton Accords and to encourage reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in what has been a difficult year. High
Representative Inzko has a demanding job, and we
appreciate the principled and committed manner in
which he carries it out. Like others, I would like to
acknowledge Bosnia and Herzegovina’s contribution to
the work of the Council since the beginning of 2010.
The United Kingdom shares the High
Representative’s serious concerns over the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Some of my colleagues have
pointed out that the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been broadly stable. Perhaps so, but it
has certainly not been moving forward.
More than a year after the elections held in
October 2010, elected politicians are still failing to
deliver an agreement on the formation of a new Statelevel Government, delays in the formation of the
Council of Ministers are preventing the passing of
legislation, and no agreement has yet been reached on a
2011 budget.
We also share High Representative Inzko’s
concerns over the intensification of nationalistic
rhetoric and challenges to State institutions, the

13

S/PV.6659

negligible progress made in reforms for the European
Union and NATO accession and the failure to fulfil any
further elements of the 5+2 conditionality necessary
for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.
We note with concern the details set out in the
High Representative’s report of actions taken by the
Republika Srpska authorities, challenging Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s State-level institutions, competences
and laws and challenging the High Representative’s
authority under the Dayton Agreement. Those actions
simply serve to obstruct Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
progress in the reform process. They offer no benefit to
any segment of the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We call on political leaders from all parties and
ethnic groups to refrain from using divisive rhetoric
that undermines State sovereignty and the authority of
State institutions.
It is clear that some politicians remain unwilling
to put the needs of the country and its citizens above
their own nationalist agendas. We therefore echo the
calls of the Peace Implementation Council for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s elected politicians to fulfil their
obligations to the Bosnian people to form a stable
Government capable of taking forward Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s essential reform agenda without delay.
Delivery of effective Government is the most
basic
of
responsibilities
owed
by
elected
representatives to those who have voted for them. The
prolonged stalemate over State-level Government
formation strikes us as a disappointing neglect of that
responsibility. We need to focus not just on formation
of a State-level Government but also on establishing a
clear reform momentum. Until reforms such as the
adoption of State aid and State census laws are enacted,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to fall further
behind its neighbours on the path towards European
Union accession. Constitutional reforms will also be
necessary to bring Bosnia and Herzegovina into line
with its international legal obligations, meeting the
minimum criteria for European Union membership, as
well as providing a workable basis for the country’s
future.
Political stagnation is also having a negative
impact on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economic
situation, and the United Kingdom shares the High
Representative’s
concerns
over
worrisome

14

unemployment and investment figures. Recent
decisions by rating agencies to downgrade Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s outlook provide a clear indication of
how political statement damages economic confidence.
That situation is made worse by endemic corruption at
both the State and entity levels. We urge elected
officials to take determined action to tackle all
manifestations of corruption.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has had a difficult and
tragic recent past. It is hard to overstate the suffering
inflicted upon the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
during the period of conflict. But Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country that should now have hopeful
prospects. It has a clear perspective for European
Union and NATO membership, which provide a proven
framework for peace, security and intensified regional
cooperation. However, that perspective requires a
commitment to reform and functionality that Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s politicians have yet to demonstrate.
The United Kingdom urges Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
politicians to focus on delivery of the reform progress
that will carry their country forward. Their
responsibility is to realize the country’s potential, not
stifle it.
I referred a moment ago to the suffering
experienced by the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the conflict of the 1990’s. The
arrest of Ratko Mladić earlier this year is a very
welcome step. It brings a prospect of long-awaited
justice for some of the victims and their families,
which have suffered and continue to suffer. It was an
important moment for the region and serves as a strong
statement
of
the
international
community’s
commitment to international justice.
We warmly welcome the European Union’s
revised strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina that was
agreed in March. We offer our full support to the new
EU Special Representative and the new EU Head of
Delegation, Peter Sørensen. Special Representative
Sorensen has made an excellent start in the role and we
commend the positive and collaborative relationship
that has been forged between him and High
Representative Inzko.
The
United
Kingdom
supports
High
Representative Inzko’s assessment that EUFOR
Operation Althea continues to reassure the Bosnian
people of their security and it welcomes the agreement
reached in October in the EU Foreign Affairs Council

11-59360

S/PV.6659

to continue to fulfil EUFOR’s executive mandate. In
light of the ongoing political instability and stagnation,
it is our belief that international safeguards against
instability remain essential alongside the strong EU
presence. We look forward to the Council’s agreement
to an extension of EUFOR later this week.
Finally, to pick up on a point made by some
colleagues, this year’s attacks on decisions made by the
High Representative come against the backdrop of talk
from within Bosnia and Herzegovina of pursuing legal
action against former High Representatives. Any such
attempt would, in our view, be neither warranted nor a
responsible course of action, and we welcome German
proposals for further discussion on the matter.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Security Council, and we thank him
for his comprehensive briefing.
South Africa expresses deep concern that it has
been over a year since Bosnia and Herzegovina held its
general elections and yet it has not been able to
establish a State level Government. That situation
holds the potential to undermine the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country. Bosnia and
Herzegovina lies at the heart of Europe, and the lack of
a State-level Government may damage peace and
stability in the Balkans. We are also concerned that the
lack of progress on that issue will continue to prevent
the country from fulfilling important obligations and
from completing the objectives of the five+two agenda.
We therefore call for all the parties to find a way to
resolve the deadlock on those matters.
It is our view that peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are dependent on a number of
elements. It is important that all parties respect the rule
of law and the international instruments that underlie
the political structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
crucial that the political leadership and the
international presence remain focused on recognizing
the balance brought about by the Dayton Agreement
and the subsequent political structures. All efforts
should be made to ensure that that balance be respected
and maintained. This is also important in completing
the process of forming a Government.
We are reminded of the fact that the Dayton
Agreement is supposed to be replaced by a permanent
constitution in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation
calls on all parties involved to begin once again to

11-59360

focus on constitutional reform, as the Constitution is an
important instrument required for sustainable peace.
None of the parties is served by actions that take the
country backwards and away from constitutional
reforms already agreed to and whose purpose is to
establish strong and representative State structures that
supersede all other structures.
We are also concerned that the parties have not
instituted a sustainable way to achieve reform of the
police service. However, it is noteworthy that the
defence force has been successfully reformed.
In establishing lasting peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, there is significant need for
dialogue between the parties, as no considerable
progress can be made without constructive dialogue
among the many ethnic groups and entities, as well as
between the Bosnian structures and the High
Representative.
Dialogue between all parties will also be essential
for reform of the constitution as well as for the
establishment of the State-level Government. A
decision should also be made as to whether the office
of the High Representative should be closed as soon as
the outstanding objectives and conditions set by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board in
February 2008 are met. My delegation notes with
concern that none of the outstanding objectives and
conditions have been met during the reporting period.
We therefore encourage all parties to engage actively in
the completion of that process, which in turn is
required by the High Representative to complete his
work and for Bosnians to take full responsibility for
their country.
We call on all parties not to act in a manner that
will further undermine State institutions or cause
further protraction of the current political dialogue. We
therefore call for all parties to carefully decide whether
the reopening of the liaison office in Sarajevo at the
end of this year will not create further challenges.
Reconciliation should be the ultimate aim of the
continued dialogue. An essential aspect for
reconciliation is the commitment by all parties to fight
impunity by bringing to justice those accused of
committing war crimes. That process must be
conducted in an impartial manner and using the
judicial instruments agreed by the various parties.
Reconciliation is jeopardized by provocative, divisive

15

S/PV.6659

nationalistic rhetoric and actions aimed at undermining
the Bosnian State.

Dayton Framework and their willingness to abide by
the decisions of State institutions.

Regarding the EUFOR mandate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, South Africa supports its renewal for a
further 12 months. We hope that the renewal of that
mandate will assist the country in resolving all
outstanding political issues.

During our debate on this issue in May
(S/PV.6529), we agreed with the High Representative’s
assessment that the conclusions adopted by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly in April
presented a serious challenge to the Framework. While
we note today that the National Assembly repealed its
decision to hold a referendum on the High
Representative’s decisions, we share Ambassador
Inzko’s concern that other controversial conclusions
have not been repealed. The High Representative has
our full support in condemning unwarranted and
unlawful challenges to his authority. He will likewise
have our full support in any steps he takes to uphold
Dayton and to defend and preserve the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As I
stated in the May debate, we will continue to consider
our own measures in support of Dayton and Bosnian
State institutions, should any become necessary.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to highlight
that political will is significant. We therefore
encourage all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
recommit themselves to full implementation of their
obligations under the peace accords and agreements.
South Africa remains dedicated to its task as a member
of the Security Council to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in those efforts.
Ms. Rice (United States): Let me begin by
welcoming High Representative Inzko back to the
Security Council. We thank Ambassador Inzko for his
comprehensive briefing and his service in support of
the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The signing of the Dayton Accords helped Bosnia
and Herzegovina end a terrible conflict and established
a framework for a lasting peace. That framework has
been the cornerstone of the country’s stability for over
16 years. Today, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
demonstrated that it is a strong and responsible
member of the international community in a variety of
ways, including through its tenure on the Security
Council and with its continued participation in the
international security force in Afghanistan. Bosnian
leaders have shown that cooperation and consensus are
possible on complicated matters of international peace
and security. We remain hopeful that they will continue
to work together to overcome their internal political
difficulties. In order for the country to keep pace with
progress elsewhere in the region, it must be able to
function as a State that can deliver results for all its
citizens, regardless of their ethnicity.
I would like to make three points in reaction to
the report of the High Representative (see S/2011/682).
First, the United States remains fully committed to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace established
by the Dayton Accords. We are concerned by
continuing challenges to the Framework, including
statements
that
undermine
its
constitutional
arrangements and challenge Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
statehood. Such statements are unacceptable. Bosnian
politicians should demonstrate their commitment to the

16

The United States also agrees that there is a need
to safeguard the Office of the High Representative’s
efforts by protecting it and its staff from politically
motivated legal actions. We recognize that the Dayton
Accords provide for immunity only within Bosnia and
Herzegovina and neighbouring countries, and believe
that we must find mechanisms for providing protection
against unwarranted court proceedings in other
countries as well. We understand that some States are
not in a position to adopt domestic legislation, as the
United States has done, and we would welcome a more
thorough discussion with partners on this issue.
Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
functioning political institutions. We agree with the
High Representative’s assessment that cooperation
within the tripartite Presidency has improved, and we
remain optimistic about the Presidency’s continued and
increasing coordination. However, 13 months after
general elections, the country remains mired in a
political stalemate. That stalemate has impeded
formation of a new State-level Government, hampered
progress on governmental reforms necessary for EuroAtlantic integration, and contributed to credit-rating
agencies downgrading the country’s outlook.
To be considered for European Union candidate
status, Bosnia and Herzegovina must pass laws on a
census and State aid, as well as beginning a serious
effort to comply with the ruling by the European Court

11-59360

S/PV.6659

of Human Rights in the Sejdić and Finci case to
provide equal rights for all citizens, including members
of national minorities. To participate in NATO’s
membership action plan, Bosnia and Herzegovina must
address State registration of defence properties. We
welcome the fact that party leaders have engaged in a
series of discussions on these issues, along with
Government formation, and we call on those leaders to
reach agreement that will result in concrete progress in
these areas as soon as possible. While the United States
looks forward to the day that the Office of the High
Representative is no longer needed, the outstanding
items on the 5+2 agenda must first be fulfilled, and we
note the lack of progress made in this area during the
reporting period.
My third point is that the United States supports
the European Union’s enhanced presence under its
Special Representative, Peter Sørensen. We underscore
how important it is that he and his office have the
resources, the political support and the operational
flexibility to guide Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path
to European integration. We look forward to working
closely with the Special Representative, and strongly
endorse close coordination between the Offices of the
Special Representative and the High Representative.
We also note that the military presence of the European
Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR)
continues to contribute to a safe and secure
environment and should be maintained. We therefore
support renewal of the EUFOR mandate.
In closing, let me reiterate that the United States
remains committed to working in close coordination
with the High Representative, the European Union and
partners on the Peace Implementation Council to
support the Bosnian people on their path towards EuroAtlantic integration and a peaceful and prosperous
future.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join
other
colleagues
in
welcoming
High
Representative Valentin Inzko to the Security Council,
and in thanking him for his comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to place on record our appreciation for
the Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2011/682).
It is a matter of satisfaction that, during the
period covered by the report, the Presidency of Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
functioned
with
improved
cooperation compared to its previous composition, and

11-59360

that a number of foreign-policy decisions were taken. It
is also commendable that the Federation Government
functioned well during the reporting period. We have
noted that, in September, the leaders of the six main
parties began negotiations on forming a new
Government at the State level and adopting reforms
aimed
at
progressing
towards
Euro-Atlantic
integration. We hope that these negotiations will
succeed in resolving the continuing political stalemate
that has existed since the elections in October 2010,
and pave the way for the formation of a new
Government.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a novel experiment in
building a new nation from the rubble of the civil war
that the people of the former Yugoslavia had to endure
in the 1990s. It is never easy to build a multi-ethnic,
multilingual, multicultural and multireligious country.
The problems mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report and by the High Representative in his briefing
today are bound to be encountered on the path to
building a nation inhabited by people of different
faiths, ethnicities and languages. Our own experience
over the past six decades has convinced us that
although the path of building such a nation is long and
arduous, the fruits are well worth the effort.
Solving the problems facing the Bosnian people
therefore calls for patience, determination and mutual
accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual suspicion,
rhetorical statements and violations of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace will only vitiate the
political and social atmosphere and delay achievement
of the required goals. We would therefore urge the
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
international community, to persevere in spite of the
occasional problems that may be encountered.
Through its continued presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has played an important role in assuring
the country’s citizens safety and security even when
the political situation has sometimes been tense. We
therefore support the extension of its mandate.
In conclusion, I commend the work being done
by the High Representative, Mr. Inzko, in assisting the
people and leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
their nation-building endeavours. We fully support his
efforts.
The President: I will now speak in my national
capacity as representative of Portugal.

17

S/PV.6659

Once again, I welcome the High Representative,
Ambassador Inzko, and convey to him Portugal’s
appreciation and support for his important and
demanding work, and that of his Office, in the interests
of peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also thank him for his very comprehensive recent
report (see S/2011/682) and for today’s presentation,
both of which deserve our full support. I would also
like to recall the appointment of the new European
Union Special Representative and Head of Delegation,
Peter Sørensen, and wish him all success in his
challenging tasks.
Portugal naturally shares the views expressed in
the statement to be made later by the observer of the
European Union, but I would also like to emphasize
some issues of particular concern to my country.

Operation Althea by the Security Council. We support
the orientation of EUFOR’s focus on capacity-building
and training, while at the same time preserving the
conditions for it to maintain a safe and secure
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Before concluding, a sincere word of deep
appreciation goes to our colleague, Ambassador Ivan
Barbalić, and his team for their permanently
constructive spirit and their excellent contribution to
the work of the Council. We wish them well in the
future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting.

For the past 13 months, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been facing a serious political impasse that has
affected the development of national policies as well as
the country’s progress towards integration into the
European Union. For instance, the State budget for
2011 has not yet been adopted, and there is no global
fiscal framework for 2011-2013. This worrying
situation creates a deadlock on much-needed internal
and external action, which is detrimental to Bosnia’s
social and economic development.

Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania; and the European Free
Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

But, of course, the most important issue is that of
the new Government. Efforts must be enhanced to
reach an agreement so that a new Council of Ministers
can be formed without delay. Portugal calls on Bosnian
political leaders to fully address their responsibilities
and to meet the legitimate expectations and needs of
their people. That requires effective political will,
inclusive dialogue and capacity for compromise.

I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
High Representative Valentin Inzko back to the
Council. Let me also express our gratitude for his work
and efforts undertaken during his time as European
Union Special Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

However, Portugal believes that the challenges
that Bosnia and Herzegovina faces are not
insurmountable. The solutions naturally lie within
Bosnia and Herzegovina. But, on the other hand, the
international community must stay fully engaged with
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This requires our steadfast
commitment to ensure the operational capacity of
existing structures within the framework of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, but also the ability to
reflect on and respond to the specific needs of the
country in an adequate, constructive and open-minded
manner.

The political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to be difficult. We note with relief that the
overall security situation has remained calm and stable
for a long time now, but we are concerned by the
political uncertainty and the economic outlook. A
State-level Government has not yet been formed, one
year after the elections of October 2010. While we
welcome that discussions among political leaders
intensified earlier this fall on the formation of the
Council of Ministers, this has yet to translate into
results. We therefore call on the political leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to form, through an inclusive
process, a State-level Government as a matter of
urgency.

Portugal supports the renewal of the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)

In addition, we believe that the outstanding
urgent and necessary reforms to achieve qualitative

18

11-59360

S/PV.6659

steps forward on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s path
towards the European Union need to be addressed
rapidly. In that regard, we encourage the Security
Council to send a message of serious concern, urging
all political actors to find common solutions within the
General Framework Agreement for Peace.
The European Union believes that as a matter of
priority and to ensure that the country does not fall
behind the region on its path towards European
integration, it is critical that obligations under the
interim stabilization and association agreement are
fulfilled. In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs
to undertake a credible effort to bring its Constitution
into compliance with the European Convention on
Human Rights and to adopt a law on State aid that is
compatible with EU acquis. Similarly, the adoption of a
State-level census law is important.
Further progress will be needed to allow for a
credible membership application. It is the prime
responsibility of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political
leaders to achieve concrete and tangible progress,
including on the five objectives and two conditions for
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The European Union is strengthening its
engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina so as to
support its progress towards European Union accession
through a comprehensive approach and significant
financial assistance and expertise. In that regard, the
European Union has enhanced its political presence
with the appointment of a new single European Union
Representative, Mr. Peter Sørensen, who has the lead
in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in EU-related
matters, including through the use of a broad and
balanced toolbox.
In addition, the European Union maintains two
crisis management missions on the ground: first, the
European Union Police Mission, which will be closed
by the end of June 2012 and whose remaining strategic
tasks will be transferred to the European Union Special
Representative; and secondly, the EU-led force
(EUFOR) Operation Althea, which remains an
important element of the EU’s overall strategy for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As our Foreign Ministers
reaffirmed on 10 October, the European Union is ready
to continue at this stage an executive military role to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to maintain a
safe and secure environment under a renewed United
Nations mandate.

11-59360

The main effort of Operation Althea will be in
capacity-building and training, while maintaining
situational awareness and a credible reserve, in case
called upon to support EUFOR efforts to maintain or
restore a safe and secure environment.
As regards the its overall strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union looks forward to the
discussions with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, including
its downsizing and the possible relocation of the Office
of the High Representative in the appropriate forum.
The European Union regularly encourages Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political representatives to act with a
greater spirit of compromise, to step up consultations
and to work for the long-term interests of the country.
We also stand fully behind the authority of the High
Representative and welcome the close cooperation
between him and the new European Union Special
Representative.
Moreover, we underline once more our
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign
and united country. We urge all to refrain from divisive
rhetoric and actions that would harm the interests of
the citizens.
Sixteen years after the signature of the DaytonParis Peace Agreements, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
citizens deserve a qualitative step forward by their
country on the path towards European integration. On
12 October, the European Commission adopted its
2011 enlargement package. According to its findings,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made only limited
progress in addressing EU-related issues. We reiterate
our appeal to the political leaders to accelerate the pace
of the reforms in all areas, to put Bosnia and
Herzegovina firmly on the way towards the European
Union.
The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): We read with attention
the report submitted by His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/2011/682, annex). We also listened
attentively to his statement this morning. We wished
that some formulations in the report and the briefing
had been perhaps more balanced with regard to the
positions of the two entities. Equally, perhaps not every
expression of the entities’ views on some existing

19

S/PV.6659

problems can be understood as antagonistic rhetoric.
That is certainly not the monopoly of either part of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Also, the positive
developments of the kind mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina perhaps
merited more attention, as we must retain a positive
outlook on the future of that country.
I am certain that Mr. Inzko will take our remarks
in good faith, as they do not detract from our basic
appreciation for his work in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Allow me to express once again the consistent
and principled policy of the Republic of Serbia in
support of preserving the integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, lasting stabilization of its internal
situation and achieving a sustainable solution, in the
spirit of European standards, that is acceptable to each
of its three constitutive peoples.
As one of the signatories and guarantors of the
Dayton Peace Accords, Serbia considers that Bosnia
and Herzegovina should function more efficiently than
has been the case so far and believes that this can be
achieved only through substantive and legitimate
decisions of the democratically elected representatives
of citizens, all three constituent peoples and both
entities.
We fully support the stability, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and are
completely aware that every decision on changes to the
internal system defined by the Dayton Accords must
come as a result of complete consensus, in order to
ensure political efficacy and stability. Only the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the citizens
of that country can define its policy, and there are no
powers on the basis of which these functions could be
taken over by international presences. The history of
the Balkans teaches us that impositions and majority
domination cannot bring the needed and expected
results.
Serbia seeks the closest good-neighbourly and
friendly relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
orientation towards the advancement of relations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina was confirmed also through
constructive support during the negotiations on
constitutional reforms. We welcome the initiation of a
structural dialogue between the European Union (EU)
and Bosnia and Herzegovina on judiciary reform, as
well as the strengthening of the presence of the
European Commission through the unification of the

20

posts of Head of Delegation
Representative of the European Union.

and

Special

We wish Bosnia and Herzegovina every success
on its road towards the European Union. We regard the
decision taken by the European Union on the
liberalization of the visa regime as a strategically
important signal for the European future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We consider that additional, concrete
encouragements from the European Union are
necessary to further stabilize the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, bearing in mind that EU membership
is in the common interest of all in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We believe that the international community
should treat relations between the three constitutive
peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and
on the basis of respect for their mutual interests. Rather
than calling into question the integrity of the country,
every solution in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be
such as to contribute to its peace and stability. Serbia
encourages all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
make additional efforts to reach sustainable solutions
to all open questions.
Serbia is of the opinion that the process of
closing the Office of the High Representative and of
cancelling the so-called Bonn powers should be
embarked upon because the legitimately elected
representatives of all peoples and entities have the
ability and capacity to assume responsibility for the
independent conduct of the affairs of State and the
initiation of reform processes.
Serbia is fully committed to continuing to act,
through cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
other neighbouring countries, towards reconciliation in
the interest of the achievement of lasting stability in
the region.
The President: I
representative of Croatia.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
extend my welcome to His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative and Special Representative
of the European Union (EU), and to thank him for his
briefing and report (see S/2011/682). Croatia aligns
itself with the statement of the EU, but allow me to
deliver a statement in my national capacity as well.
Historically, the EU enlargement process has
shown itself to be the most effective political

11-59360

S/PV.6659

instrument for bringing peace, stability and prosperity
to the European continent. Today, Croatia’s example
testifies to the fact that the perspective of EU and
NATO membership brings to a national political life a
strong motivation to find the way forward. The only
region that is still far from the real benefits of the
enlargement process is the Western Balkans. Croatia
has consistently advocated membership in the
European Union and NATO as the best framework for
stabilizing its South-East European neighbours. We
will continue to provide our political and technical
support in that regard to all the countries of the region,
especially Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Our emphasis today on Croats in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not based on ethnicity. It is based on
our firm belief that the unity and stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina depend primarily on the actual
equality of Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs. Treating the
smallest and the most vulnerable constitutive people as
a minority equals giving up on the viability and unity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In a country in which
division into two entities represents a real obstacle to
inner integration, reducing the number of constitutive
peoples — be it de jure or de facto — could lead to the
breakup of the country that would create a scenario
with dire consequences.

For Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Dayton Peace
Agreement brought peace but not stability or
prosperity. The country today yearns for a more
functional political system. This change must come
from within and must not be introduced at the expense
of democracy. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country of
two entities and three constitutive peoples. The State
itself can be strengthened only by respecting the
equality of the three peoples in all possible aspects of
life. At the highest political level this requires the
legitimate representatives of each people — those who
carry the majority of votes of its people — to be
acknowledged as such. Our frustration with the
inefficiency of the political system of Bosnia and
Herzegovina makes it tempting to forget this basic
democratic principle, but as the Arab Spring has
demonstrated
lately,
building
and
cherishing
democracy is the only way forward in the search for
long-term stability.

Instead of such an approach, we should support
the democratic process itself, bearing in mind that
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina starts with
ensuring equal rights for all three constitutive peoples.
Democracy brought stability to the countries of the
Western hemisphere, and it will bring stability to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of all the
complexity it implies there.

We are today faced with two grave challenges to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. One is the rhetorical flirtation
with the breakup of the country. The international
community and all countries of the region must send a
clear message that such rhetoric is unacceptable. The
other serious challenge is the position of Croats in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As recent history has shown,
they — as the least populous of the three peoples —
have
serious
difficulties
in
electing
their
representatives within the existing system. When
addressing this problem, we should not forget that
citizens’ identification with their country is in strong
correlation with its democratic process. We must
therefore make sure that the democratic will of Croats
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the least populous
people, is fully respected.

11-59360

Croatia is especially eager to see Bosnia and
Herzegovina embark on the process of integration into
the EU and NATO. We are more than ready to share
our unique experience with the leadership and
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of
their ethnicity. We know how demanding and
challenging these processes are and how detrimental
any sort of democratic deficit can be at every step of
the way. Any doubt about whether the EU-based
reforms will be beneficial to all three peoples equally
may be fatal to the process. We all agree that the
present state of internal integration is not particularly
conducive to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s successful
accession into the EU or NATO. That fact should not
be a reason for giving up on the accession process; we
should rather consider a new tailor-made accession
process designed specifically for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Some believe that we should move away from the
so-called ethnic approach and that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can move forward only if ethnicity — that
is, nationality — gives way to common citizenship.
Although this at first glance may seem to be a solution
to many of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s problems, it is
not. However seductive the idea of quickly reaching a
functional State on that base may be, we must not
forget that ethnic-national affiliation is a very strong

21

S/PV.6659

component of individual identities in that country, and
perhaps even more so than in most European countries.
We should not underestimate or disregard as
antiquated the legal/constitutional and deeply-rooted
political traditions of Yugoslav federalism, which was
founded on the rights of constituent peoples. It is
realistic to think that successful affirmation of the
concept of a constituent citizen achievable through
prior affirmation of the concept of constituent peoples.
Bypassing the issue of ethnic and national identity,
instead of solving it, would shortly get us back to the
beginning and would constitute a heavy burden in the
process of Euro-Atlantic integration.
Croatia thus advocates an accession and
integration process into the EU and NATO that would

22

link together, under well-defined and tight
conditionality, national institution-building, democratic
practices and a free market economy. However, first
and foremost, there should be constitutional reform,
which would assure all three peoples that their credible
voices are heard and respected. Only a political
leadership, be it at the State, the entity or the cantonal
level, accountable to all three constitutive peoples can
lead Bosnia and Herzegovina through the long-awaited
reforms to a better future.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

11-59360
