A /70/PV.117

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

117

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 13 September 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly (A/70/1003)
Draft resolution (A/70/1003, paragraph 67)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 119 and agenda item
120 in a joint debate at its 45th plenary meeting, on
3 November 2015.
It is fitting that the last draft resolution to be
considered by the General Assembly at this session is
that related to the continued revitalization of the work
of the Assembly. I congratulate members of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly on delivering yet another landmark
draft resolution. In particular, allow me to extend
my most sincere gratitude to Ambassador Vladimir
Drobnjak of Croatia and Ambassador Wilfried Emvula
of Namibia, co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group,
who have so ably conducted the Working Group’s
discussions and complex negotiations.
The draft resolution contains a number of milestone
reforms that will continue to reinvigorate the work of the
General Assembly as we move into its eighth decade.
It points to the critical need to continue to strengthen
the role and authority of the General Assembly and to
improve its working methods. During what has already

16-28503 (E)

been a momentous year for the process to appoint
the next chief administrator of the Organization, the
draft resolution continues to address the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General and other
executive heads.
It is, however, in relation to the transparency and
accountability of the President of the General Assembly
and the Office of the President where this year’s draft
resolution makes its greatest mark. From the beginning
of my term as President, I have placed the highest
priority on this issue, particularly in terms of how I and
members of my Office discharged our responsibilities.
It is with much gratitude to the Member States
that I warmly welcome the steps this draft resolution
proposes to strengthen the Office of the President.
Most notably, it includes an oath of office which I
know my successor looks forward to taking later
today, and a code of conduct that will also apply to
staff members of the Office. There are also a number
of other measures in the draft resolution that, when
taken together, form a substantive package of actions
to strengthen the integrity of the Office of the President
and, by extension, the integrity and legitimacy of the
General Assembly and the United Nations itself. It
includes mandated recordkeeping, financial disclosure
requirements, the vetting of Trust Fund contributions
and comprehensive induction briefings for the staff of
the Office of the President.
This draft resolution is yet another example of
effective, timely and decisive action on the part of the
General Assembly. As my time as President very swiftly

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1628503*

A/70/PV.117

13/09/2016

draws to a close, I am left with a sense of great optimism
as to what we in the United Nations can achieve
when we work together. In particular, I am optimistic
about the fact that the General Assembly — the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of
the United Nations — continues to increase its capacity
to effectively tackle today’s many global challenges
in the areas of peace, human rights and sustainable
development.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 67 of the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Abelian (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. By adopting the
draft resolution contained in paragraph 67 of the report
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly (A/70/1003), entitled
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”,
the General Assembly in paragraph 64 of the draft
resolution would request the Secretary-General
“to submit, in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019,
proposals to review the budget allocation of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly in
accordance with existing procedures and bearing
in mind the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General’s Task Force on
the functioning of the Office of the President of
the General Assembly, and in this connection looks
forward to considering such proposals during the
main part of its seventy-second session”.
The recommendations contained in paragraph 68
of the report of the Secretary-General’s Task Force on
the functioning of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly state, in sub-paragraph (k), that
“[t]he Secretary-General should consider
proposing the establishment of an additional P-5
post in the Office, which could be filled for a
duration of up to five years. The incumbent of the
post would manage the continuity and transfer of
knowledge between Presidents and sessions, as well
as assist in the preparation of the President’s end2/11

of-presidency report and in the handover briefing
recommended for the President and/or the Office”.
In sub-paragraph (n), the report states that
“[t]he Secretary-General should propose that
programme budget resources be allocated for
handover and overlap costs for a limited duration
during the three-month transition period, in order
to maximize the use of the transition period for
incoming Presidents”.
Should the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 67 of the report
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly, there would be
programme budget implications for the biennium
2018-2019 as follows: $275,200 for the establishment
of a P-5 post as recommended in document A/70/783,
paragraph 68 (k), estimated using the vacancy factor
of 50 per cent; and $178,800 in general temporary
assistance corresponding to an overlap period of one
month each year for four positions: two D-2s, one D-1
and one P-5 for handover and overlap requirements to
assist outgoing and incoming Presidents of the General
Assembly.
Accordingly, the adoption of the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 67 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly would give rise to additional resource
requirements amounting to approximately $454,000 for
the biennium 2018-2019. These requirements would be
dealt with within the context of the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2018-2019.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly”, contained in
paragraph 67 of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt it?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/305).
The President: We shall now hear statements after
the adoption of the draft resolution.
I give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.
16-28503

13/09/2016

The European Union and its member States
welcome today’s adoption of resolution 70/305 on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s
meeting and for your engagement in the revitalization
process. We owe further thanks to the co-Chairs, His
Excellency Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak and His Excellency
Mr. Wilfried Emvula, and their teams, who very ably
led the negotiation process. Without their personal
involvement, wisdom, good sense of humour and
extraordinary patience, these results would not have
been possible. We also thank the Secretariat, in
particular Mr. Georg Zeiner, and other colleagues
from the Secretariat engaged in the process for their
useful involvement. We would like to highlight the
constructive atmosphere that prevailed throughout the
negotiations and thank all the negotiating partners for
their engagement in revitalizing the General Assembly.
The resolution we have just adopted contains some
significant new elements and would not have been
possible without the flexibility shown by all Member
States engaged in the negotiations. The resolution
can be seen as another milestone in strengthening the
accountability, transparency and institutional memory
of the Office of the President. In particular, this includes
the release of detailed information on the finances,
official travel, staffing and activities of the Office of the
President; a standardized format for the written handover summary of best practices and lessons learned, to
be transmitted to the President’s successor and made
available to Member States; the preservation of records
and institutional memory during the President’s term
in office by using existing recordkeeping and archiving
facilities; new efforts to create equal opportunities
for men and women and to ensure a gender balance
throughout the United Nations system and in the Office
of the President; and the obtaining of information on
the sources of funding and staffing of the Office of
the President. Another element worth highlighting is
the agreement on the provision of financial disclosures
on the assumption and completion of the President’s
duties, in line with the existing United Nations financial
disclosure programme. In addition we agreed that all
contributions have to be vetted through the United
Nations Ethics Office and for non in-kind contributions
to be channeled through the United Nations Trust Fund.
Particular progress was also made in other areas,
such as the establishment of a code of ethics to be
observed by the President, including the members of

A/70/PV.117

his or her Office, and of an individual oath of office to
be taken by him or her. This is complemented by the
decision to enhance cooperation and interaction between
the Permanent Missions to the United Nations and the
Secretariat through an interactive and comprehensive
dialogue. All these, and other elements agreed upon
in the resolution, will ensure a more favourable public
image of the United Nations in general and the Office
of the President.
On 18 July, the Council of the European Union
adopted its priorities for the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly. These priorities reaffirm
the commitment of the European Union to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and recognize the need for the reform and
reinvigoration of the global governance systems, of
which the revitalization of the General Assembly is a
key component. It is with this in mind that I wish to
signal our readiness to remain constructively engaged
in this process.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, which is a cross-regional
group comprised of the following 25 small and mid-size
countries seeking to improve the working methods
of the Security Council: Austria, Chile, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Hungary,
Ireland, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Maldives,
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Portugal, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland and Uruguay.
We warmly welcome the adoption of resolution
70/305 today by consensus, and we would like to thank
President Lykketoft for his leadership, as well as the
tireless co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
the Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia,
for their excellent work, creativity and continued
dedication. We also extend warm thanks to all of the
teams and the Secretariat.
The ACT group would like to offer a few comments
on the cluster dealing with the selection and appointment
of the next Secretary-General and other executive heads
addressed in the resolution.

16-285033/11

A/70/PV.117

We are pleased that the Ad Hoc Working Group
reached a consensual agreement to complement the
historic resolution 69/321 with the provisions in this
year’s resolution, affirming the achievements made so
far. We have received a clear overview of the candidates
that were submitted for the position of the SecretaryGeneral and pariticipated in informal dialgoues with
them — a process that we believe will and should
become the norm in the future. Since the new session
will start today and the selection process is not only
ongoing but reaching its final stage, we are glad that
the resolution just adopted requests the President of the
Assembly at its seventy-first session to actively support
the process.
The ACT group continues to advocate for the
best qualified person who will emerge from a fair
and transparent selection process, to be appointed
by the General Assembly as the next SecretaryGeneral. We are therefore pleased that clear and
precise qualifications and criteria have been included
also in this year’s resolution. Furthermore, in the
highly debated paragraph 45, dealing with senior
appointments, the long-standing positions of the ACT
group are well reflected. We have been advocating for
the Secretary-General to exercise independence in the
selection of senior officials, as well as respect for the
highest standards and efficiency in these appointments,
while ensuring equal and fair distribution based on
gender-balance and as wide of a geographical base as
possible.
The ACT group would like to see the General
Assembly continue playing the rightful role foreseen for
it under the Charter, including its prerogative to draft
a final resolution for the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral. We hope that the final phase of the selection
will be as encouraging as the whole process has been so
far. In this regard, the ACT group, concurring with the
views expressed by the President, calls once again upon
the Security Council to live up to the expectations of
the general membership concerning the new standard
of openness and transparency on the selection process
and the results of the straw polls.
In conclusion, allow me to sincerely thank President
Lykketoft on behalf of our group for his excellent work
in bringing new norms of transparency to the United
Nations and to wish much success to the incoming
President and, indeed, to the whole General Assembly
for a sucessful conclusion to this selection process.
4/11

13/09/2016

Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Brazil welcomes
the adoption by consensus of another breakthrough
resolution on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly (resolution 70/305). We would like
to thank Ambassador Vladimir Drobnjak of Croatia
and Ambassador Wilfred Emvula of Namibia for
their excellent work on a second consecutive year
as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
As is well known, last year’s resolution 69/321
introduced important changes to the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General.
These changes — in particular the holding of informal
dialogues between the candidates and the General
Assembly — have contributed so far to an unprecedented
degree of transparency and democratic interaction
in the process for the next Secretary-General. The
resolution that was just adopted, after 10 months of
intense discussions and negotiations, reflects a similar
commitment to a more inclusive and democratic
decision-making process at the United Nations.
From our perspective, the advances introduced in
paragraphs 44 and 45 of this year’s resolution deserve
special mention. Paragraph 44, among other points,
stresses that
“the process of appointments to senior posts by the
Secretary-General within the Organization should
be inclusive and transparent”.
Paragraph 45, for its part, stresses that as
“a general rule, there should be no monopoly on
senior posts in the United Nations system by
nationals of any State or group of States”.
Ironically,
part
of
these
breakthrough
innovations — the prescription that there should
be no monopolies in the senior posts of the
Organization — came from previously agreed
consensus language. Resolutions 46/232 of 1992
and 51/241 of 1997, both adopted without a vote,
established this principle after the end of the Cold
War. The importance of reaffirming this notion at this
time should be highlighted. With the election of a new
Secretary-General by the Assembly upon us, it is more
than necessary that this principle should guide his
or her appointments from the very outset. Improving
the functioning of the Secretariat is a vital part of the
reform and revitalization of the General Assembly and
16-28503

13/09/2016

of the United Nations as a whole, and there is no better
moment to recommit to this idea than now.
This year’s resolution also brings important
innovations in other areas, especially regarding the
President and his or her Office. After 70 years, a
long overdue code of ethics has been established, as
has an oath of office for the President. In addition,
measures such as the provision of financial disclosures
by the Presidents of the General Assembly, vetting
all contributions to the Trust Fund in support of the
Office of the President by the United Nations Ethics
Office, as well as making available resources to the
Presidents from their date of election, will contribute to
the observance of the highest standards of transparency
and ethics and will represent a positive contribution to
fortify the activity of the Office of the President.
On other possible ways to improve and strengthen
the work of the President of the General Assembly,
however, the resolution has fallen short of expectations,
especially as regards the long-overdue need to
provide the Office with meaningful resources from
the regular budget. Brazil remains committed to
the revitalization of the General Assembly and the
reaffirmation of its central role as the most democratic
and representative decision-making body of the
Organization, as well as to ensuring a more active role
for the General Assembly in nominating the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with article 97 of the Charter of
the United Nations. The General Assembly cannot be a
rubber-stamping Assembly.
Finally, as this is the last resolution to be adopted
during this session, allow me to congratulate the
President on the excellent work he has done as the
President of the General Assembly at its seventieth
session. Among the many important initiatives the
President has conducted during his term of office, let
me single out his active participation in guaranteeing a
democratic selection of the next Secretary-General by
organizing the informal dialogues or hearings, as well
as the creative town-hall meeting with the candidates
that was covered by the TV network Al Jazeera. Absent
his commitment, we may not have come this far.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the co-facilitators, Ambassador Vladimir
Drobjnak and Ambassador Wilfried Emvula, for their
tireless work, and President Lykketoft for his enormous
efforts to reach the point where we find ourselves today.
As we did last year in this same forum, this year I wish,

A/70/PV.117

on behalf of my delegation and my country, to extend
our gratitude to President Lykketoft for the way he has,
throughout these intense 10 months of negotiations,
steered this ship of ours safely to port towards the
revitalization the work of the General Assembly.
For a number of years, criticism has abounded at
the lack of consensus within the Organization and the
lack of concrete action taken to adapt it to the global
challenges of an increasingly turbulent world. We have
come a long way, but it has become ever more clear
that, working together as the international community
of States Members of the United Nations, we have
achieved fruitful results with a view to making its
principal organ more inclusive, more democratic and
more transparent. I would highlight three key aspects.
First, thanks to resolution 70/305, adopted today,
we now have a more inclusive General Assembly. The
resolution highlights the need for the United Nations
to strike a gender and geographical balance. Let me be
frank in saying that this is no mean feat, particularly in
light of resolution 69/321 of 2015, wheb we were able
to achieve a high participation of female candidates for
the post of Secretary-General.
Secondly, thanks to resolution 70/305, we now have
a more democratic General Assembly. Between us, we
have managed to fine-tune the procedures established
between the Assembly and the other organs — including
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the different components of the United Nations
system — so that the sum of its parts can function
more efficiently. I want to draw particular attention to
the appeal made in the resolution for more consistent
alignment between the General Assembly and the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), which perhaps constitutes the most
significant achievement of our times in the area of
development.
Thirdly, through this resolution, we have managed
to create not just a more transparent General Assembly,
but a much more transparent Organization, with the
adoption of the code of ethics and the oath of office
of the President of the General Assembly so that the
President’s actions are more visible for the rest of the
world.
As ever, it is clear that there is still a long way to
go, but to that end the momentum created by the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly offers the optimal space for

16-285035/11

A/70/PV.117

pursuing the right path. Strengthening the United
Nations is essential to the ambitious agenda that we have
proposed. It must evolve from being a mere aspiration
to becoming a reality in the next 15 years. The orderly,
transparent and efficient work of the General Assembly
is essential to that end.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): On behalf of my dear
friend, Ambassador Wilfried Emvula of Namibia and
myself, I wish to express our sincere appreciation for all
the constructive cooperation and creative assistance that
we have received from Member States in the previous
months. It has been a privilege to continue co-chairing
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly at the seventieth
session as well, and we can most certainly say that
resolution 70/305, which we have just adopted, is truly
our common success.
The resolution before us is not only an important
step forward in increasing the efficiency, transparency
and accountability of the General Assembly and the
Office of its President; it is also a triumph of consensus.
It serves as the best example of what we all can achieve
when we work together in the spirit of seeking a
common goal and creative compromise. It is also, in
more ways than one, a continuation of the milestone
resolution 69/321.
There is still ample room for improvement
within the framework of the revitalization of the
General Assembly, but with the adoption of today’s
resolution, building on resolution 69/321, one can say
with confidence that profound creative improvements
have been accomplished, especially in the field of the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General and
the strengthening the Office of the President. The fact
that the annexes to the resolution will be immediately
annexed to the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly speaks for itself about the significance and
reach of our action.
We want to thank the Secretariat, and in particular
Mr. Georg Zeiner, for their highly professional,
competent and valuable assistance and resourcefulness.
Last, but definitely not least, we thank the President
of Assembly at its seventieth session, Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft, and his team for all the confidence entrusted
in the co-Chairs and the efficient support provided
whenever and wherever needed in the course of this
challenging endeavour.
6/11

13/09/2016

In a few hours, the President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session will take the
oath of office, thereby beginning the implementation
of what we have achieved through our hard work and
adopted today. We are confident that other important
provisions of this far-reaching document will also be
put to practical use very soon. It was indeed an honour
to co-chair this groundbreaking process. We thank
everyone once again.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus completed its consideration
of agenda item 120.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Global awareness of the tragedies of irregular
migrants in the Mediterranean basin, with specific
emphasis on Syrian asylum seekers
The Acting President: Members will recall that, at
the Assembly’s 116th plenary meeting, on 9 September,
delegations expressed their views in favour of as well
as against the inclusion of this item on the draft agenda
of the Assembly’s seventy-first session.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): This issue is of interest to every State,
whether it be one of destination or origin. This global
phenomenon must be tackled by all of us, and all of
us must work to find ways to solve it. We must be
objective in examining every one of its aspects and
effects all over the world, as well as its chief causes in
the Middle East, particularly terrorism, the continuing
Israeli occupation of Arab territories and the military
invasion of some parts of the region, as well as unilateral
economic sanctions.
Agenda item 130 focuses only on the area of
the Mediterranean basin and Syrians in particular,
ignoring the tragedies of Yemeni, Libyan and Afghan
refugees. Many States Members of our Organization
have interfered militarily in their countries. Based on
data from Eurostat, the numbers of Syrian refugees and
migrants do not exceed 20 per cent of asylum seekers,
meaning that 80 per cent of those entering Europe are
of other Asian or African origin. No one is willing to
admit to the political and non-humanitarian motives
behind the insistence on focusing on Syrian asylum
seekers in this agenda item.
While we appreciate the sincere efforts of some
States to host Syrian asylum seekers, we object to
16-28503

13/09/2016

their being used as a political ploy and to efforts to
link them to terrorism. The international community
should shoulder its responsibilities for dealing with the
migration of the tens of thousands of foreign mercenary
fighters travelling to join the terrorist groups active in
Syria. In Syria, we are saddened by the flight of any
Syrian seeking asylum, and we hope that all our citizens
will eventually return to their schools, universities,
villages and cities and will work side by side with their
compatriots to rebuild Syria once more.
The existence of asylum seekers makes it incumbent
on the international community to put pressure on
States that support terrorism to end that support
forthwith, and on States that have imposed unilateral
economic sanctions on Syria — causing economic
paralysis and the destruction of infrastructure — to
lift those sanctions. A peaceful solution to the Syrian
conflict requires an end to external interference. Based
on Article 14 of the Charter of the United Nations, we
therefore urge that item 130 either not be included on
the agenda of the Assembly at its seventy-first session or
that the emphasis on Syrian asylum seekers be deleted.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We believe that the General Assembly’s
consideration of the problem of irregular migration in
the Mediterranean region should be broad and inclusive,
taking into account every attendant aspect, including
that of human rights, as well as of countries of origin,
transit and destination. To highlight the Syrian factor
in this issue seems inappropriate and politicized,
particularly since we are all aware that the scale of
migrants flowing through Libya and the Mediterranean
basin near is now so threatening that it required
special Security Council resolutions and a report of the
Secretary-General (A/70/59), whose conclusions are not
encouraging. As we know, it is precisely in the southern
Mediterranean that the European Union has launched
a special military operation, Operation Sophia. We
therefore propose that the reference to Syrian asylum
seekers be deleted from item 130, which would allow
us to avoid unnecessary division within the General
Assembly.
Mr. Louis (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf of
my delegation, I would first like to warmly congratulate
the President on the leadership he has shown in steering
the work of the General Assembly at its seventieth
session, which is closing today.

A/70/PV.117

I would like to focus the attention of the Assembly
on the scale of the tragedy of irregular migrants in the
Mediterranean basin. This is one of the most pressing
humanitarian situations facing the world today, which
has been getting exponentially worse for more than
a year. Furthermore, aware of the urgency of the
situation, at a General Assembly meeting held on
20 November 2015, the President of the Assembly was
already delivering a message of alarm, stating that
“[s]ince January, more than 880,000 refugees and
migrants have arrived in Europe ... more than 3,500
of them have already died on the route this year”.
(A/70/PV.59, p. 1)
The plight of millions of displaced men, women
and children refugees, Syrian or otherwise, must appeal
to the conscience of the international community. In
that regard, the collective action of the international
community is necessary, and indeed indispensable,
especially given the timely high-level summit on
the large movements of refugees and migrants, to be
held 19 September on the margins of the seventy-first
regular session of the General Assembly.
The delegation of Haiti is very sensitive to and
concerned by the situation of the massive displacement
of refugees and migrants, particularly Syrian asylum
seekers in the Mediterranean Basin, but also all
displaced persons in general. Therefore, we are in
favour of including agenda item 130, aptly named
“Global awareness of the tragedies of irregular migrants
in the Mediterranean basin, with specific emphasis on
Syrian asylum seekers”, in the agenda of the seventyfirst regular session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I would like to underline
my delegation’s strong position in favour of retaining
item 130 on the agenda of the seventy-first session
of the General Assembly, as it is. We find it deeply
regrettable that the merely procedural deferral of this
agenda item is being challenged. The magnitude of the
large-scale movement of the migrants and refugees in
the Mediterranean basin needs no further explanation.
The number of Syrian refugees, 4.8 million people in
total, spreading out from Brazil to Australia, speaks
for itself. At a time when we feel disheartened to see
so many displaced trying to survive, we should not
question the relevance of the United Nations addressing
the tragedy.
Next week, our leaders will come together to
address the issue of migrants and refugees in New York.

16-285037/11

A/70/PV.117

In the wake of these gatherings, we must refrain from
being divided on an issue on which we should be most
united. We are confident that Member States will stand
firm in their commitments towards those who would
look to the United Nations for assistance and support
by retaining item 130 in the agenda of the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly as it is.
Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
problem of refugees and migrants is of a global nature
and should be considered holistically. On 19 September,
the General Assembly will hold the high-level plenary
meeting on addressing large movements of refugees
and migrants. That event will be substantively unlike
any other event held thus far in the United Nations
on that theme. We will adopt a global strategy for
refugees and a road map for migrants through outcome
documents. There is also a subsequent plan to hold an
international conference on migrants in order to adopt
a global strategy on that issue.
These events reflect the fact that, in the short
and mid terms, we have created a solid foundation
for the profound and comprehensive consideration
and exploration of ways to solve problems related to
migrants and refugees, including Syrians. In that
respect, we do not think it appropriate to include item
130 in the agenda of the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly. A separate agenda item on that topic
could lead to the duplication of work in the Assembly,
expanding our already hefty agenda, and resulting in
the irrational spending of the United Nations budget.
Mr. Chu Guang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has listened to the statements made by the
representatives of Belarus and the Russian Federation,
and we thank them for their positions. We support the
statement made by the representative of the Russian
Federation. We believe that the second part of agenda
item 130, “with specific emphasis on Syrian asylum
seekers”, should be deleted.
Ms. Pritchard (Canada): There are many situations
that warrant the attention of the General Assembly.
However, the wide range of situations that are before
us should not lead us to ignore the issue surrounding
global awareness of the tragedies of irregular migrants
in the Mediterranean basin, with specific emphasis on
Syrian asylum seekers.
Several delegations have already pointed out that
it remains an issue of not only regional but also global
concern, and it is our view that to remove that item from
8/11

13/09/2016

the agenda of the General Assembly at this time would
send entirely the wrong message. It is for that reason
that we support the inclusion of that item and would
like to see it on the agenda of the seventy-first session.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran underlines the importance
of addressing the agony and suffering of refugees in
a humane and respectful manner. In fact, Iran is no
stranger to the issue at hand, as for several decades, it
has single-handedly hosted one of the largest refugee
populations in the world. However, singling out
one situation among many does not seem helpful in
addressing the subject. We reiterate our understanding
that the issue of refugees should be considered in a
holistic manner, under a relevant General Assembly
agenda item, without undertaking a selective approach.
It is for that reason that my delegation cannot support
the inclusion of that agenda item in the draft agenda of
the seventy-first session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, aware of the importance of considering a
topic of such critical importance to the current global
and humanitarian agenda as the tragedy of the refugees
and migrants in the Mediterranean basin, asserts that it
deserves a comprehensive treatment encompassing all
geographical areas that suffer from that phenomenon,
without focusing on any single region or country.
As such, our position on the issue will continue
to advance a vision from the South that advocates the
ongoing creation of a positive narrative on the topic of
refugees and migrants and does not criminalize them
by considering them to be the root causes of phenomena
such as fomenting armed conflicts, but rather promotes
economic and social development and overcoming
poverty as structural mechanisms for addressing
that global issue. We therefore support the Russian
Federation’s proposal.
Ms. Al-Temimi (Qatar): We want to echo the
statement just made by our colleague from Turkey. This
issue continues to be one of great global concern. That
is why we support the inclusion of agenda item 130 in
the agenda of the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Given the
continuous flow of migrants through the Mediterranean
Basin, Senegal is in favour of the inclusion of agenda
16-28503

13/09/2016

item 130 in the agenda of the seventy-first session of
the General Assembly.
Ms. Blake (United States of America): The United
States wishes to express its full support for retaining
agenda item 130 as it is currently on the agenda of
the General Assembly and for including it in the draft
agenda of its seventy-first session. As several other
delegations have stated, including Haiti’s, that remains,
as ever, a relevant challenge. We would strongly
encourage all Member States to consider its relevancy,
given the gravity of the situation of the displaced, not
only in Syria but elsewhere, so as to ensure that we
have an opportunity as an organ to continue discussing
something that remains a timely and important matter.

A/70/PV.117

agenda. We believe that discussions must continue to be
held in this forum.
Mr. Fornell (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Ecuador calls for item on refugees and
migrants to be included in the draft agenda of the
General Assembly, without politicization, double
standards or singling out a specific country. Ecuador
therefore supports including the item on the draft
agenda, but without the reference to Syria.
Mr.

Orozco

Barrera

(Colombia)

(spoke

in

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): My country is, and has
been for years, one of the countries at the forefront
in the migrant and refugee crisis that affects the
Mediterranean region. Of course, while war is a
dimension of issues pertaining to migrants and refugees,
we can speak particularly about what is happening
in the Mediterranean. Taking into account that we
are approaching the important Summit to be held on
19 September, we think that it would send the wrong
message not to include this item in the draft agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-first session. We
therefore firmly support its inclusion.

Spanish): My delegation believes that it is important to

Mr. Oussihamou (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation firmly supports the inclusion of agenda item
130 in the draft agenda of the upcoming session of the
General Assembly.

Mediterranean in 2015. According to the International

Mr. Minami (Japan): Japan would like to support
the proposal regarding the retention of agenda item 130,
entitled “Global awareness of the tragedies of irregular
migrants in the Mediterranean basin, with specific
emphasis on Syrian asylum seekers”, in the draft agenda
of the General Assembly of its seventy-first session.

to reach Europe via the Mediterranean came from

The international community still faces human
tragedies as a consequence of massive irregular
movements of refugees and migrants in the
Mediterranean basin. Given the complexity and
seriousness of its root causes, this issue requires
continuous global attention. Therefore, we need to
discuss it intensively, before and after the Summit to be
held on 19 September.

that the use of the Mediterranean as a passageway to

Ms. Duncan Villalobos (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica calls for retaining this item of the

retain this item as it stands on the draft agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session: “Global
awareness of the tragedies of irregular migrants in the
Mediterranean basin, with specific emphasis on Syrian
asylum seekers”.
Mr. Cepero Aguilar (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
More than 1 million asylum seekers crossed the
Organization for Migration, 32 per cent of migrants
who reportedly died or went missing in their attempt
Western, Central and Southern Africa; 22 per cent
from the Middle East and South Asia; 10 per cent from
the Horn of Africa; 1 per cent from North Africa; and
35 per cent from areas unknown. Those statistics show
reach Europe is not exclusive to any particular country.
The singling out of any one country with regard to this
item will only contribute to an unrealistic analysis of
the phenomenon in general.
In conclusion, Cuba supports the proposal made by
the Russian delegation.

16-285039/11

A/70/PV.117

Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The opinions expressed by the delegations of
certain countries, including their insistence on dealing
with the tragedy of migrants and refugees with a
specific focus on Syrians alone and their rejection of the
proposal made by the Russian Federation to retain that
part of item 130, which focuses on a global awareness of
the tragedy of irregular migrants in the Mediterranean
basin while deleting the phrase specifically focusing
on Syrian asylum seekers, demonstrate that there are
Governments involved in this crisis and in exploiting
the suffering of migrants and refugees in order to
pressure the Syrian Government by exacerbating the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
My delegation would therefore like the matter
concerning agenda item 130 put to a recorded vote.
Ms. Danish (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would like
to retain item 130 in the draft agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session in connection with
the huge movements of migrants and refugees in the
Mediterranean basin and encourage all members to
support retaining this item.
The Acting President: Members will recall that, at
its 116th plenary meeting, on 9 September, delegations
expressed their views in favour as well as against the
inclusion of this item in the draft agenda of the seventyfirst session.
In view of the objections made, the General
Assembly will now proceed to a recorded vote on
the proposal that agenda item 130 be included in the
draft agenda of the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, New Zealand,
10/11

13/09/2016

Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Lesotho, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, United Republic
of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, China,
Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal,
Pakistan, Philippines, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Viet Nam
The General Assembly decided to include agenda
item 130 in the draft of agenda of its seventy-first
session by 82 votes to 9, with 21 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Albania informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour,
the delegation of Cuba informed the Secretariat that
it had intended to vote against, and the delegation
of Tanzania informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We welcome all the sincere and dedicated
efforts to address the issue of Syrian refugees.
However, including the item as it is, focusing on global
awareness of the tragedies of only the Syrian refugees
in the Mediterranean Basin, who represent only 20 per
cent of all asylum seekers in Europe, we believe that
there are doubts about the appropriateness of including
this item on the draft agenda. Therefore, we requested a
vote and voted against the inclusion of this item on the
draft agenda. On this occasion, I should like to express
our delegation’s appreciation to those countries that
16-28503

13/09/2016

voted for the inclusion of this item because of the global
nature of this phenomenon and whose thinking was not
confined to the Syrian phenomenon.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Singapore voted in favour
of including this item on the General Assembly’s
agenda, as we respect the right of delegations to propose
agenda items for inclusion for discussion in the plenary.
Furthermore, we see merit in retaining this agenda item
for further discussion in the Assembly at its seventyfirst session. The issue of irregular migration in the
Mediterranean basin remains an issue of concern to the
international community, as it affects many innocent
people, including children. While our approaches to

A/70/PV.117

addressing large movements of migrants and refugees
may differ, reflecting our differing national realities,
capabilities, policies and priorities, the General
Assembly is the forum for Member States to discuss
this key issue with a view to finding durable solutions
to this challenge.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

16-2850311/11
