S/PV.8373

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8373rd meeting

Wednesday, 17 October 2018, 9:30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz/Mrs. Cordova Soria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-32500 (E)
*1832500*

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 a.m.

list of 50 names. Let me recall how we arrived at the
middle third list, which is now on the table and which
has been revised more than once and updated into a
new list.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Egypt,
Germany, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: When I briefed the Security
Council last month (see S/PV.8345), I said that we were
approaching a moment of truth in the effort to convene
a United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-led and Syrianowned constitutional committee, which, at the moment,
is the main outstanding item with regard to the way we
should implement resolution 2254 (2015). Everything
else is still on the table but that item remains the most
important one at the moment. A credible and balanced
committee could be the cornerstone of an inclusive
political process for Syrians in the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015), which is the only one we have.
Yesterday, I consulted Secretary-General António
Guterres at length and received very clear instructions
regarding our accelerated effort to convene a credible
and balanced constitutional committee — the only
kind that the United Nations — and by that I mean the
Secretariat — would be willing to convene and the only
one with which it would like to be associated. I will
return to those instructions later. But, first, let us be a
bit more precise about where we are.
As I told the Council last month, some things
are quite clear. The two lists of 50 names each for a
constitutional committee submitted by the Government
and the opposition, respectively, are not in question, but
questions continue to be raised, mainly by the Syrian
Government, about the composition of the middle third
2/30

17/10/2018

The final statement of the Congress of the Syrian
National Dialogue, held in Sochi, spoke about the need
to include “Syrian experts, civil society, independents,
tribal leaders and women”, with “adequate representation
of Syrian ethnic and religious components”. The Sochi
final statement made clear that it was via the Geneva
process and through the facilitation of the Special
Envoy that a final selection would be made.
In truth, it went even further than that. The
Secretary-General has asked me to remind the Council
that, in addition to the terms of the Sochi final statement
itself, an explicit United Nations-Russian understanding
was reached during the Vienna consultation, which
took place just before the United Nations attended
the meeting in Sochi. The understanding was that I,
as Special Envoy, would be free to draw not only on
names emanating from Sochi, but also on other names,
including, if necessary, those of Syrians who did not
attend the meeting in Sochi, in order to form a balanced
and credible list. Let me also recall that, in any case,
resolution 2254 (2015) mandates the United Nations to
convene parties in the political process and assigned
to the Geneva talks the task of setting a schedule and
process for drafting a new Constitution.
There should be no doubt that the middle third list
was very carefully developed by the United Nations. We
received input from and listened to many, including the
guarantors and others. Moreover, we also did our own
careful homework. We sought out credible and neutral
Syrian experts, including people who had played a role
in the previous Constitution-making process and could
bridge and build upon the two sides and with whom the
sides could work constructively. We look for respected
civil society representatives, independents and other
Syrians of standing — individuals who, as in any other
constitutional process, could somehow represent the
many Syrians who are not political affiliates but still
deserve a stake in their future. Of course, we know that
all Syrians, like all of us, have a political opinion or
leaning, which is totally natural. But we sought a fair
balance among the various political leanings so that
no one side could dominate the committee. This is a
very key part of what we consider to be the credibility
and legitimacy of the list. We ensured the adequate
representation of various ethnic, religious and regional
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

backgrounds, as well as a balance between those
living inside Syria and the millions of Syrians, who,
for the moment, are living outside their country due to
the conflict.
Lastly, with the full support of the SecretaryGeneral and as part of our commitment to giving full
effect to resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, we insisted that a minimum of 30 per cent
of the constitutional committee should be women. This
meant bringing many qualified and expert women of
all backgrounds into the middle third, and indeed the
proposed middle third is almost half women. That is
what has guided United Nations efforts to facilitate the
middle third and revise it into a new list, as has already
been done. I have also carefully facilitated development
as per resolution 2254 (2015) and the final statement
of the Sochi National Dialogue Congress. They both
stipulate that on a logical basis I should prepare some
basic aspects of the process and rules of procedure that
could enable the constitutional committee to work.
From the three lists of the Government, the
opposition and the middle third, it would be possible
to identify a smaller group, numbering 15 from
each, to form a drafting body for the constitutional
committee. The committee could be mandated to
draft constitutional reform for popular approval, as a
contribution to the political settlement in Syria, leading
to a new political structure and giving effect to the Sochi
final statement of 20 January. Within the context of the
Geneva process to implement resolution 2254 (2015),
such a constitutional reform could aim to embody in
the Constitution and constitutional practices of Syria
the letter and spirit of the 12 principles developed in
Geneva at great length and with a lot of hard work,
endorsed in Sochi, and offering the people of Syria a
vision of a future that can be shared by all.
The constitutional committee could work in Geneva
with an impartial Syrian chairmanship acceptable to all
components, supported by United Nations facilitation
and with appropriate decision-making arrangements.
Of course, these arrangements should all be consistent
with respect for Syria’s sovereignty, unity, independence
and territorial integrity. The United Nations facilitation
should enable the Syrians themselves to engage with
one another and independently and democratically
determine their own future with dignity. Clearly, the
key parties are the Syrian parties, but equally, the
prospect of an effective constitutional committee also

S/PV. 8373

rests on strong support from key countries. They will
be further engaged by us in the coming weeks.
Let me start with the Government of Syria. Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Al-Moualem
met with the Secretary-General during the general
debate of the General Assembly, a meeting that I also
attended. At the meeting, the Foreign Minister voiced
strong doubts about the Sochi final statement and its
outcome, indicating that the Government had a very
different understanding of those matters. He called
for a fundamental reassessment of the work that had
been done to date on the middle-third list and rules of
procedure, as well as on the United Nations facilitation
role. For his part, the Secretary-General reiterated the
Sochi statement and its outcome, as well as the mandate
of the Security Council, and offered to have me explain
the work that has been done on it in much more detail.
He appealed to the Foreign Minister to ensure that
the Government could work in partnership with the
United Nations.
For their part, two of the Astana guarantors,
Russia and Iran, have also significantly questioned
the middle-third list, indicating that it does not meet
the Government’s requirements, despite the extensive
consultations and the Sochi understanding. At the same
time, they have indicated that they are continuing to
engage with the Government of Syria on the matter, and
indeed, as we speak, senior Russian officials will be
visiting Damascus in the next few days. Turkey, which
initially felt that our list could benefit from revision,
has recently indicated its own full understanding of the
logic and composition of the third list.
For its part, the Syrian High Negotiations Committe,
as we call the opposition, confirmed to the SecretaryGeneral during the general debate its readiness to move
ahead on the basis of the broad package on the table.
The opposition met at the beginning of this week in
Riyadh, and most of the nominees for the constitutional
committee are right now sitting together in internal
consultations in order to prepare for their work. The
small-group countries — Egypt, France, Germany,
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and the
United States — have all urged the United Nations
to convene a constitutional committee without delay.
Similar messages have come during the past few days
from a large number of European and Arab Foreign
Ministers with whom I met during the general debate.

18-325003/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to inform the Security Council that
the Government of Syria has invited me to Damascus
next week in a follow-up to the meeting with the
Secretary-General during the general debate. I plan to
engage with them on the work that has been done on the
constitutional committee. If the Council wishes, I will
of course be ready to report back to it after my visit on
whether those direct consultations have produced the
approval of and agreement on a credible and inclusive
third list, as we hope.
Before the end of the month I also intend to invite
the Astana guarantors for consultation with me in
Geneva and to engage with the small-group countries.
In my view that would be our final opportunity to put
the finishing touches to the preparations for convening
a constitutional committee. I would then hope to be in a
position to issue invitations to convene the committee,
if possible during November. I can offer no guarantee
as to whether this is possible, but what I do know after
nine months of preparations is that it is important to
launch a credible constitutional committee and that
whatever transpires, I would like to come back and
brief the Council in November on where we stand.
Let me remind us all that if steps are not taken
towards achieving a safe, calm and neutral environment,
the work of a constitutional committee would not end
up being very meaningful. We all know that. But first
things first. On the constitutional committee front,
despite our best efforts regarding steps towards a safe,
calm and neutral environment, we have seen very few
concrete outcomes during 2018. I hope we will see more
in the upcoming months. For instance, the Working
Group on the release of detainees/abductees and
handover of the bodies and the identification of missing
persons, met again last week in Tehran. We continue
to urge it to come up with its first tangible results, as
many, many people in Syria are waiting for them.
Let us look now at the big picture for a moment
before we go back to the constitutional committee.
A catastrophe has so far been averted in Idlib and
the Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding
appears to be being implemented. Major strides have
been taken in defeating terrorism, and that should
continue to be a priority. The territorial base of the
Islamic State in Syria and the Levant has largely been
erased, although it does remain dangerous. For the
moment the de facto map of Syria today is relatively
stable, but it must not become a de facto soft partition,
nor a theatre for new international confrontations.
4/30

17/10/2018

There must therefore be a political path forward.
President Putin and President Erdoğan have said that
the Idlib deal offers a window for the constitutional
committee to be established and the political process
to go ahead. The European Union, for instance, will
host a third Brussels conference in March 2019, and
we know that its decisions will depend on a credible
political process. The United Nations has done all that it
can — and, frankly, more — to find a way to convene a
credible and balanced constitutional committee. We are
ready to do more, and do it faster, during the upcoming
months, taking advantage of the Idlib window of
opportunity. However, we are not ready to convene a
committee that is not credible and balanced.
In that regard, having consulted the SecretaryGeneral, let me also give the Council a heads-up, if I
may. I will myself be moving on, as of the last week
of November. I have had the honour to serve for four
years and four months as Special Envoy. For some time,
I have been discussing with the Secretary-General my
desire, for purely personal reasons, to move on. I deeply
appreciate his constant support and wise counsel with
regard to this matter, but I will definitely not say
goodbye or engage in reflections today. A month can
be a century in politics. We will continue to have a
very intense and, hopefully, fruitful month ahead.
I will not lay down my charge until the last hour of
the last day of my mandate. In fact, the SecretaryGeneral has instructed me that my last month of service
should be used to actively verify whether or not the
United Nations is in a position to convene a credible
and balanced constitutional committee, and report to
the Security Council accordingly. I plan to do so with
clarity and frankness and count on the support of the
Security Council and all Syrian counterparts to do so.
Let me summarize the bottom line of my message,
which has been long.
First, the Idlib memorandum of understanding
provides a unique window of opportunity for launching
a credible and inclusive constitutional committee. We
must take advantage of it. That is, and remains, our
aim. Our assessment is that if there is political will,
there is no reason for a constitutional committee not to
be convened in November — 10 months after the Sochi
declaration. Secondly, the main reason for the delay
in convening in Geneva the first session of a credible
and inclusive constitutional committee involves the
difficulties that the Government has in accepting the
current third list of participants prepared by the United
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Nations in accordance with the Sochi declaration
and resolution 2254 (2015). Thirdly, I plan to discuss
that pending issue during my forthcoming mission to
Damascus and report back to the Secretary-General
and the Security Council thereafter on the outcome.
Fourthly, since my personal plan, in consultation with
the Secretary-General, has always been to end my
mission, for purely personal reasons, in the last week
of November — four years and four months after it
began — my intention, and as per the instructions of
the Secretary-General, is to dedicate this crucial last
month to actively verify, once and for all, the feasibility
of the implementation of a credible and inclusive
constitutional committee, as well as the implementation
of the Sochi declaration.
I will therefore report in November to the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council on the status of the
implementation of the constitutional committee in
order to allow the Secretary-General and the Security
Council to draw their own conclusions, so that my
own successor can start his or her own mission with a
clean slate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
I would request members of the Security Council
and those joining us in the Chamber to remember to
turn off their cell phones and please focus on those
taking the floor.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing and his
hard work to prepare for political progress in Syria.
We have before the Security Council today a very rare
thing — a brief window of opportunity to advance a
political solution in Syria. We should take it. History
will be unforgiving if we fail to do so.
The United States has sought every opportunity
to prevent the Al-Assad regime and its Russian and
Iranian allies from pursuing a military end to the
conflict in Syria. We have long called for a credible,
inclusive constitutional committee that will begin the
essential work of drafting a new Syrian constitution.
That committee will lay the groundwork for free
and fair elections in Syria, supervised by the United
Nations and open to all eligible Syrians, including
those who were forced to flee their country during the

S/PV. 8373

present conflict. The United States has worked long
and hard for this progress in Syria, as have some others
on the Security Council. That said, the United States
did not always support Russia’s January proposal for
such a committee. We had concerns that that initiative
would undermine the Geneva process. We had concerns
about Russia’s good faith. We had doubts about whether
Russia intended to support a political transition in Syria
and whether the proposed constitutional committee
was a way for Russia to assert its influence over Syria
rather than to blaze a path to peace, because, frankly,
Al-Assad, Russia and Iran have the most to gain from
pursuing a military end to the Syrian war. De-escalation
zones have been established and ignored by Russia and
the Al-Assad regime. Accountability has been resisted.
Villages have been levelled. Humanitarian assistance
has been denied. Weapons of mass destruction have
been used. So yes, we had concerns.
In the eight months since the announcement, the
United States has consulted with other Security Council
members. We felt that if there were an opportunity
to move towards a political solution, we should do
everything possible to make it work. Today there is a
consensus in the Security Council that a constitutional
committee should be convened in Geneva immediately
by the United Nations Special Envoy, as he wishes to
do. We join in this consensus. Our Syria small-group
partners have also rallied behind that idea. Egypt,
France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United
Kingdom support the creation of such a group to map
Syria’s political future without delay, but it is starting to
look as though our concerns may have been warranted.
We see the Al-Assad regime using the same delaying
tactics that have stalled the political process in Syria
for years.
The Special Envoy has worked hard to prepare
a diverse and credible list of Syrians to serve on the
constitutional committee. The candidates are drawn
from all parts of Syrian society. Many of them are
experts in the law and the process of drafting a new
constitution, and, just last month, Turkey and Russia
announced an agreement in principle on lists of possible
members of the committee, but now the Al-Assad
regime is objecting to those lists. They now want veto
power over the United Nations process. They have at the
eleventh hour invited the Special Envoy to Damascus
next week for new consultations after months of not
engaging. We welcome Special Envoy De Mistura’s
offer to brief the Council on his Damascus trip as soon

18-325005/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

as possible, and we hope that such briefing will take
place before the end of this month.
The Syrian representative to the United Nations
has told the Council that Damascus rejects Russia’s
own Sochi declaration that launched the constitutional
committee. Syria rejected Russia’s diplomatic initiative.
Let us therefore be clear about what Al-Assad is up to.
This is not a last-ditch attempt at diplomacy. This is
another obvious attempt to delay the United Nations
effort to forge a political consensus and a political
solution. There can be only two purposes for these
delaying tactics, neither of which speak well of the
motives of Al-Assad and his Russian friends. Either
they are attempting to create an unbalanced committee
that will rubber-stamp the regime’s positions, or
they are attempting to forestall the vital work of the
committee, which is the critical work of establishing
self-government for the Syrian people. Let us remember
what is at stake if the Syrian regime and the Russian
Federation delay the creation of the committee. There
will be no progress on the new Syrian constitution,
no progress towards free and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections, and no progress on a political
solution. This moment of calm and opportunity, which
has created the time and space for political progress,
could well evaporate.
The United States does not share the view that
a November launch of the committee is rushed or
premature. Quite to the contrary, delay risks disaster.
We have the lists of participants. The Security Council
has had the road map for a political settlement since it
adopted resolution 2254 (2015), in 2015. The Special
Envoy has every authority to convene the committee
and tells us that he is ready to do so. We believe that
he should. Special Envoy De Mistura should set a date
for the first meeting of the committee, issue invitations
and move ahead with talks, and he should do so without
delay. While some in this Chamber are in no hurry to
move forward on the political process, there are 6 million
refugees who cannot return home without progress
on the 2254 process. The constitutional committee is
only a very early step towards this. There are 3 million
Syrian civilians in Idlib whose fate also hangs in the
balance. The Syrian and Russian jets are grounded,
for now. The heavy weapons have been removed from
Turkey and Russia’s demilitarized zone, for now. The
ceasefire in Idlib has given us a window of opportunity,
but it is a window that could close at any minute.
6/30

17/10/2018

We remind the Council that resolution 2254
(2015), which was adopted without opposition in this
Chamber, explicitly supports a nationwide ceasefire
to accompany and reinforce the initial steps towards
political transition. The United States has been clear;
any military escalation in Idlib or beyond remains
unacceptable and would gravely threaten efforts to find
a peaceful political solution to this crisis. The Syrian
people have been silenced for too long. We have a
unique opportunity to forge a political solution to one
of the most bloody and destructive wars of our lifetime.
This moment of opportunity will not last long, based
on all that we have seen in Syria over the past years. I
urge my colleagues to resist further delays and take this
historic opportunity.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his very
informative briefing and exemplary commitment. I also
wish to commend the exceptional work of the Special
Envoy and reiterate to him France’s full and entire
support for the crucial month ahead of us.
Each of us is well aware that Syria is at a
crossroads. It could either topple to military escalation
in Idlib, which would open one of the darkest chapters
of the Syrian tragedy, or take the demanding path of
true political momentum towards a settlement of the
conflict. It is our conviction that today, and perhaps for
the first time in seven years, there is a narrow window
of opportunity in this respect, and it is our collective
responsibility to seize it. Today both the darkest and
the most promising scenarios are possibilities; the
choice depends largely on us and on the ability of the
Council to unite around the option of peace — a step
that, despite the tremendous difficulties of which we all
are aware, is today within our reach. In that context, the
creation of a constitutional committee can and should
be the inflection point that we seek — the first stage
of a genuine political dynamic. The establishment of
that committee as soon as possible is therefore our
priority today.
Staffan de Mistura has just presented us with a
mixed picture — to put it mildly — of the progress
made on the political scene. Ten months after the
announcement of the establishment of the constitutional
committee during the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress, held in Sochi in January, that forum has
yet to meet. Let us say it how it is; that stalemate is
directly linked to obstruction by the Syrian regime,
which ultimately tells us that it does not wish to take
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

part in the ongoing diplomatic efforts, while its allies
are unable or unwilling to convince it to put an end to
its intransigence. The lists from the opposition and the
regime were sent to the United Nations several months
ago, but the systematic obstruction by the regime and
its allies on the composition of the third third of the
committee has paralysed those efforts. I remind the
Council that the Sochi Congress gave a mandate to the
Special Envoy for the composition of that committee. It
is our collective responsibility to firmly support him in
his efforts and to call for an end to any obstruction to
the implementation of the road map that we all agreed.
It is therefore imperative that the first meeting
of the committee take place as soon as possible and
with a clear time frame in order to put an end to
these delay tactics. We are determined to support the
Special Envoy in carrying out his work, and we need
a specific date. I wish to inform Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura that, in keeping with the role accorded the
United Nations in this process, he has all the room for
manoeuvre that may be necessary to move forward.
That is the thrust of the support that the ministers of
the small group have publicly provided to him on the
margins of the General Assembly. We also call for the
committee, whose inclusivity is key, not to be stalled
by unbalanced operating rules. It is incumbent on all
Syrians, not just the regime in Damascus, to decide on
their own constitution.
Finally, the political process cannot be restricted to
the constitutional committee alone. This is only the first
step in a process consistent with resolution 2254 (2015),
which should in particular include an electoral process
that is inclusive and credible and the establishment of a
safe and neutral environment in Syria. We would also
be interested to hear the thoughts of Staffan de Mistura
on the regime’s implementation of Law 10, which is of
particular concern to us.
Secondly, I wish to come back to the situation
on the ground. The agreement between Turkey and
Russia has temporarily averted the prospect of a
major humanitarian disaster. However, it offers the
inhabitants of Idlib only a short respite; there are major
challenges remaining. We will therefore continue to
closely monitor the implementation of the agreement
on the ground, calling for a long-term ceasefire. We
must also do everything possible to guarantee the
protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as ensuring full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syrian

S/PV. 8373

territory. It is imperative that humanitarian aid remain
independent, neutral and equitable. The objective
remains the long-term avoidance of an offensive that
would have disastrous migratory, humanitarian and
security consequences for Syria and the entire region.
Our efforts to avert a tragedy in Idlib must continue
in parallel with our commitment to begin the work of
the constitutional committee and, ultimately, to initiate
a political process. Everything is connected; it is a
question of breaking the cycle of violence in Syria and
finally creating a space for a true political process.
In that context, what can we do in the coming
weeks to support the mediation of the United Nations?
France, along with its partners from the small group,
strongly advocated the convening as soon as possible
of a credible and inclusive constitutional committee to
initiate the drafting of a new constitution. That is our
road map for laying the groundwork for free and fair
elections that are open to the participation of refugees
and internally displaced persons, under the supervision
of the United Nations, in a safe and neutral environment
that protects the rights of Syrians and provides them
with concrete guarantees, while preventing the regime
from rendering the process meaningless. We will spare
no effort to move forward on those priorities, which
must unite us all. The members of the small group will
continue to fully support the Special Envoy in that
regard, and I welcome their participation today.
Let us not close the narrow window of opportunity
that has opened for the formation of the constitutional
committee, which offers the hope of initiating a political
process aimed at resolving the Syrian crisis. If these
efforts do not prove successful, we will return to square
one, and 10 months of diplomatic efforts — including
on the part of the Astana guarantors — will all have
been in vain. The process of ending the crisis, with
the return of refugees and the reconstruction that must
accompany it, will be blocked over the long term before
it has even begun. It is therefore time to use the next
few weeks to ensure the convening of the first meeting
of the committee. Given the gravity of the situation,
waiting to see is not an option. That must be our common
priority today, around which, on behalf of France, I call
on all the members of the Council to unite.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy for his briefing and for all the work that he and
his team do on the ground. I learn with personal regret
of his intention to move on, much as I understand
the reasons, and I will come back to that, if I may.

18-325007/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

However, the Council and the entire United Nations
owe him a tremendous debt because he has persisted
with one of the most difficult portfolios that, I think,
any representative of the Secretary-General can have
in any conflict, and he has done so for four long years.
We thank him very much for that. As I said, I will come
back to that later. The war itself has gone on for even
longer than his tenure. I think that he is the third Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and the war
has continued for seven very long, very gruesome and
very awful years for the Syrian people.
I will start with Idlib, which represents a terribly
important moment because 3 million civilians remain
at risk there. We salute the work that the Turkish
Government has done, working with the Russians to
get the current situation in Idlib under control. If I may
cite the Emergency Relief Coordinator, we hope that
that is a reprieve and not a stay of execution. However,
I think that everyone on the Council remains fearful
that the Idlib agreement will not hold. My first point is
therefore that the Council should do everything that it
can to support the Special Envoy and Turkey in having
the Idlib agreement be preserved,
Secondly, as the French Ambassador said, the
humanitarian situation still remains very difficult and
very challenging. There has been progress in certain
areas, but it is not the case that aid is reaching all those
who are truly in need. We therefore also call on everyone
on the Council to redouble efforts to support the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others in
getting aid through. We call on the Russian and Syrian
Governments to ensure that the aid is delivered on the
basis of impartiality and need.
As the Special Envoy said, Idlib represents not
only the potential salvation of 3 million civilians but
also a window of opportunity for the peace process.
My United States and French colleagues set out very
clearly how that could be taken forward. I just want to
add the United Kingdom’s voice to what they said. The
Special Envoy described exactly how the constitutional
committee should be constituted, how it might work
and the sort of matters that it could look at. Under
resolution 2254 (2015), that was supposed to have been
set up within six months.
Frankly, on our side, it defies belief that the Syrian
Government cannot work with what the Special Envoy
has set out. I agree with the United States representative
8/30

17/10/2018

that the fact that the Syrian Government cannot work
with the constitutional committee as set out either calls
into question Russian good faith in brokering that deal
in Sochi in the first place or shows that the Russian
Government does not have power and influence in
Syria. I think that both those things are quite dangerous
for the potential of the Syrian political process and
that we should spend some time thinking through the
consequences of there being no progress at all on the
constitutional committee.
Even at this stage, we would appeal to the Syrian
authorities to make every conceivable effort to work
with the United Nations to bring the constitutional
committee into being along the lines that the Special
Envoy set out. We completely agree with him and the
Secretary-General that the United Nations cannot be
involved in this charade and that the constitutional
committee must be a genuinely credible and
representative process. As the French Ambassador said,
it is not the only part of the political process. Working
with the United Nations on a broader political process
is not a threat to Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
or unity. All the experience of the Council over very
many decades — but, in recent times, from the Balkans
to Africa and the Middle East — shows that where there
is conflict that is as divisive, as awful and as damaging
as the Syrian conflict has been for the past seven years,
there needs to be a representative political process if the
country is to be stable and coherent and, above all, for it
to reintegrate back into the international community. I
assume that the Syrian people really want those things.
We therefore take the opportunity today to call
on the Syrian authorities to put aside self-interest
and to engage with United Nations and the broader
political process. We call on them to ensure sustained
humanitarian access, as I said earlier, but we also
call on them to put an end to policies and practices
that create obstacles to displaced people and refugees
returning home and rebuilding their lives. We call
on them to start progress towards creating a safe and
neutral environment, in which all Syria’s communities,
regardless of religion or ethnicity, can thrive and be
fairly represented.
Moving on to the Special Envoy’s visit to
Damascus. I hope that he goes with the Council’s full
support in delivering the Secretary-General’s clear
and direct message to the Syrian authorities. We thank
him for the offer to come back to the Council and to
brief us further. As others have said, it is of such vital
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

importance that we seize this opportunity. The Special
Envoy will always be welcome in the Council at any
time, but I hope that he will err on the side of keeping
the Council updated as to how his talks are going.
The Special Envoy mentioned the Brussels
conference. I again want to be very clear: the sort of
reintegration of Syria into the international community
and the coherence and stability that need to flow from
a genuinely representative political process will need
money for reconstruction, including from the West.
That is also a lesson of all conflicts that we have dealt
with collectively over the past few decades. I take this
opportunity to reiterate — as I am sure the Brussels
event will — that we will not provide reconstruction
assistance for Syria absent a credible political process
leading to a settlement that is genuinely in the interests
of all Syria’s communities. To do otherwise would
be to see the awful seven years that have bedevilled
Syria repeated time and again until we are all locked
in the most vicious of spirals. Syria needs to overcome
the factors that, seven years ago, led in the first place
to the conflict with which we are now all struggling.
That cannot be done by ignoring help from the United
Nations or by it turning its back on the international
community. I hope that the Syrian representative will
be able to transmit those messages to his authorities in
advance of the Special Envoy’s visit to Damascus.
I will save a fuller tribute to the work of the Special
Envoy for when we get his final thoughts and advice on
what follows in the future after November. I welcome
the fact that he has said that he will be honest, direct
and clear. We look forward to that.
We hope that he will give us unvarnished advice
on what to do next. We hope that the outcome of that
will be a way in which the United Nations can assist
the people of Syria in coming to a political settlement,
but we must also contemplate other scenarios, unless
we see movement from the Syrian authorities. It is a
defining moment. I hope that the Council will be able
to support him fully, and I look forward to hearing his
future account.
I would like to close by expressing our deepest
thanks on behalf of the British Government for
everything that he has done in working for the United
Nations on this most difficult of dossiers.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding this meeting. We also thank Mr. Staffan de

S/PV. 8373

Mistura for his detailed and comprehensive briefing,
and we renew our appreciation and support for all
the efforts that he is making to activate and advance
a political settlement, especially his most recent
efforts to establish a constitutional committee. I would
like to join Ambassador Karen Pierce of the United
Kingdom in taking this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation for the intensive and earnest efforts
that Mr. Staffan de Mistura has made over the past four
years in his very difficult task. We also commend his
commitment to continue working until the very last day
of his mandate.
The international community finds itself at an
important and sensitive stage of the political process
to resolve the Syrian crisis. As my colleague the
Ambassador of France has said, we are now at a
crossroads. On one side, we see a bright and illuminated
path with clearly defined landmarks, in accordance
with the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). That path
gives us hope that we can put an end to the crisis that
Syria has been enduring for the past eight years. On
the other side of that crossroads, we find a dark and
difficult path riddled with obstacles and fabricated
impediments, which could take us back to square one.
Nine months after an agreement was reached in
Sochi to form a constitutional committee, and after
many rounds of negotiations over the three lists with
the relevant parties, we had hoped to see a launching of
the committee’s work. However, it is clear, as we have
just heard from the Special Envoy, that no progress has
been made. In that context, we hope that the visit of
Special Envoy De Mistura to Damascus next week,
which he just announced in his statement, will lead to
results that will facilitate the launch of the committee’s
work. We look forward to hearing his briefing on the
outcome of his visit soon.
We call for an intensification of efforts aimed at
an early launch of the work of a credible constitutional
committee that is inclusive of all segments of Syrian
society. We believe that this would constitute an
important landmark in the Syrian political process and
would push it forward. It is a first step in a political
transition that would include drafting a constitution
and holding free and fair elections in accordance with
such a new constitution, under the supervision of the
United Nations and in line with the highest international
standards of transparency and accountability. We hope
that all Syrians, including members of the diaspora, will

18-325009/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

participate in the elections, in keeping with resolution
2254 (2015).
We were on the brink of a humanitarian disaster
a month and a half ago because of a potential military
escalation in the province of Idlib, which is home to
approximately 3 million people, most of whom are
innocent civilians. The Council, which has adopted a
policy of preventive diplomacy, played an important
role in shining a spotlight on Idlib by holding a series of
meetings dealing with the possibility of a humanitarian
crisis in the event of a military escalation in Idlib. We
all followed the agreement that was reached in the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding, which
helped de-escalate the situation and averted what we
had most feared. As the deadline for that memorandum
of understanding draws near, we call for intensifying
efforts to sustain the ceasefire, not just in the province
of Idlib but throughout Syria, pursuant to resolution
2401 (2018), which was unanimously adopted by the
Council in February to protect civilians and guarantee
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need
throughout Syria.
The State of Kuwait reaffirms today, and every
day, that there is no solution to the crisis in Syria other
than a political one that is agreed by all segments of the
Syrian population, achieves their legitimate aspirations
and preserves the unity, independence and sovereignty
of Syria.
In closing, as I mentioned earlier, we are at a
crossroads, and the next few days will determine
the path that the political process will take. There is
an urgent need for international political will and
intensified diplomatic efforts by all parties at the
highest levels over the next few days in order to achieve
a political settlement and to put an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people and the repercussions of that
destructive crisis on the stability and security of the
region and the entire world.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to thank Special Envoy De Mistura for
his briefing. I appreciate his tireless efforts in seeking
a political settlement to the question of Syria.
The political process in Syria has recently
gained positive momentum. The memorandum of
understanding on the stabilization of the situation
in Idlib’s de-escalation zone, which was signed by
Russia and Turkey, is, in broad strokes, being smoothly
implemented. Heavy weapons and armed groups are
10/30

17/10/2018

being withdrawn from demilitarized zones. China
welcomes the gradual stabilization of the situation
in Idlib and appreciates the efforts made by Russia
and Turkey.
We hope that the ceasefire in Syria will be sustained,
thereby creating the conditions for the establishment of
the constitutional committee and Geneva peace talks.
China also welcomes the reopening of border crossing
points between Syria and Jordan, which will restore a
major trade channel in the Middle East.
The political process in Syria still faces challenges.
Terrorism continues to threaten the security and stability
of Syria and to hamper reconstruction and the return
of refugees. The international community must remain
united, coordinate its efforts, cut the supply chain of
funds and weapons to terrorists, prevent the resurgence
of terrorism and consolidate the achievements made
in counter-terrorism. China has always believed that
political negotiations are the only feasible solution to
the question of Syria.
First, the international community should seize the
opportunity offered by the alleviation of the situation
in Syria and revitalize the political process there. The
key now is to work steadily to establish the Syrian
constitutional committee, which must be representative
of and acceptable to all. The international community
should remain committed to the mediation efforts
taken up by the United Nations and Special Envoy De
Mistura, relaunch the Geneva peace talks as soon as
possible, further leverage the role of the Astana process
and facilitate full dialogue and consultations among all
the parties in Syria.
Secondly, the countries of the region should take
action based on their long-time interest in the overall
stabilization of the region and play a constructive role
in seeking a political settlement. Achieving peace and
stability throughout the entire territory of Syria remains
an arduous task. We hope that all the parties will fully
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, jointly ensure the effective
functioning of the Idlib demilitarized zone, stabilize
the overall situation in Syria and create the necessary
conditions and environment for its political process.
Thirdly, the Syrian Government and the
opposition parties must proceed in accordance with
the fundamental interests of the country and its people,
the principle of a Syrian-led and -owned process and
resolution 2254 (2015). They must promote the political
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

process, settle differences through negotiations, foster
national reconciliation and work gradually to arrive at
a political settlement that fits with Syria’s reality and
addresses the legitimate concerns of all the parties,
whom we encourage to initiate measures conducive to
reconciliation and enhance mutual trust.
China is ready to join hands with the international
community to further support the political process in
Syria and to contribute to improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria and restoring peace and stability in
the country and the region.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and we
thank Mr. De Mistura for his important briefing.
We have been closely following developments
in Syria in the wake of the agreement reached in
September between Turkey and the Russian Federation
on the establishment of a demilitarized zone in Idlib,
which has averted the humanitarian disaster we all
feared. We emphasize the important role that Turkey
and the Russian Federation have been called on to play
in order to guarantee the ceasefire. In that regard, we
want to point out that their efforts must be guided by
international humanitarian law and by the need to
respect the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We also want to highlight the removal of heavy
artillery from the demilitarized zone and encourage the
parties to make further progress in implementing the
agreement, thereby encouraging an easing of tensions
and improving the necessary ability to distinguish
between civilians, rebel groups and terrorists. We
believe that this progress should bring the parties to
the conflict to a situation that is more conducive to
achieving a political settlement with prospects for a
lasting peace in Syria. In that regard, the international
community is hoping that an inclusive, credible
and representative constitutional committee will be
established and can start work. More than eight months
after the Sochi National Dialogue Congress, we hope
that a date can be set for the commencement of the
committee’s work, as indicated by the Special Envoy.
We hope that the upcoming meeting in Geneva between
the Astana guarantors and the Special Envoy, as well as
their consultations in Damascus, will produce tangible
results with regard to the committee’s formation,
operating mechanisms and decision-making. We note

S/PV. 8373

that further delays would pose a genuine risk to the
credibility and legitimacy of the process.
We also believe that confidence-building and
reconciliation measures should be adopted between
the parties. In particular, we expect to see substantive
developments in identifying missing persons, the
handing over of human remains and the release of
detainees and missing persons. It will also be essential
to address the plight of the millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which will require the
political will and adequate financial resources needed
to ensure their return under safe conditions and in a
dignified manner, in accordance with internationally
accepted standards. Their property rights must also be
respected. We would also like to remind all parties of
the importance of making progress on accountability
for the heinous crimes committed during the protracted
Syrian conflict.
I want to stress how important it is that the Astana
guarantors and other countries with influence over the
parties to the conflict help to prevent further escalation
and take concrete measures, such as the commencement
of work by the constitutional committee, to advance the
political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Lastly, I must mention our special gratitude to
and recognition of Mr. De Mistura for the hard work
he has continued to do not only to achieve a political
solution, but also to avoid escalations that could have
caused the Syrian people further suffering, as we have
witnessed in recent months. We are saddened by the
announcement of his departure, but we understand his
reasons, and we hope we will still be able to count on
his valuable counsel and experience.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, for his very comprehensive briefing,
and to express Poland’s gratitude for his efforts to find
a political solution to the Syrian crisis. I would like to
reiterate Poland’s support, especially at this crucial time
in his consultations with the various parties. I would
also like to share some reflections with the Council.
The conflict in Syria has caused suffering to
millions of people who are forced to find refuge in other
countries and who face starvation and armed offensives
inside Syria, along with constant violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. In a broader
political perspective, we welcome the agreement on

18-3250011/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

Idlib between Russia and Turkey. At the same time,
Poland wants to point out that it is the duty of the Astana
guarantors to protect the most recent de-escalation zone
in Syria, which they made a commitment to safeguard.
The measures necessary to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure must be ensured.
We strongly believe that the Idlib ceasefire
agreement is an opportunity for the resumption without
delay of the political process under United Nations
auspices in Geneva. In that regard, we express our full
support for the Special Envoy’s efforts to establish a
constitutional committee as soon as possible. As has
been repeatedly said in this Chamber, it should be
implemented right now as a priority, and further steps
should swiftly follow in order to enable a negotiated
political transition process. It requires the full and
constructive engagement of all the parties to the conflict,
especially the Syrian authorities, in participating in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.
Let me conclude by underlining that a political
solution must be brokered in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). There is no military solution to the conflict
that can bring sustainable peace to the Syrians, and we
should focus on achieving an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement. It is for the Syrians themselves to
negotiate, and that is why we desperately need to revive
the United Nations political process in Geneva. Only
a real, tangible political process that ensures the true
representation of the Syrian people can set a timetable
and provide procedures for drafting a constitution and
conducting free and fair elections supervised by the
United Nations.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy de Mistura for his comprehensive and very
informative briefing today. My country acknowledges
and greatly values his unfailing commitment to seeking
a peaceful solution and progress for Syria.
Kazakhstan therefore welcomes the memorandum
signed on 17 September in Sochi by the Defence
Ministers of Russia and Turkey on stabilizing the
situation in the de-escalation zone in Idlib in Syria.
We call on all the parties in Syria to cooperate in
implementing the agreement and ensuring safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas through
the most direct routes. We stress the need to forge a
durable political solution in line with resolution 2254
(2015).
12/30

17/10/2018

We hope that the agreements reached in Sochi
are expeditiously implemented, with full respect for
international humanitarian law and the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria,
based on the preference for continued dialogue. This
option is timely for preserving and consolidating what
has been achieved, and we are convinced that the
agreement has created an opportunity to jump-start
political talks.
Thanks to recent positive developments, we
estimate that across much of the country the situation
is now calmer than it was before. But we agree that
humanitarian needs remain substantial and call
on Member States to come forward to mitigate the
situation. We commend the Special Envoy’s attempts
to involve different States of the Middle East, the Gulf
region and Europe in this process. In the current phase,
the coordination of regional and international efforts
should take advantage of the momentum in this regard,
in order to promote the innovative regional paradigm
that is needed to support both the Geneva and Astana
processes. We must take all necessary measures to
uphold the ceasefire and promote the peace process.
Kazakhstan underlines the importance of achieving
a political solution in Syria, especially through the
formation of a genuinely credible and inclusive
constitutional committee as a major step towards
reaching a political settlement to the crisis. Astana fully
supports the Special Envoy’s efforts aimed at achieving
a comprehensive settlement, especially in the crucial
months ahead, and looks forward to achieving tangible
results. We wholeheartedly wish the Special Envoy a
fruitful visit to Damascus next week.
We also emphasize that it is the Syrians themselves
who should begin to shape the future political system
of the Syrian State, with the necessary legislative
reforms, a territorial and administrative structure,
and presidential and parliamentary elections. Only
a politico-diplomatic approach, confidence-building
measures and political goodwill — in the spirit the
Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
documents on preventive diplomacy and sustaining
peace — can bring proper and full results.
There is therefore a strong need to continue
supporting the aims of the Astana talks and additional
Geneva negotiations in order to see positive outcomes.
We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, fulfilling their
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support.
Finally, based on its analysis of recent events,
Astana believes that the evolution of the situation in
Syria has laid the foundation for a qualitative change
for the better — the final elimination of terrorists on
the country’s territory, the beginning of a real political
process, the revival of economic activity and the return
of refugees to their homeland.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, I would
like to thank the Special Envoy for his very clear and
comprehensive briefing. I also wish to convey our deep
appreciation for his persistence and resilience and for
his continuous efforts in the last years to bring us closer
to a political solution. We welcome his commitment to
going the extra mile in the remainder of his term in
office. We will miss him.
I would like to focus on three points today — first,
the need to swiftly convene the constitutional committee;
secondly, the need for sustained de-escalation in
Idlib; and thirdly, the need to address issues related to
reconstruction aid and the return of refugees.
On my first point, the convening of the
constitutional committee is long overdue. There have
been too many delays. The committee should convene
as soon as possible and move ahead with the creation
of a new Constitution. The constitutional committee is
not a goal in itself: as others have said, it is part of the
broader United Nations-led political process based on
resolution 2254 (2015). Only when the constitutional
committee itself is credible can one speak of a credible
political process. Inclusiveness and representation of
all Syrians is key. We repeat our strong support for the
Special Envoy in this regard.
We are concerned about the Syrian regime’s
actions, which have led to the delay in the establishment
of the constitutional committee. We support Mr. De
Mistura’s commitment to having women constitute
30 per cent of the committee’s members. In our view,
any future drafting subcommittee should also include
having a floor of women’s representation set at 30 per
cent. We feel very strongly that the Security Council
should unite behind the Envoy’s ambition to convene
the committee soon.
That brings me to my second point, the need for
sustained de-escalation in Idlib. We welcome that the
memorandum agreed between the Russian Federation

S/PV. 8373

and Turkey has largely been respected. It has led
to de-escalation in the area. It is now important that
the agreement be sustained. We are concerned about
signals from Damascus that the current situation is only
temporary. We must do all we can to prevent an all-out
offensive, as that could only lead to an international
confrontation and a humanitarian catastrophe.
Unimpeded and unconditional access for principled
humanitarian assistance is absolutely necessary. This
applies both to cross-border and cross-line assistance,
and it should be based on independently assessed needs.
We are concerned that the Organization’s humanitarian
access continues to be constrained in areas where
the regime has reasserted control, such as in eastern
Ghouta and Quneitra. We feel that it is important that
the Russian Federation use its influence to ensure that
the Syrian Government facilitates the Organization’s
sustained and unfettered humanitarian access.
That brings me to my third point — issues related
to reconstruction aid and the return of refugees.
We strongly disagree with premature calls for
reconstruction aid and the return of refugees. There
will be no reconstruction aid from the European Union
for Syria until there is a lasting political transition in
Syria. It is inconceivable to start rebuilding when the
possibility of a massive attack still looms over Idlib. We
acknowledge the positive developments for the civilians
of Idlib from the Russian-Turkish agreement, but we
have to be realistic — the situation can change rapidly.
It is inconceivable that the international community
will rebuild a country in the absence of a negotiated
political solution.
The international community should not normalize
relations with a regime that is credibly suspected of
perpetrating crimes against humanity and of war crimes.
We need accountability for those crimes. Let me stress
again our support to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, a French
initiative on fighting impunity. We see the referral of
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court as the best path forward to fighting impunity.
Let me also refer to the statement made by eminent
jurists on 24 September that sets out clear standards
for reconstruction in Syria. These jurists’ legal opinion
is that “without adherence to these standards, the

18-3250013/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

17/10/2018

provision of reconstruction assistance can facilitate
past, continuous or new violations of international law,
which would in turn give rise to complicity or shared
international responsibility.”

and the convening of the constitutional committee is an
important first step. There should be no reconstruction
aid before a lasting political transition takes place. Last
but not least, there is no peace without justice.

With regard to premature calls for the return of
refugees, Syria is simply not ready for the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees. Voluntary return can
only be facilitated when the internationally agreed
protection thresholds are in place. The involvement of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees is crucial for monitoring the protection of
Syrian civilians. Many Syrians cannot go back. They
fear the lack of security. They fear retributive violence,
persecution and imprisonment. They fear security
screenings and forced conscription. They often have no
homes to return to due to the consequences of housing,
land and property laws, such as Law Number 10, which
is currently being implemented, despite earlier reports
that its implementation had been suspended. Arbitrary
arrests that contradict reconciliation agreements are
another reason that Syrian refugees fear going back.

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive
and forward-looking update to the Security Council
today. We commend his continuous and tireless efforts
towards reaching a political solution and bringing an
end to the conflict in Syria. I want to echo the regret
other speakers have expressed about his mission coming
to an end, and, naturally, to send him a very strong
message of admiration and gratitude for the work he
has done. Of course, the mission remains ongoing, and,
as always, we stand behind him fully. He has our full
support, including for the way ahead he has outlined
today and the immediacy with which he will pursue it
in coming weeks.

Furthermore, we are concerned about the recent
amnesty law, as it does not differ from previous amnesty
laws. The biggest flaws remain the same — the law is
not applicable to opposition fighters nor does it provide
for exemption from military service. It seems the
Al-Assad regime adopted this amnesty law to extend
its ability to recruit new troops.
Our
focus
needs
to
be
on
real
confidence-building measures. The regime should
release those unlawfully held in detention, reveal
the fate of the missing and prevent further forced
disappearances and detentions. So far, it has not done
any of these things.
The approach to detainees must be part of a
comprehensive political solution — not an afterthought.
Securing the release of detainees is critical to Syria’s
future. Release can build confidence and can provide
hope for reconciliation. The issue needs to be properly
addressed with genuine progress under the auspices
of the United Nations, as part of the official United
Nations-led process in Geneva. The United Nations,
and in particular the UNHCR, needs access to those
currently detained in detention facilities. That could be
a start.
In conclusion, it is clear that fundamental structural
changes are needed in the administration of Syria. An
inclusive political transition must be the starting point,
14/30

We welcome the fact that Turkey and Russia have
reached an agreement on a ceasefire in Idlib. A military
offensive in Idlib would not only have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences, but it would also have
put at risk a political solution. We now look to the
Astana guarantors to live up to their commitments as
well as their obligations under international law, and
to safeguard the last remaining de-escalation zone in
Syria until a peaceful settlement can be reached.
The ceasefire in Idlib offers an opportunity to
reinvigorate the United Nations-led political process.
This is an opportunity that must be seized. As agreed
by the Council, the first step towards a sustainable
political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
is the establishment of a constitutional committee. We
must now join efforts, support and insist on the swift
establishment of the committee. The Special Envoy has
full authority to decide on its composition, procedures
and time frame, as well as our support.
It is critical that the constitutional committee is
credible, balanced and representative of the Syrian
people and reflects the diversity of the country.
It needs to include Syrians from different ethnic,
religious and geographical backgrounds in order
to meet those criteria. Furthermore, women’s full,
effective and substantive participation is important
for the legitimacy of the committee. We support the
Special Envoy’s determination expressed here today
to ensure that a minimum of 30 per cent of committee
and subcommittee members are women, including
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8373

the subcommittee that will draft the constitutional
reform. Women’s meaningful participation is — as
we all know — necessary for sustainable peace and
development in Syria — as elsewhere.

the Presidents of Turkey and Russia to establish
a demilitarized zone in Idlib. In this regard, we
recognize that measures are being taken to implement
the agreement.

In line with the express support of the Council for
the swift establishment of the constitutional committee,
we encourage the Special Envoy to continue his efforts
to set up the committee as quickly as possible. We
therefore call on the Syrian parties, in particular the
Syrian Government, to engage constructively with the
Special Envoy and to contribute to the United Nations-led
process as well as within the committees’ proceedings
once convened. We also expect all members of the
Council and other relevant actors to move from words to
action and actively support the efforts of the Envoy and
his mandate to set up and decide on the composition of
the committee. We note the envisaged visit to Damascus
next week and welcome Mr. De Mistura’s offer to
update the Council on progress immediately after the
visit has been completed. Needless to say, the content
and assessment of that report will be very important.

At the same time, as can be expected in such complex
situations, we also understand that there are challenges
to fully operationalizing the agreement within the set
deadlines. What is important is to continue to work
together to sustain the implementation of this important
agreement. In this regard, we appreciate and support
the continued efforts of Turkey and Russia. All those
members that have influence should also support the
full implementation of the agreement. In addition,
enhancing international coordination to combat
terrorism also remains important.

The Syrian people have endured unspeakable
suffering for too long. The agreement on Idlib has
delivered some modest but concrete and much-needed
relief. The agreement can and should be used to
reinvigorate the United Nations-led political process.
Only the United Nations has the legitimacy and the
credibility for a viable and enduring political solution
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). As others have
said, Syria has reached a fork in the road. As Council
members we must shoulder our responsibility and send a
strong and unified message in support of United Nations
efforts. We must also step up our joint efforts towards
the road that leads to a credible political solution.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We join others in
thanking the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his comprehensive
briefing today. We very much appreciate and support
his untiring diplomatic endeavours to relaunch a
credible political process with a view to resolving the
Syrian crisis. We know that his has not been an easy
job, and we understand his decision to move on. But
we continue to support him in his efforts in the coming
days, which are going to be very critical.
Last month, the Council expressed its concern
about a possible humanitarian catastrophe in Idlib (see
S/PV.8345). This potential humanitarian tragedy has
been averted due to the agreement reached between

As the Special Envoy said, the stabilization of
the situation in Idlib should be taken as a window of
opportunity for reinvigorating the political process,
without which there cannot be a sustainable way to
address the Syrian crisis. In this regard, since the
outcome of the Syrian National Dialogue Congress
held in Sochi, we understand the Special Envoy has
been conducting a series of extensive consultations
with Syrian actors and concerned Member States on
the formation of the constitutional committee, which is
indeed necessary as the process has to be truly inclusive.
While appreciating the Special Envoy’s continued
engagement with all stakeholders, we also believe that
all actors should fully support his efforts to finalize
the establishment process of the committee, which we
believe should be credible and Syrian-owned. As is wellknown, the constitutional committee is only one element
in the Syrian political process, important though it may
be. Indeed, the formation of the committee should be
a stepping stone for relaunching the Geneva political
process in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
It is therefore time for all Syrian parties to
constructively engage with the Special Envoy to
establish the committee as soon as possible. In this
regard, we welcome the invitation extended by the
Syrian Government to the Special Envoy. As he
mentioned, we hope his visit to Syria will be productive
and meaningful, leading to concrete outcomes that will
move the process forward. We look forward to hearing
from him next month. In addition, the Special Envoy’s
continued consultations with the Astana guarantors and
the small-group countries could contribute to speeding
up the process of the formation of the committee. The

18-3250015/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

Council should also demonstrate its unity and continue
extending its full support for the tireless efforts of the
Special Envoy.
In conclusion, we all agree that there is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. Therefore, finding a
comprehensive political solution remains urgent and
critical, not only for the sake of the people of Syria,
whose legitimate aspirations and concerns should be
addressed, but also for regional and international peace
and security. The international community, particularly
the Security Council, should work together in support
of the facilitation role of the Special Envoy for whom
we reiterate our appreciation and support.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s meeting on the political
process in the Syrian Arab Republic and thanks
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, for his informative briefing and for
his efforts in the service of peace.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with satisfaction the signing in
Sochi on 17 September, under the auspices of the Russian
Federation and Turkey, of the agreement providing for
a demilitarized zone between the territories under
the control of the Syrian armed forces and those held
by armed groups. My delegation is pleased that the
deadline of 10 October for the withdrawal of all heavy
weapons from the zone has been met. Compliance with
this agreement by all stakeholders will unquestionably
prevent a large-scale offensive that could lead to a new
humanitarian tragedy in a country devastated by more
than seven years of armed conflict. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
13.1 million Syrians are in need of humanitarian
assistance, 5.6 million Syrian refugees are living outside
the country and 6.1 million are internally displaced.
My delegation believes that the effective
implementation of the agreement on the demilitarized
zone could create the conditions for a resumption of the
intra-Syrian dialogue and help to advance the peace
process, which is the only way to achieve a peaceful
and lasting solution to the crisis in Syria. In this
context, Côte d’Ivoire supports the Special Envoy’s
proposals and welcomed the meetings held at his
initiative on 11 and 12 September, with the guarantors
of the Astana process, and on 14 September with senior
officials from Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America. They represented an opportunity to discuss
16/30

17/10/2018

the establishment of the constitutional committee
responsible for drafting the new Constitution of the
Syrian Arab Republic and defining the modalities
for free and transparent elections, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), on the road map for the Syrian
political process.
Côte d’Ivoire also takes note of the joint statement
of Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America,
the small-group members, made at the margins of the
seventy-third session of the General Assembly. The
statement, which calls for convening a credible and
inclusive constitutional committee as soon as possible,
once again demonstrates the international community’s
interest in the smooth conduct of the Syrian political
process. In that context, Côte d’Ivoire invites all Syrian
parties to give priority to the dialogue for a negotiated
solution to the current impasse. We also reaffirm our
commitment to the principle of accountability so that
armed persons or groups guilty of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights can
be brought before the competent international courts.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls for unity in the
Security Council with a view to contributing effectively
to the settlement of the Syrian crisis, which has gone on
for too long.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the convening of today’s meeting and thanks Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his informative briefing.
We join the previous delegations in thanking him and
expressing our gratitude for the firm commitment and
passion he has shown as Special Envoy. We hope that
under Mr. De Mistura’s leadership a representative
and much-desired constitutional committee will be
established before he retires as Special Envoy.
We welcome the participation of several member
countries of the contact group in today’s debate. The
Government of my country believes that it is essential for
the Security Council and the international community
to listen carefully to the actors and countries involved
or directly or indirectly affected by these long years of
conflict.
On 18 September, Equatorial Guinea, along
with several other countries, applauded the signing
of the agreement between Russia and Turkey on the
establishment of a demilitarized zone in Idlib, which
has undoubtedly prevented a large-scale offensive
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

with catastrophic consequences for Syria and the
region, and has given a major boost to the ongoing
peace negotiations. We welcome the removal of heavy
weapons from the future demilitarized zone in time to
meet the deadline agreed in the agreement. However,
the most difficult task continues to be convincing the
jihadist groups to definitively abandon the area. We call
on all parties to the conflict not to weaken the agreement
and to accept the conditions agreed in Sochi. In order
to do that, they must refrain from armed provocations
and take the path towards a peaceful settlement of the
situation in the areas under their control.
Equatorial Guinea sees no alternative to the
political process in Syria. We will continue to insist on
the facilitation of the political process in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015). The demilitarization of
Idlib has changed the tone of efforts aimed at settling
the conflict, making it more political than military.
Indeed, since the signing of the agreement, there have
been fewer clashes between the Syrian army and armed
opposition groups, and that should enable the political
process to move forward.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
importance of making progress in the search for a
political settlement based on negotiations and of
establishing an intra-Syrian constitutional committee,
under the leadership of the Special Envoy, as soon as
possible. However, while we should always respect
the sovereignty and independence of the Syrian
people, priority should be given to the quality of the
composition of the constitutional committee so as to
make it impossible for external forces to impose plans
that have not been agreed to by the Syrian people or
their legitimate representatives, as has been stressed on
numerous occasions.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
for his briefing. It is not yet time to bid him farewell,
and we will postpone that for now, because he has
promised to work on this matter up to the last minute.
Recently in Syria we have seen a trend towards
stabilization associated with the liberation of a greater
part of the country’s territory from the terrorist presence
At this stage, Syrians need international support in
re-establishing an economy that has been destroyed by
the war. The citizens of Syria who are endeavouring
to return to their homeland should be getting genuine
support from the specialized international agencies. We

S/PV. 8373

strongly urge our partners to be guided on these issues
by the interests of ordinary Syrians and to refrain from
artificially tying them to political progress. Otherwise,
as with the unilateral sanctions that end up burdening
ordinary citizens, it does not match their publicly
trumpeted humanitarian slogans. Judging from what we
have heard today, however, our urgings are not likely to
find a response from our so-called humanitarians.
Russia, Iran and Turkey are the country guarantors
of the Astana process and are continuing their close
joint work in the interests of a Syrian settlement. We
in this Chamber never tire of asking questions of those
who tell us haughtily what we have done wrong and
what we should do. But what have those here been doing
for a Syrian settlement? We know what they discuss
in their so-called small group, and the documents that
result from their meetings. They have no relation to the
Syrian settlement. They are a collection of ultimatums
and conditions. We suggest that the small-country
group publish the memorandums that they adopt in
their meetings and make them accessible to a broad
public. We do not want to do it for them. Then we can
discuss with them who is trying to launch a Syrianowned political process and who is dictating to Syrians
what their future should be.
The high-level agreement between Russia and
Turkey on temporary measures for stabilizing Idlib
governorate has had a palpable effect on the situation that
is much appreciated by many of those involved — but
not all. It seems that some of our partners are never
satisfied. Things before the memorandum were bad, and
things after the memorandum are also bad. According
to what we have heard today, the memorandum would
barely have happened if it hadn’t been for the efforts of
the so-called small group. I want to let the Council know
that the memorandum is being implemented in full, and
our Turkish colleagues are working very hard to that
end. A number of opposition groups have announced
their support for the Sochi memorandum. More than
1,000 militants have left the demilitarized zone. A
significant quantity of heavy military equipment has
been removed, although there are reports that some
groups are trying to hide some of it in the mountains.
The situation is not without difficulties, for
which the most radical rebel cells, particularly Jabhat
Al-Nusra, are to blame. They are trying to undermine
the implementation of the memorandum by shelling
towns and villages bordering the de-escalation zone,
including the western outskirts of Aleppo. We assume

18-3250017/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

17/10/2018

that extreme measures will be applied to incorrigible
terrorists. Those who are ready to break with the
radicals are being given a good, indeed a unique chance
to return to normal society, and they should make that
choice as soon as possible.

allies, puppet self-governing bodies are being created
independently of the authorities in Damascus. What
is that if not a blatant violation of Syrian sovereignty
through the country’s forcible dismemberment? These
are neocolonial policies, plain and simple.

All international players must respect Syria’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Neither Idlib nor any other part of the country can
be seen as some sort of separate entity with special
arrangements. Unfortunately, not everyone is complying
with those fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

We should not omit to mention the ugly story of the
fake White Helmet rescuers associated with terrorist
organizations. It is they who are some of the main actors
in the militants’ toxic-substance provocations, which
Damascus is then purposely accused of perpetrating.
Some of them have been brought out of Syria, but not
all of their Western patrons are in a hurry to investigate
their clients after analysing their personal affairs. The
White Helmets represent a threat to the security of the
States of the region, which is why we are asking their
patrons to take them away and to hurry up about it.
All of them. We wish them luck integrating them into
democratic society.

The United States representative asked about the
motives of the Russian presence and activity in Syria.
My answer is that Russia is in Syria at the invitation of
its legitimate Government. Our aim is to assist Syria
in combating international terrorism. We have no other
goals or motives. If I may, I will ask him in return what
the basis is for the United States presence in Syria and
what its motives are. Are they to combat terrorism,
or to create quasi-State entities on the territory of a
sovereign country and a springboard for some sort of
future action in the region?
There are military bases being built and expanded
in Syria, including the notorious Al-Tanf, around
which a real terrorist breeding ground has formed. The
demographic makeup of north-eastern Syria on the left
bank of the Euphrates is being violently reconfigured.
The fight against the remaining isolated centres
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is
getting nowhere, as if the task of finally defeating the
terrorists was not an issue. Now and then the terrorists
take over new territories, as is happening in the area
of Hajin. From time to time militants are transported
somewhere. We do not know what is happening in the
areas controlled by the so-called coalition where ISIL
members are being held. Are they kept in improvised
prisons, prosecuted, returned to their countries of
origin? This uncertainty confirms our long-standing
suspicions that countering terrorism is only a pretext for
maintaining the coalition’s military presence in Syria.
As our Syrian colleagues have informed the
Security Council, civilians are being killed as a result
of the so-called coalition’s air strikes on residential
areas. We are very concerned about the reports of the
use of phosphorous munitions during those bombings,
which should be thoroughly investigated. In the
territories under the control of the coalition and its local
18/30

In the meantime, we are pleased to see Damascus
and other Middle Eastern capitals finding ways to
normalize relations, starting with the most ordinary
kind, the human contacts and the trade that have
maintained regional ties for thousands of years. The
Nasib crossing on Syria’s border with Jordan opened
just a few days ago. And with the assistance of Russian
specialists, work has begun again on the Quneitra
crossing after a years-long interruption. There is
mutual interest in returning the cross-border interaction
between Syria and Iraq to pre-conflict levels. That is a
natural process in the interests of the residents of the
region, and it would be criminal to interfere with it.
Increased attention is currently focused on forming
a constitutional committee on the basis of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi in January.
If we are to establish a viable body, which we hope
everyone is genuinely interested in, its working
parameters require the consent of the Syrian parties.
Like other partners, we want to see the committee
established as soon as possible, but in this case it will
be counterproductive to pursue artificial deadlines,
with artificial terms that are artificially introduced. I
would like to know why we are not setting deadlines for
resolving other crises, such as the Palestinian-Israeli
settlement, Yemen or Libya. There, too, let us loudly
and fervently demand immediate settlements and set
deadlines that do not accord with the interests of the
parties or the situations that have evolved. If a process
is to be credible, all the parties must agree, and that
takes time. So we have to be patient. We simply have to
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

respect the partners and not demand that they agree to
what suits us rather than the parties directly involved
in negotiations.
We ask our colleagues from the so-called small
group, many of whose participants have not proven
themselves in the area of the Syrian settlement, to
refrain from unwarranted ultimatums and from putting
pressure on the United Nations mediation efforts. While
we are open to dialogue, we wonder whether countries
that refuse even to talk to the legitimate Syrian
Government can play a positive role in supporting the
political process.
Mr. De Mistura is well aware that Russia has
consistently supported the United Nations efforts for an
intra-Syrian settlement and has repeatedly helped it to
emerge from what were seemingly hopeless impasses.
We have been convinced more than once of his ability to
make informed decisions based on his rich diplomatic
experience. We hope that his visit to Damascus will be
successful. However, we will not stop repeating that for
more active progress towards peace in Syria we need
to unite the constructive efforts of all the international
and regional players with influence and to refrain
from confrontation and the execution of geopolitically
destructive projects.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational Republic of Bolivia.
We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary General for Syria, for his briefing and
we are grateful for his tireless efforts in a difficult job.
We want to emphasize that in the past few months
there has been a reduction in military activity in
various regions of the Syrian territory, thanks partly to
the Syrian Government’s consolidation of its control,
but also to the efforts of the Astana guarantors, whose
agreements must be reinforced if the aim is to reduce
violence and facilitate peace and stability in Syria.
In that regard, we are pleased with the results of the
agreement between the Russian Federation and Turkey
on Idlib governorate, which has allowed a demilitarized
zone to be established there. We welcome the fact
that although the agreement was in force only until
15 October, it is still valid and has been enabling radical
combatants to withdraw from Idlib.
We should reiterate, however, that any action in
the fight against terrorism must be conducted within

S/PV. 8373

the framework of international law and international
humanitarian law in particular, so as to guarantee the
protection of civilian lives and of workers from the
various humanitarian agencies in the field. We reiterate
our support for the Special Envoy’s work, and for his
conversations with the various parties at a so-called
high diplomatic level. In that regard, we will be closely
watching the results of his visit to Damascus in the next
few days, and if necessary the presidency of the Council
will convene a meeting to hear a report on his efforts.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Syria, and we therefore reject any
attempt to provoke fragmentation or sectarianism
there, as well as the presence there of external forces
with no authorization from the Syrian Government.
On the contrary, it is clear that the solution requires
the continued implementation of the Sochi final
declaration, whose main objective is the establishment
of a constitutional committee.
Lastly, in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and respect for the principle of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria, we call
for the resolution of this conflict through an inclusive,
dialogue-based and concerted political process, led by
and for the Syrian people, that would make it possible to
reach a peaceful, lasting solution to the situation in the
framework of the Geneva process and resolution 2254
(2015), and under the auspices of the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The illegal so-called international coalition
led by the United States, in another flagrant violation
of international law, international humanitarian law
and human rights instruments, has committed yet
another crime against innocent Syrian civilians. On
13 and 14 October, the coalition’s warplanes targeted
residential areas in the Syrian city of Hajin, in Deir
ez-Zor governorate, using internationally banned
white phosphorus bombs and killing a number of
civilian martyrs and injuring others, including women
and children.
It is now clear to all that this coalition has fought
everything but terrorism. Its practices make it clear that

18-3250019/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

its goals are in harmony with those of terrorist groups.
It has sown chaos, death and destruction. The coalition
has defied State authority and helped the Da’esh terrorist
organization to move its troops to the area east of the
Euphrates in order to carry out its acts of aggression
in Syria. If it is to preserve its credibility, the Security
Council must launch an immediate investigation into
these crimes so as to prevent their recurrence, end
the illegal presence of United States and other foreign
forces in Syria and stop them carrying out their plans to
undermine Syria’s sovereignty and unity.
Military and political groups have been established
without the participation of the Syrian Government.
They are suspect because they do not serve the
interests of the Syrian people. On the contrary, they
defy the Syrian State and support terrorism under
political pretexts. The creation of the Brussels group
and the small group, or any other entity in which the
Syrian Government does not participate, can only be
counterproductive and will not help to achieve progress
on the political track, which is supposed to be Syrianled.
Syria is not under anyone’s authority. There will
not be another Karzai in Damascus. When a meeting
was held in Marrakech on 12 December 2012 for the
so-called Group of Friends of the Syrian People, at
the initiative of France, at the time the Group included
137 members. Today it has only 12. It failed because it
was never a friend of the Syrian people. It is as simple
as that. That is why the Syrian Government does not
recognize any road map that it is not a party to and that
it does not approve. The United Nations must not be
part of any political group that stands against Syria and
the Syrian Government, because those groups are being
created outside the authority of the Security Council by
political Powers that support terrorism in Syria and in
the region.
The countries that have supported the terrorist war
against Syria for the past seven years have convened
Council meetings for the purpose of grandstanding, and
have exploited the United Nations in an unprecedented
manner. There have been hundreds of meetings on
Syria, formal and informal, Arria Formula and side
events — all kinds of meetings. Those meetings have
been held every time the Syrian army has been able
to defeat the armed terrorist groups, in order to bring
political pressure to bear on the Syrian Government
and hinder its progress.
20/30

17/10/2018

Today we are seeing a new chapter in this policy
of blackmail. Following the achievements and progress
in Astana, and after the Syrian Government’s positive
engagement with the outcomes of the Sochi Congress,
those same countries sought to create an illegal group,
known as the small group, outside the authority of
the Security Council, with the aim of blocking any
progress in Astana or Sochi, turning back the clock
and hindering the political process. The Sochi process
is the only one that has borne fruit, and the reason is
simple: the Syrian Government was part of the process,
and that is why it succeeded. Those countries have tried
to portray the group as angelically innocent by giving
the impression that all of its members are committed
to reaching a peaceful settlement of the crisis in Syria.
I wonder how that group, whose members include
countries that have financed and supported armed
terrorist groups in Syria, can claim to protect Syrians. I
will not go into detail about the actions of every State.
The Council is well aware of them. I also wonder how
this entity, which includes members that have financed,
trained and supported terrorists in Syria and committed
multiple acts of aggression against it, can claim to
be protecting Syrian lives. How can a group whose
members include countries that supply terrorist groups
with chemical weapons claim to be protecting Syrians?
When I spoke about this issue yesterday in a statement
before the First Committee (see A/C.1/73/PV.8), I
named the country that provided those terrorist groups
with chemical weapons. I am referring to Turkey. How
can this group, whose members include countries that
have issued jihadi fatwas in support of terrorism, claim
that it is protecting Syrians? Is the Council aware of the
fact that the Al-Nusra Front has refused to implement
the Russian-Turkish agreement, which ended three days
ago in Idlib? It refused to do that.
Is the Council aware that the leaders of the Al-Nusra
Front — and I am not trying to insult Egypt; I respect
its Permanent Representative — are mostly Egyptians
and Turks, sent by Morsi to Syria to carry out their
jihad in Syria?
The religious leaders of the Al-Nusra Front are now
at odds with its political leaders. Its religious leaders do
not want to implement the Russian-Turkish agreement
because they want the bloodshed to continue.
How can a group that has countries among its
members that occupy parts of our territory claim
that they are going to protect Syrian lives? There are
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

American, British, French and Turkish forces on Syrian
territory. How can the small group, which calls itself
an international coalition, assist us while it occupies
parts of our land? How can a group whose members
have Syrian blood on their hands claim to protect
Syrian lives?
Instead of preaching to the Council, we ask it for
answers. We need clear answers and a specific position
taken by the Security Council against the presence of
illegal foreign forces on our land. We need it to take a
position against terrorism and against sponsoring and
financing terrorism. We need a position that respects
the Syrian Government, instead of one that creates
vacuum by pushing for a failed State, thereby helping
to spread terrorism across the region.
I find it necessary to remind some members of
Chapter I, Article 2, paragraph 7 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which states that “Nothing contained in
the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations
to intervene in matters which are essentially within
the domestic jurisdiction of any State...”. Perhaps this
Article belongs to the charter of the planet Mars rather
than the United Nations, because some members seem
to have forgotten about it.
The Syrian Government has emphasized its
readiness to positively respond to all initiatives that
would help the Syrians end the crisis, as long as they
respect national principles, including the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and unity
of Syria and its people; give the Syrian people the
exclusive right to determine the future of their country
without any foreign interference; and reject the
presence of terrorism on Syrian territories. All of these
beautiful words appear in Council resolutions on Syria.
I did not make them up. That is what Security Council
resolutions state. They have also been mentioned in
statements made today in this Chamber.
The Syrian Government engaged positively and
with openness in the Geneva discussions, the Astana
process and in the Syrian National Dialogue Congress,
held in Sochi. However, the other parties stalled. They
rejected dialogue, invested in terrorism and foreign
interference and sought to undermine Syrian sovereignty
and resilience. Today, we listened to the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands as he outlined a
number of conditions. He said that it is too early to
talk about reconstruction, too early for the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees, too early to

S/PV. 8373

lift the unilateral and coercive economic measures, too
early to address the humanitarian situation in certain
parts of Syria and therefore too early to end terrorism.
Despite everything, the Syrian Government continues
to positively engage in implementing the outcomes of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress held in Sochi on
the formation of a constitutional committee to review
the current Constitution. We do not want a constitutional
vacuum because Syria is not a failed State.
The Syrian Government presented a practical and
comprehensive vision on the composition, prerogatives
and working methods of the committee and submitted to
the Special Envoy a list of representatives supported by
the Syrian State. We underscore in that regard that the
mandate of the Committee is limited to reviewing the
articles of the current Constitution through a Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned process. We stress that the Special
Envoy must respect his mandate as a facilitator of the
committee. No preconditions should be imposed on
it nor should its recommendations be prejudged. The
Committee must be independent since the Constitution
and all relevant matters are Syrian issues to be decided
upon by Syrians themselves. We will therefore not
accept any proposal that interferes in the internal
affairs of Syria or that leads to that end. We stand ready
to work actively with friendly countries to launch the
committee along the parameters I have just mentioned.
My country welcomed the agreement reached in
Sochi on 17 September with regard to the city of Idlib
because we are committed to stopping the bloodshed.
The agreement came as a result of intensive consultations
between Syria and Russia and with full coordination
between the two countries. We hope that it will bear
fruit and that the Turkish regime will uphold its side of
the deal. We stress that the agreement is time-bound and
includes clear deadlines. It complements all previous
agreements on the de-escalation zones that resulted
from the Astana process. Just like any region in Syria,
the city of Idlib will return to the fold of Syrian State
sovereignty. In order to achieve sustainable and durable
peace in Syria, all illegal foreign forces, including
Turkish, American, British, French and Israeli forces,
must leave the Syrian territories. We consider all of
them to be occupying forces. Their presence on Syrian
land runs counter to the Charter, international law and
relevant Council resolutions on Syria.
The Syrian Government has never interfered
in the internal affairs of any Member State. It has
always sought to respect and uphold the principles of

18-3250021/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

the Charter and of international law. On behalf of my
country, I stress today that we will block any attempts of
provocation and escalation that undermine our relations
with the Arab region and the world. As a result, we
have sought to re-open the Nasib border crossing with
Jordan. We will also open other border crossings, with
Iraq, very soon.
The progress made by Syria and its allies in the
war against terrorism has led to new developments in
Syria and the region, which must be taken into account
in any discussion on my country. It is time for those
parties and Powers that support terrorism to review
and reconsider their positions and join an international
effort to stop supporting this heinous terrorist war.
Supporting terrorism is a threat to international peace
and security in the long and short run. It is time for all
those detached from reality to wake up, let go of their
fantasies and come to their senses. They must realize
that they will not achieve politically what they failed to
achieve through terrorism.
In conclusion, my country continues to seek a
political solution that would allow Syrians themselves
to make decisions about their future without foreign
interference, in a manner that ensures Syria’s
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Based on our
respect for the role of the United Nations in facilitating
Syrian dialogue, my country has invited the Special
Envoy to Syria in the coming days to hold discussions
on issues related to his mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting and for your efforts throughout
your presidency to reinforce the principles on which
the United Nations was founded. I also wish to express
my thanks and appreciation to Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his comprehensive briefing. In that regard, I would like
to pay tribute to the relentless efforts he has made and
continues to make to achieve a political solution to the
crisis in Syria.
All previous approaches to dealing with the Syrian
crisis have failed. That is why we need to redouble
our honest efforts and put the interests of Syria and
its people above all other considerations. Today, this
requires the Security Council to step up its work to
reach a political solution to this crisis. That solution
22/30

17/10/2018

must be able to preserve the unity and integrity of Syria
and be accepted by all Syrians.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has worked with the
international community to find a peaceful solution
that would avoid the destruction of Syria and the
displacement of its people. We have also helped to
contain the human impact and alleviate the suffering
of the brotherly Syrian people, as was clearly reflected
in our contribution to the development and adoption
of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014), on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
Jordan will continue to support all multilateral
efforts to assist Syria in reaching a political solution.
That is why we hope to return to the Geneva process
and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) so
as to preserve the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria and create an environment conducive
to restoring stability, which will reflect positively on
the political settlement and contribute to the return of
displaced persons and refugees. In this context, the
reopening of the Jaber-Nasib crossing point on the
borders between Jordan and Syria is a step that we
hope will help achieve stability and pave the way for
the voluntary return of refugees to their homes.
In the context of our commitment to the return of
stability in Syria, my country reaffirms its full support
for the efforts deployed by Mr. De Mistura and the
United Nations to reach a solution to this crisis through
the formation of a Syrian constitutional committee as
soon as possible, thereby launching a political process
that would include all Syrian parties and components
under the auspices of the United Nations.
My country currently hosts 1.3 million of our
Syrian brothers. We have exceeded our absorptive
capacity and are doing all we can to support and assist
those refugees, despite the enormous pressures of their
presence on the national economy. The costs of hosting
Syrian refugees, as well as the direct costs of the Syrian
crisis to the Kingdom, have now exceeded $10 billion.
This amount includes the costs of education, health
care and subsidies for electricity, water, sanitation
and the use of infrastructure, as well as security and
other costs.
We underscore once again that the refugee crisis is
a global responsibility. Everyone agrees on that, and it
therefore requires an international solution. However,
international assistance is not currently covering real
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

needs. There must be coordinated efforts to ensure
the flow of humanitarian assistance within Syria and
to support host countries and communities, including
Jordan, as we encourage the voluntary return of Syrian
refugees to their homes as an inevitable outcome. We
reaffirm the importance of coordinating efforts to
achieve this end through the creation of an atmosphere
conducive to the voluntary return of those refugees.
I am confident that the Security Council appreciates
the great responsibility and heavy burden it bears in
the service of Syria’s citizens, who place their hopes
in the Council so that their spirits may be reassured
and the situation stabilized in order for normal life to
be resumed. The international community therefore
needs to make further efforts to meet the interests and
aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for giving us
the opportunity today to address the Council and to
clarify the Egyptian position at this important stage
in the Syrian crisis. I would also like to express our
appreciation to Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing.
Since the early days of the crisis, Egypt has reiterated
what everyone has said today — that there is no military
solution to this crisis and a settlement in Syria will be
achieved only through a political solution that would
uphold Syria’s sovereignty over its territories within
one country for all Syrians. Such a solution would at
the same time meet the aspirations of the Syrian people
in all its different factions and components and allow
them to live in prosperity, freedom and democracy.
Egypt has not reaffirmed this position simply
by making statements and slogans; rather we have
translated our words into action at every level. In recent
years, we have communicated with all Syrian parties
in order to facilitate a settlement. We have exerted
great efforts to support the voices of the national
opposition and to make them heard and heeded in order
to counterbalance the voices of extremism that enjoy
the funding and support of many other parties. This has
given Syrians the opportunity to establish the Cairo
platform, which has become a main foundation for the
Syrian national opposition.

S/PV. 8373

Egypt has also sponsored many truce agreements
in Syria. Moreover, it has positively used its
non-permanent membership of the Security Council
to contribute to guaranteeing continued humanitarian
access to Syrians throughout the country, including
Idlib, over two full years. We made strenuous efforts
to prevent humanitarian support from being affected
by the polarization witnessed in the Security Council
during that time. Those efforts were crowned by the
adoption of resolution 2393 (2017) concerning crossborder assistance, based on a draft resolution that we
penned in cooperation with Sweden and Japan.
Furthermore, since the beginning of the crisis,
Egypt has consistently affirmed the need to eradicate
terrorism and extremism in Syria. We have warned of
the dangers of being lenient with terrorist organizations
or politicizing the positions of countries in this regard.
We have warned of the dangers of ignoring or turning
a blind eye to parties that have transformed parts of
Syria into fertile ground for terrorism and extremism.
Certain parts of Syria would not have become safe
havens for terrorist groups had it not been for the
questionable failure of the international community to
uphold its duty in this regard, a failure that requires
further explanation.
I am compelled to reiterate the same call that we have
issued time and time again to all countries, especially
the major Powers, to set aside their differences and
search for an adequate format, to be coordinated among
them, in order to eliminate the presence of terrorist
organizations inside Syria. Whether it be the Al-Nusra
Front or others, and regardless of their nationalities,
those terrorist organizations — in Idlib or elsewhere —
must be stopped from spreading beyond Syria to other
countries of the region, including Libya, with which we
share a border of over 1,000 kilometres. We are not here
to simply substitute one safe haven for terrorists with
another in a region that has been blighted by disputes
and conflicts, external interference and terrorist
organizations and militias.
Today, we reaffirm and underscore that the
brotherly people of Syria will be able to heal from the
damage and the wounds suffered by their country over
the past several years only through a comprehensive
and inclusive political solution, provided that it is based
on international consensus embodied in resolution 2254
(2015) and the United Nations-led Geneva process.

18-3250023/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

Unfortunately, 10 months have passed since the latest
round of negotiations was held within the framework
of the Geneva process. That is unacceptable. The lack
of progress in the negotiations will simply exacerbate
the crisis and hold it hostage to the situation on the
ground, which will lead to the further deterioration of
the situation and an increase in the number of victims
of the Syrian crisis. We must not remain silent in that
regard. I reaffirm our rejection of allowing the political
process to be held hostage to developments on the
ground or of simply succumbing to the delusion of a
military solution.
In that context, I reaffirm the content of the
statement issued on 27 September at the recent
ministerial meeting of the Small Group in New York,
on the margins of the General Assembly meetings. The
statement called for support for a political solution and
the convening of a constitutional committee to that
end as soon as possible. I would like to remind the
Council that work on the constitutional committee is
aimed primarily at facilitating political negotiations
by moving forward the activation of one of the four
negotiating baskets. Unfortunately, we are witnessing
further delays on the political track, which threaten
to create additional complications in the crisis and to
increase the suffering of our brother people of Syria.
Let me underscore the need for Special Envoy
De Mistura to exercise his authority and call for the
convening of the first meeting of the constitutional
committee without delay, as he indicated earlier that
he would, while keeping in mind that the lists for the
committee have been drawn up. We also hope that the
Special Envoy will brief the Security Council and keep
it updated on the progress made, especially following
his visit to Damascus.
In conclusion, I underline that Egypt will remain
committed to supporting the brotherly people of Syria.
Egypt stands ready to provide all forms of support to
our Syrian brothers in the next phase of the process,
including by providing them with constitutional
expertise that could be useful in the coming days.
We also express our readiness to work constructively
to bring together the various views among Syrian
national factions so as to firmly establish the country’s
sovereignty and ensure the integrity of Syrian territories
and the safety of the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
24/30

17/10/2018

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your wise leadership of the
Security Council for this month, and to wish you
continued success. I also thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
for his valuable briefing and for all his tireless efforts
over the past four years to find a way out of this crisis.
I regret that he has been unable to arrive at a political
settlement, due to the obstinacy of the Syrian regime.
I hope that Mr. De Mistura will find what he and
the international community are seeking during the
remaining period of his mission.
My country supports all international and regional
efforts to end the current crisis in Syria. We believe that
the solution to the Syrian crisis will not be achieved
through military operations or chemical weapons,
which have wrought the worst forms of destruction
upon the Syrian country and people The only solution
to the Syrian crisis is political, based on resolution 2254
(2015). My country believes that through its obstinate,
procrastinating and belittling attitude, the Syrian
regime has obstructed the efforts of international actors
to achieve progress through meaningful negotiations. It
has hindered the Geneva negotiations, the previous eight
rounds of which failed to achieve any tangible progress
with regard to restoring Syria to its former status.
My country is part of the small group on Syria,
which was established to support the efforts of Special
Envoy De Mistura to find a political solution to the
crisis. In that regard, we stress the need to step up the
establishment of the constitutional committee so that
it can begin drafting a new Syrian constitution, and
we call on all Syrians inside the country and abroad to
elect a Government under the supervision of the United
Nations in a credible and inclusive manner. My country
reiterates the small group’s call for the constitutional
committee to begin its work as soon as possible, within
the next several weeks. We call on the Syrian regime
and all other parties to prioritize the interests of the
Syrian people and refrain from hindering in any way
the Special Envoy’s efforts to form the constitutional
committee so that Syria can be saved from its
catastrophic crisis.
This is the eighth year of the Syrian crisis, and my
country is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the country. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia urges the international community to
address that reality with greater responsibility. Since
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8373

the beginning of the crisis, the Kingdom has been
intensely focused on the human dimension of the crisis
and provided every form of support to the Syrian
people. For example, my country is hosting more than
2 million Syrians and providing them with employment
opportunities, health care and education. It has also
provided those who wish to do so with the possibility
of moving to other locations. Currently, more than
140,000 male and female Syrian students are attending
Saudi universities and schools and being provided with
the same benefits as Saudi students.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

My country has sought diligently to consolidate the
Syrian opposition under the auspices of both Riyadh
conferences so that the opposition and the regime can
negotiate to ensure the security, stability and unity
of Syria and prevent destructive foreign intervention.
Moreover, my country has worked with its sister
States of the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the
Arabic Republic of Egypt. We are working together to
consolidate an Arab role in finding a solution to the
Syrian crisis and provide support for the Syrian people
by all possible and available means.

The implementation of the agreement to create
a demilitarized zone in Idlib continues, in particular
thanks to the cooperation of the Syrian Government.
To review that process, a ministerial meeting of the
Astana guarantor States was convened here in New
York on 26 September. It was underscored that every
effort should be made for the full implementation of
the agreement, and it was emphasized in particular that
in order to preserve the Idlib de-escalation zone and to
build on that achievement, all terrorists must leave the
zone. The guarantor States also reiterated their strong
resolve to continue fighting terrorists.

My country rejects any interference in Syria by
the Iranian regime, regardless of the form it takes.
We reject Iran’s support for the Syrian authorities
in operations that have led to uprooting people from
their homes and demographic change, as well as for
the genocide and sectarian mass murder that are being
carried out against the Syrian people. We must end those
destructive actions, the serious consequences of which
have destroyed infrastructure and led to the killing and
displacement of many Syrians. The Government of
my country believes that the only effective action that
Iran can take in the Syrian crisis is to leave Syria and
withdraw its Revolutionary Guard and security militias
immediately, thereby leaving Syria for the Syrians.

With respect to terrorists, one thing should be made
crystal clear: foreign terrorist fighters should return to
their country of origin, and terrorists of Syrian origin
must be dealt with according to Syrian law. In any case,
and as a principle in combating terrorists inside or
outside of Syria, international humanitarian and human
rights law should be strictly observed. Regarding the
armed opposition groups, it is essential that all States
with an influence thereon encourage them to end the
fighting in order to join the political process. That is
crucial to making any progress in the political domain.

In conclusion, the world must realize that the time
has come to change the tragic reality in Syria. The
international community must work seriously and with
resolve to advance the political process. That would
enable us to save what can be saved and pull Syria
from the rubble under which it is buried. The cause
of that distress is the arrogant and immoral behaviour
exhibited by that pathetic regime under the guise of
combating terrorism. The regime intentionally ignores
the fact that it created a breeding ground for terrorism to
spread throughout the country and allowed the greatest
sponsor of terrorism, Iran, to enter Syrian territory.

Mr. Al Habib (Iran): I would like to begin by
wholeheartedly thanking the Bolivian presidency for
convening this meeting. No one can forget Bolivia’s
principled and rational position or its dedication and
tireless efforts during its presidency of the Council,
which will remain forever in Council history. I also
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his efforts and briefing.

Concerning the political process, our ministers
expressed satisfaction at the fact that there is
increasingly strong international support for the efforts
initiated within the Astana process, aimed at solving
the Syrian crisis through political means. That is also
confirmation of the fact that the Syrian crisis did not
and does not have any military solution. We appreciate
the efforts of Mr. De Mistura with respect to the
establishment of a constitutional committee. At the
same time, we would like to stress that measures related
to the constitutional committee should be carried out
according to the understandings reached between the
Astana guarantor States and the Special Envoy. The
proposal that was submitted in that regard should be
further examined and adjusted. In their upcoming

18-3250025/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

consultations in Geneva, the representatives of the
Astana guarantor States will discuss that issue with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
We underline the importance of making progress in
launching the constitutional committee. Nevertheless,
exerting political pressure to set artificial deadlines,
deviating from the understandings reached or any other
political manoeuvring is not acceptable and would
prove to be counterproductive. No success can be
achieved and no progress can be made through making
hasty decisions, ignoring the realities on the ground or
making political miscalculations. Ultimately, the right
to determine the future of Syria belongs exclusively to
Syrians. We should therefore only facilitate a Syrianled and Syrian-owned political process.
One of the key factors that can contribute to national
dialogue and accelerate the reconciliation process is the
return of all refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs), and every effort should therefore be made to
facilitate their voluntary return. Unfortunately, there
have been attempts to deliberately discourage refugees
and IDPs from returning to their homes. That is an
irresponsible approach. They should not be forced to
stay where they are or prevented from repatriating.
Equally important is the reconstruction of Syria.
This is critical to facilitating the return of refugees and
IDPs and to launching a significant political process.
While the Syrian Government has already started the
reconstruction process, the international community
needs to contribute to the country in order to enable
it to rebuild all of its infrastructure. That should not
be politicized, delayed or made conditional. Just as the
Islamic Republic of Iran supported Syria in defeating
terrorists, it will also play a constructive role in bringing
peace and prosperity to the country.
Finally, with regard to the allegations made by
the United States, I must stress that they only reflect
the failure of that country’s policies in Syria. Rather
than making such claims, the United States must end
its occupation of Syrian territory and stop supporting
terrorist groups.
I always hesitate to respond to our colleagues
from Saudi Arabia, but, unfortunately, they misuse
every meeting here in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly as an opportunity to go against Iran
and encourage a few small States of the region to follow
them. That is very sad for our region. That country has
played a very destructive role. Everyone around this
26/30

17/10/2018

table knows about Saudi Arabia’s destructive role in
the region, which recent events have demonstrated.
It should cease its fabrications and disinformation.
Terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq were nurtured by
Saudi ideologies, funded by its petrodollars and armed
with its weapons. Saudi Arabia should stop talking
about Syria or Iran’s legitimate presence in the country,
which is only to fight the terrorists backed by the United
States and Saudi Arabia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive
briefing. He identified the main challenges that lie
ahead on the political track. As his mission comes to an
end, I would like also to express our deep appreciation
to him for his tireless efforts in finding a political
solution to the Syrian crisis. Before sharing our views
on the way forward, I would like to provide an update
on the implementation of the Idlib memorandum.
The memorandum signed one month ago at the Sochi
Turkish-Russian summit a month ago stabilized the
situation in Idlib province. Thanks to the memorandum,
it was possible to preserve the de-escalation status
of Idlib.
Since my most recent statement to the Council on
the situation in Syria (see S/PV.8355), considerable
progress has been made in the implementation of the
memorandum on the following points: the cessation
of hostilities has been established; the borders of the
demilitarized zone in Idlib have been determined; the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the demilitarized
zone has been completed ahead of the 10 October
deadline; significant progress has been achieved on the
withdrawal of radical groups from the demilitarized
zone — we are continuing our efforts to that end — and
we are working on the modalities of coordinated patrols
together with Russia as well as on other measures
aimed at strengthening the sustainability of the
ceasefire regime.
Thanks to the memorandum, further bloodshed
and a humanitarian tragedy in Idlib have been averted.
Relieved over the improvement of the situation on the
ground, tens of thousands of Syrians have started to
return to their homes in Idlib. Following months of fear
in anticipation of a full-scale assault, the memorandum
has given civilians in Idlib respite and raised their
hopes for a peaceful solution. The memorandum has
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

also proven that the situation in Idlib can be addressed
through effective diplomacy.
The de-escalation status of Idlib remains crucial to
prevent a humanitarian catastrophe, to pave the way for
the advancement of the political process, and to create
the necessary conditions to fight terrorism effectively
and in line with international humanitarian law. Our
priority now is to seize on this momentum to advance
the political process. With that understanding, we
strongly and actively support Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura’s efforts to establish the constitutional
committee as soon as possible. We are working closely
with the other Astana guarantors and Mr. De Mistura
towards that end.
The constitutional committee requires a credible,
inclusive and balanced structure. That is essential
to its legitimacy. The committee will be the key to
achieving the ultimate goal of finding a negotiated
political solution in Syria, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). Its work will pave the way for holding free and
fair elections under United Nations supervision, with
the participation of all Syrians, including those who
are living outside the country. Any attempt to design
a political system for Syria without Syrian ownership
would lack legitimacy and be detrimental. The
political process must be owned and led by the Syrians
themselves, and not by others deciding on their behalf.
We reiterate our call on the Council and the overall
international community to support our endeavours
and expedite the political process. In order to give fresh
impetus to the efforts to put an end to the conflict,
Turkey has introduced the idea of hosting a quadrilateral
summit with the participation of France, Germany and
Russia. Our main objective is to contribute to efforts
to find a convergence of ideas to reach a sustainable
political solution. Talks among the four countries to set
the date and agenda of the summit are under way. We
believe that this initiative will be helpful in supporting
the efforts to reach a political settlement.
The conflict in Syria is in its eighth year, at the
cost of hundreds of thousands of lives lost and millions
forcibly displaced both within and beyond Syria’s
borders. There is an urgent need for concerted efforts
to end this colossal human tragedy, meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and pave the way
for lasting peace. Turkey will continue its efforts to
achieve a viable political solution in Syria, a solution
that is owned and led by Syrians and based on a lasting

S/PV. 8373

ceasefire on the ground that allows for a meaningful
political process. It is high time that the Security
Council puts its weight behind efforts to that end.
Lastly, I do not consider the regime’s representative
my legitimate counterpart. I will therefore not dignify
his delusional accusations with a response.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria for his
comprehensive briefing. It is certainly much too early
to bid him farewell, but let me take this opportunity to
express our deep gratitude for his tireless peace efforts
over all these years. It is with great regret that we note
the fact that his mission will soon come to an end.
Like Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, Germany is
taking the floor as a member of the Small Group on
Syria. I will make three brief points on the situation in
Idlib, the political process and refugees.
To start with Idlib, we welcome the fact that the
Idlib agreement reached by Turkey and Russia has so far
prevented a full-scale military offensive by the Syrian
regime that could have triggered an unprecedented
humanitarian catastrophe. At the same time, we call
on Russia and Iran, as Astana guarantors alongside
Turkey, to ensure that the ceasefire continues to be
fully respected by all parties, including the Syrian
regime. We expect them to follow through with their
commitment and guarantee the protection of civilians
and infrastructure, as well as safe, unhindered and
sustained humanitarian access.
On the political process, as Secretary-General
Guterres emphasized, with the Idlib agreement now
in place the international community must seize
the opportunity to move forward with the United
Nations-led political process. Otherwise, the military
de-escalation will not be sustainable. We need to
urgently seize the chance to make progress in the
United Nations-led political process. Now is the time
to start working towards an inclusive, credible and
sustainable political solution in Syria, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Germany therefore fully supports the Special
Envoy’s efforts and his clear mandate to convene a
constitutional committee as quickly as possible, as the
members of the small group called for in their statement
of 27 September. The Special Envoy’s clear mandate to

18-3250027/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

form a credible and inclusive constitutional committee
must be respected. In that regard, Russia and the Syrian
regime must live up to their Sochi commitments. That
includes respecting the fact that it is solely the Special
Envoy’s prerogative to select the independent members
of the committee. We urge all parties to refrain from
any attempts to manipulate or undermine that process.
Doing so would endanger its credibility and legitimacy
and therefore any prospect of achieving a political
solution consistent with resolution 2254 (2015). We are
looking forward to Staffan de Mistura’s next report on
the progress achieved in the Security Council.
Finally, I want to say a word on refugees and
reconstruction. We repeatedly hear suggestions these
days from Russia, Iran and the Syrian regime that it is
time for the return of refugees and for reconstruction.
Let me say first that Germany has made very significant
contributions to alleviating the suffering of the Syrian
people by contributing to the financing of humanitarian
assistance, and we will continue to do so.
With respect to returns, Germany, too, certainly
supports the return of Syrian refugees to their homes,
but only if and once the conditions are ripe. More
than stones, cement and bulldozers, Syrian refugees
need safety guarantees and political change in Syria
so that they can begin to see a future for themselves
in the country they had to flee. Returns must be
voluntary, safe and dignified, in accordance with
international standards. As the key institution for
dealing with refugees, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) must not
be bypassed. It stands ready to facilitate large-scale
returns once the many obstacles have been removed
and the necessary guarantees are in place. We fully
agree with UNHCR that the biggest immediate obstacle
for a large-scale return is the lack of safety in Syria.
Returnees need more than protection from armed
conflict; they need to be safe from political persecution,
arbitrary arrests or expropriation.
Certainly, Syria needs economic and social
rebuilding, but as we and the European Union have
stressed many times, we will have a meaningful
discussion on reconstruction only if we see clear,
irrevocable progress in the political process. We
will not invest in war and corruption. We will not
build on shifting sands. What we need is a political
transition that paves the way for viable economic and
social reconstruction.
28/30

17/10/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic,
who has asked to make an additional statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize
for requesting the floor once again, but I will be brief.
In my statement, I pointed out the political flaws of
the small group on Syria and its construction. However,
I would like now to draw attention to its moral flaw,
namely, the presence therein of the Saudi regime,
which is underdeveloped in terms of civilization and
mentality. In that regard, I would like to shed light on
some points that were raised in the statement of the
Saudi Ambassador.
First, in his statement he called for drafting a new
constitution for my country. There is an Arab saying
that if you are riddled with flaws, you must hide them.
Members know that Saudi Arabia has no constitution
and no Parliament. The country does not even have a
name. Instead, its name belongs to the ruling family.
Thus when someone says “the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia”, it is as if that person were saying “the Republic
of Macron” for France, or “the Kingdom of Theresa
May” for Britain, or the “United States of Trump”. That
is the case now. That country has no name.
Secondly, a regime that kidnaps and holds the Prime
Minister of another State and imprisons its own princes
and businessmen until they pay ransom is unworthy
of respect. It is a regime that is concealing one of
its opponents, who was basically a member of Saudi
intelligence and worked in Washington, D.C., for many
years, and was a right-hand man of the current Saudi
Minister for Foreign Affairs. It is a regime that kidnaps
a Saudi opponent, Mr. Khashoggi — although I am sure
those present have not heard his name before — and
holds him in his country’s consulate in Istanbul. No one
knows what has become of him. That is a regime that
cannot speak of law and the pain of others because it is
surrounded by the stench of such actions.
Thirdly, the Saudi Ambassador spoke of the desire
of his country’s regime to help the Syrian people,
ignoring the fact that the Saudi regime is primarily
responsible for spreading takfiri and Wahhabi terrorism
in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt,
Libya, Nigeria and South-East Asia.
Fourthly, a regime that sheds blood in Yemen,
creates alliances with Israel to bury the Palestinian
question and pays generously to buy the conscience of
18-32500

17/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

those who defend it is not worthy of being allowed to
speak in the Council about humanitarian and political
issues pertaining to other countries. The list goes on,
but I will stop at this point.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia, who has
asked to make an additional statement.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): When truth appears, liars flee. I did not want
to take more of the Council’s precious time to respond
to the nonsense of my colleague the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic, first, because I personally
sympathize with him and secondly, because I
sympathize with our brother people of Syria, who are
suffering at the hands of their leaders and politicians.
However, the Syrian regime and those who represent
it are the last people who should speak of morality
and accusations the way Syria’s representative did.
He brings up the disappearance of one journalist but
seems to ignore the thousands of journalists who have
vanished into Syrian prisons, or the people who have
been forcibly disappeared and killed, who number not
just in the thousands but in the tens of thousands.
He speaks of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as being
responsible for the problems of the entire world. The
only thing he has not yet blamed it for is the tsunami
that recently hit Indonesia. We know quite well that
his regime is the one that opened the doors to enable
terrorism in Syria to threaten the entire region. That
regime has no moral right to speak as it just has, because
its record is riddled with flaws, both hidden and visible,
as we have seen everywhere and in every forum.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to take the
floor again to make the following point. It is good that
under rule 37 we can hear from Members of the United
Nations that are not currently serving on the Security
Council. But I really do think that delegations that
speak under rule 37 should speak to the agenda item
at hand. The agenda item today has been Syria. The
situation in Syria is dire enough. I do not think it right
that some representatives on this side who spoke under
rule 37 used it to pursue personal and national agendas
against other Members of the United Nations.
The situation is bad enough in Syria that it deserves
our whole attention. We ought to be working as a
Council, supported by the wider membership, to support
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. We do
not need lectures from two countries that have done

S/PV. 8373

more than anyone else to contribute to the dire situation
inside Syria. I therefore hope that when Member States
ask to speak under rule 37 in future — and we want to
invite them to do so for all the reasons of transparency
and openness that we all subscribe to — they will stick
to the agenda at hand.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America); I would
like to fully associate myself with the statement that
the representative of the United Kingdom just made
and to add that, in particular, coming from a regime
whose behaviour and use of chemical weapons has
driven millions of its own citizens to flee as refugees,
that statement was outrageous, whether made here in
the Council or indeed anywhere.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I did not plan to take the floor either, but my
colleagues have left me with no choice. Yes, of course
rule 37 is an important one, and we are obliged to keep
to the designated agenda item for the meeting that we
are discussing, but insisting that the representative of
a country that is directly affected by the agenda item
we discussing today does not have the right to give his
view of the situation, and of its genesis and current
and future state as his country sees it, shows a lack
of respect for that country’s legitimate representative.
I want to point that out to the Council once again.
And yet it is no secret. We know perfectly well that
the countries that have just made statements lack any
respect for the legitimate representatives of the Syrian
Government — more than that, their attitude to them is
totally disrespectful.
Let us grant the countries that we invite here under
rule 37 the right to say what they consider to be essential
on the agenda item that we are discussing today.
Incidentally, I saw no deviation from the issues we are
discussing today in the statements by the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic. Perhaps the countries that
just took the floor did not like something he said, but
this is one of those cases where responding with “the
truth hurts” is the adage that applies.
I would suggest to the countries that spoke with
such impassioned support for abiding by the rules of
procedure and our meeting’s agenda that they listen very
carefully to the words that we heard today not only from
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic but from
many other delegations. They show that our versions of
what has happened, what is happening and what may
happen in Syria are divergent, to put it mildly. In our

18-3250029/30

S/PV.8373

The situation in the Middle East

statement we called on countries, including those that
have opposed us today, to put aside their differences
and work together so that we can, finally, arrive at a
political settlement in Syria, which is what we all so
desperately want.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a short statement — I am sure it will be the
last — on the way in which Bolivia is presiding over
the Security Council.
We agree that States must keep their remarks
within the framework of the agenda for which a meeting

30/30

17/10/2018

is convened. Unfortunately, in many cases, that is not
happening, and I could cite several examples. When we
talk about the question of Palestine, some States talk
about other matters. However, for this presidency, all
Member States are on the same footing. This presidency
will never cut off any State while it is speaking because
we believe that the State knows what it is talking about
and has every right to express itself with the utmost
freedom in the Security Council. As long as we are
presiding over the Security Council, therefore, that is
how we will conduct ourselves.
The meeting rose at 12:30 p.m.

18-32500
