S/PV.9008

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9008th meeting

Tuesday, 29 March 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy
Dame Barbara Woodward
Ms. Sherman

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30314 (E)
*2230314*

Ukraine

S/PV.9008

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Joyce
Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the United
Nations World Food Programme.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: Just over a month ago the war in
Ukraine started, and it shows no signs of abating.
Children, women and men are being killed, injured,
displaced and traumatized. Hospitals, homes and
schools are being destroyed. According to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as of 27 March, 1,119 people had died, including
99 innocent children. We know that those numbers are
conservative and the tolls far greater.
Cities such as Mariupol, Kharkiv, Chernihiv and
many others — bustling and full of life just one month
ago — are encircled, bombarded, and blockaded. People
in those towns lack food, water, medicine, electricity
and heating. They are trapped, desperate and afraid.
In some neighbourhoods, it is not even safe to bury
the dead. More than 10 million people — including
more than half of Ukraine’s children — have fled their
homes. That includes an estimated 6.5 million people
who are internally displaced in the country, according
to the International Organization for Migration. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees reports that more than 3.9 million refugees
have crossed the borders to neighbouring countries in
the past month.
2/23

29/03/2022

Our work is to save lives. The humanitarian system
has scaled up to deliver despite the spreading conflict.
Since 24 February, humanitarian organizations have
reached approximately 890,000 people across Ukraine,
mostly in the east, with multisectoral assistance. People
have received food, shelter, blankets, medicine, bottled
water and hygiene supplies.
We are working around the clock to reach more
and more people in need. The United Nations and our
humanitarian partners are working impartially and
relentlessly to uphold humanitarian principles and
negotiate safe passage in and out of encircled areas for
one cause alone: to provide life-saving assistance.
Humanitarian logistics and supply chains are
scaling up every day. But treacherous security risks
and access challenges are hampering our efforts. Many
routes are disrupted, and humanitarian convoys and
workers are frequently unable to pass due to shelling,
fighting and landmines. Humanitarians of all stripes
are putting their lives at risk to help those in need.
There are now more than 1,230 United Nations
personnel working via humanitarian hubs across the
country. And there are more than 100 humanitarian
organizations implementing or planning activities in
every oblast in Ukraine, in all sectors. The brave work of
the Ukrainian Red Cross Society and other civil society
organizations who are working shoulder-to-shoulder
with volunteers and communities is astounding.
Ukraine is a humanitarian paradox. Side by side
with extreme violence we see extreme kindness,
profound solidarity and the gentlest of care. I am
humbled and inspired by the tireless commitment of
those people, and we must continue to support their
work. Where security allows, humanitarian convoys
are unloading much-needed supplies and delivering
equipment to repair damaged infrastructure.
On 18 March, after delays due to ongoing
hostilities, the first United Nations-organized convoy
reached Sumy, in the north-east. The convoy delivered
130 tons of much-needed medical supplies, water,
ready-to-eat meals and canned food for 35,000 people,
as well as essential equipment for the repair of water
systems that will help improve access to water for some
50,000 people.
Yesterday, again after delays due to ongoing
fighting, the second United Nations-organized convoy
reached Kharkiv, where supplies of food, other essential
22-30314

29/03/2022

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

relief items and emergency health kits and medicines
were unloaded for distribution by the Ukrainian Red
Cross Society.

Commissioner for Refugees — will also be revised.
The generosity and welcome of Ukraine’s neighbours
remains a bright spot in a darkening landscape.

Countrywide, more than 180 metric tons of medical
supplies have been delivered, and more than 470 metric
tons are on the way. Where we can, we buy supplies
from the local market and work alongside local efforts.
But we need to move to scale. More convoys are planned
for the days and weeks ahead in order to reach many
more people with desperately needed aid.

The global impact of this war is becoming clearer
every day, as the conflict continues. It threatens to make
things even worse in the world’s biggest humanitarian
crises such as in Afghanistan, Yemen and the Horn
of Africa, which are already grappling with food
insecurity and economic fragility. Increases in food,
fuel and fertilizer prices will hit hard now and for the
coming seasons. We are only now beginning to see the
breadth of the impact of this crisis on other regions and
countries. We will all be affected.

I am sure Mr. Beasley will tell us more about the
World Food Programme, its work over the past month
and the expansion of its operations in Ukraine.
Civilians in Ukraine desperately need assistance
and protection, but it cannot be provided unless all
parties uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law — to ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to help civilians in their homes
and those on the road in Ukraine and to allow those
civilians who want to leave to get out. We need detailed,
realistic agreements on humanitarian ceasefires and
pauses to allow aid in and people out.
For predators and human traffickers, the war
in Ukraine is not a tragedy; it is an opportunity.
Humanitarian organizations are worried about the risk
of trafficking, as well as sexual violence, exploitation
and abuse, in Ukraine and the region. Children fleeing
the war in particular are at a heightened risk of human
trafficking and exploitation. Predators are luring
single parents on the road with promises of transport
and accommodations.
We are scaling up our protection services at the
borders and within the country in order to make sure
that people have information available on safe options
and routes, access to helplines and safe shelters.
Humanitarian partners are coordinating closely — not
only to monitor risks of sexual violence, trafficking and
abuse but also to provide swift and specialized services
to survivors.
Humanitarian partners agree — our worstcase scenario has been reached and, in some areas,
surpassed. That is why, last week, the principals of the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee agreed to revise the
flash appeal that has rallied nearly $506 million of the
$1.1 billion needed to support the response. The refugee
response plan, coordinated by the Organization’s
refugee agency — the Office of the United Nations High

The Secretary-General has asked Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths to urgently engage with the
parties on possible arrangements for a humanitarian
ceasefire in Ukraine. Mr. Griffiths has already been
in touch with both parties, who have welcomed the
initiative, and he will travel to the region within days.
We must find measures — from local pauses to
wider ceasefires — in order to save lives and protect
the homes, schools and hospitals of civilians from being
attacked. Civilians are running out of food, energy and
hope. Our aim is simple — to silence the guns and
save lives.
The President: I thank Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Beasley.
Mr. Beasley: It is good to hear from Ms. Joyce
Msuya, and I will try not to repeat much of what
she said.
It is simply hard to believe that things could get
any worse around the world than they were before the
Ukraine crisis. Because of fuel prices, food prices
and shipping costs, we were already beginning to cut
rations for millions of children and families around the
world in countries such as Yemen, where we had just
cut 8 million people down to 50 per cent rations and
are now looking to go to 0 rations, and others such as
the Niger, Mali and Chad — and on and on. Now we
are talking about a catastrophe on top of a catastrophe.
Ukraine has gone from the breadbasket of the
world to bread lines. We would never have dreamed
that anything like this would be possible. This conflict
is not just decimating Ukraine and the region, but will
have a global impact beyond anything we have seen
since the Second World War.

22-303143/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

I would like to touch upon a couple of issues inside
Ukraine. We have now reached about 1 million people.
Over the next four weeks, we will reach 2.5 million
people and, by the end of May, we will have reached
4 million people. By the end of June, we hope to reach
about 6 million people on any given day, week or
month, so to speak. The price tag that we are looking
at, for food security inside Ukraine alone, is about
$500 million for the first three months. We are short
about $300 million, and we will therefore need to step
up our efforts.
One of the things we need to be careful of in
the context of our concerns about Ukraine is not to
neglect the Sahel, North Africa, the rest of Africa and
the Middle East. Otherwise, there will be massive
migration coming from all sides of Europe. That is why
this is a crisis on top of a crisis.
We all know that the ordinary, loving and
welcoming arms of strangers and neighbours in Poland,
Romania, Hungary, Slovakia and Moldova has been
remarkable. I have been there three times in the past
few weeks alone, seeing people’s experiences first
hand. One can say that the 3.5 to 4 million people who
have made it to the outside are the lucky ones, because
they are getting food, shelter, help and some degree of
hope out of harm’s way. However, there are 40 million
people inside of Ukraine. We have to do everything we
can to stabilize the food supply chain system and reach
as many people as we possibly can. As members can
imagine, the farmers are fighting on the front lines.
For the next four weeks, it will be planting season for
maize. Who will tend the crops? It will then be time to
harvest, let us say, wheat, in June and July. Farmers are
on the front lines, and therefore we start worrying not
just about what happens inside Ukraine, but also what
will happen outside Ukraine.
Obviously, we are appealing to everyone involved to
deconflict and give us the access we need. We can reach
most of the places around Ukraine in several different
ways right now, but we cannot reach other places, such
as Mariupol. We need the access that Ms. Msuya was
talking about so that we can reach the people who are in
harm’s way and do not have access to food.
We will be using cash-based transfers, as well
as commodities, in-kind assistance and food itself,
depending on the dynamics in each specific area. As
members can imagine, Ukraine is not a small country.
We are therefore prepositioning and moving food. We
4/23

29/03/2022

are working with the Government to move it either by
train or by truck, whatever it takes. We are also working
with the Government to make certain that we have the
truck drivers we need to do what is necessary to reach
the people in need.
Let me capsulize Ukraine and now turn to outside of
Ukraine. As members have heard, Ukraine and Russia
produce 30 per cent of the global supply of wheat;
20 per cent of the global supply of maize and between
75 per cent and 80 per cent of sunflower seed oil.
Members can begin to see the dynamic consequences.
Fifty per cent of the grain that we buy comes from
Ukraine. We were feeding125 million people before
the conflict in Ukraine ever happened. Members can
therefore assume the devastation that that will have on
our operations alone.
We already anticipate a $71 million increase in
monthly expenses because of fuel costs, food costs
and shipping costs. That is a total of $850 million,
which means we will be able to reach 4 million fewer
people just from expense costs alone. Then consider
the devastation in countries such as Yemen and Egypt,
which are dependent on Russian and Ukrainian wheat.
Egypt is dependent upon Ukraine for 85 per cent of its
grain. In 2020, Lebanon was dependent on Ukraine for
81 per cent of its grain. I could keep providing examples
around the world.
That is then compounded by the lack of fertilizerbased products that come out of Belarus and Russia. If
fertilizer is not put on crops, the yield will be at least
50 per cent diminished. We are therefore looking at
what could be a catastrophe on top of a catastrophe on
top of a catastrophe in the months ahead. That is why,
when I was talking to the Ministers and Secretaries of
Agriculture of the Group of Seven, I asked how quickly
the world agricultural community could offset the
reduction we could expect out of Ukraine and Russia in
terms of supply and demand.
At one time, we were primarily concerned about
pricing. We see that it is, in fact, a pricing problem and
perhaps an availability problem if we cannot offset what
we will lose inside of Ukraine and Russia. These are
extremely serious issues. As we talk to leaders around
the world, we are asking how to respond quickly to do
the things necessary to minimize the impact globally,
as well as in Ukraine itself.
If we consider the Arab Spring of 2008, 2011 and
2012 and the economic indices and hike in food prices at
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

that time, we begin to see several similarities — except,
quite frankly, it is much worse in some categories today
than it was in those years. That is because now there
is the war in Ethiopia, the crisis in Afghanistan and a
climate crisis that is impacting the Sahel, for example.
The months ahead will be extremely difficult.
Many nation States have been stepping up in ways
they have not done before. Let me be clear: if we do not
step up and respond, we will pay a price that will be
1,000 times more expensive than stepping in and doing
what is necessary. For example, in Syria, we can feed
a Syrian for $0.50 per day. If that same Syrian ends up
in Berlin or Brussels, the cost is $70 or more per day.
If we act now to end the conflict and address the
needs, we can avoid famine, the destabilization of
nations and mass migration. If we do not, the world
will pay a mighty price. The last thing we want to do at
the World Food Programme is to take food away from
hungry children to give to starving children. Please, let
us make certain that we can reach them all.
The President: I thank Mr. Beasley for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Msuya and Mr. Beasley for
their briefings.
I would especially like to express my gratitude for
the substantial mobilization on the part of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme and all other humanitarian agencies.
They can count on our support.
The humanitarian situation in Ukraine is
deteriorating day by day. All indicators point to red.
Last week, the overwhelming majority of the members
of the General Assembly demanded the immediate
cessation of hostilities perpetrated by Russia against
Ukraine and full respect for international humanitarian
law. Resolution ES-11/2, proposed by France and
Mexico, should make it possible to support the efforts
of the Secretary-General and humanitarian actors
working on the ground to assist civilians and provide
them with vital assistance.
Nonetheless, the Security Council must also
continue to fully assume its responsibilities in the
light of the humanitarian tragedy unfolding before our
eyes. It is imperative that Russia respect the Geneva

S/PV.9008

Conventions. Civilians, including children, persons with
disabilities and medical and humanitarian personnel, as
well as civilian infrastructure, must be protected. Full
humanitarian access should be guaranteed. Civilians,
in Mariupol and all other cities under attack, should be
able to leave combat areas safely and freely, should they
wish to do so. The siege of Mariupol must be lifted.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine increases the
risk of famine around the world. The populations of
developing countries are the first to be affected. No
doubt, Russia will attempt to make us believe that it is
the sanctions adopted against it that are affecting global
food security. Let us be very clear: Russia alone is
responsible. The unjustified and unjustifiable war that
it unleashed on Ukraine is preventing Ukraine from
exporting its grain. That, in turn, is disrupting global
supply chains, leading to an increase in prices and
jeopardizing access to food for the most vulnerable.
It is the ongoing fighting that threatens agricultural
activity in Ukraine and forthcoming harvests.
The European Union and its partners have adopted
sanctions to compel Russia to fall in line with the
Charter of the United Nations. Those sanctions do not
target Russia’s agricultural sector.
In the light of the global food insecurity, the
most effective response is the immediate cessation of
Russian aggression. It is also important to strengthen
international cooperation to that end. France fully
supports the initiative launched by the SecretaryGeneral, through the United Nations Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance. France,
in its capacity as President of the European Union,
has launched an initiative called FARM, or the Food
and Agriculture Resilience Mission. The goal of the
initiative is to reduce tensions on the global food market
and ensure the free movement of food. It should also
enable rapid access to agricultural products for those
countries where needs are most pressing and ensure
rural development and food production in Africa. We
call upon the relevant private and public stakeholders
to support this initiative, which should also be included
in the efforts of the Secretary-General.
Urgent action is needed. France commends the
courage demonstrated by the people of Ukraine at
the United Nations and in all other forums. We will
continue to work with its partners to support Ukraine
and the Ukrainian people. We will spare no effort to

22-303145/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

ensure that full light is shed on the allegations of crimes
which, if found to be so, must not go unpunished.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme, for their briefings. We also welcome
the Ambassador of Ukraine to this meeting.
Each week, the humanitarian tragedy in Ukraine
increases exponentially, and the figures that have
just been shared with us are a reflection of that
deterioration. I mention them only because we must not
lose sight of the scale of the issue. In five weeks, there
are now 3.9 million refugees and 6.5 million internally
displaced persons. Of particular concern is the fact that
90 per cent of those refugees are women and children.
The risks they run of becoming victims of trafficking,
exploitation and sexual and gender-based violence must
be clearly underscored here and now.
It is due to the continuing deterioration of the
situation on the ground that Mexico and France
requested today’s briefing. Five weeks after the start
of Russia’s invasion, the international community’s
priority is to achieve the cessation of hostilities and
protect the civilian population in Ukraine. That was
evidenced by the overwhelming majority support for
General Assembly resolution ES-11/2 at the emergency
special session meeting of the Assembly on 24 March
(see A/ES-11/PV.9).
The war has also had major impacts on global food
supply and food security, as we have heard. The effects
are grave in the immediate, medium and long term.
During the negotiations on that resolution, numerous
delegations mentioned the issue and highlighted it
as a priority. The Secretary-General has also spoken
explicitly on the matter.
We acknowledge the World Food Programme’s
intention to support the basic needs of the nearly
6 million people affected by the conflict. The fact that
some 1 million people in Ukraine have already benefited
from cash transfers and food distribution should also be
recognized. Such relief is certainly very timely, as it is
much needed, but it is also only temporary in nature.
We know that there are many logistical difficulties
in getting humanitarian assistance to where it is most
needed, due to limitations with regard to fuel, transport
and drivers — and now the closure of major ports and
6/23

29/03/2022

insecurity for commercial ships. In some cities, as is
the case for Mariupol, the situation has worsened. We
therefore reiterate our call to ensure safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian personnel.
The conflict has also had a direct negative impact
on the global food and energy markets, raising the
prices of those products. That price increase is
beginning to be felt in domestic markets and will, in
several regions, limit people’s access to at least certain
types of basic foodstuffs.
Consequently, there will also be an increase in
the operating costs of the World Food Programme, as
we have heard, limiting its capacity to respond to the
growing needs and the new situations of food insecurity
that will be created in various regions beyond Ukraine.
We highlight the work of United Nations humanitarian
agencies that have provided support to millions of
people, both in Ukraine and in neighbouring countries
providing refuge, whose generosity we commend.
General Assembly resolution ES-11/2 is also
intended to ensure that conditions exist on the ground
to provide humanitarian personnel with safe and
unhindered access to carry out their functions.
We have also followed with concern the increase
in the flow of weapons into Ukraine. The proliferation
of weapons can result in a higher incidence of violence
among the civilian population and, if such weapons
fall into the wrong hands, lead to other violations of
international law and human rights. The extent to which
those arms could aggravate the humanitarian situation
in the country needs to be assessed. We certainly deplore
the use of explosive weapons and cluster munitions in
urban areas. The use of such weapons must be stopped.
Finally, Mexico’s priorities in the face of the conflict
have been, and will continue to be, the protection of
civilians, humanitarian aid and respect for international
law, including international humanitarian law and
refugee law. An immediate cessation of hostilities is
urgently needed and, until that is achieved, sustainable
humanitarian pauses that guarantee the protection of
civilians and access to humanitarian aid are urgently
required. We reiterate once again that humanitarian aid
cannot be held hostage to political considerations. We
therefore call for the full implementation of the resolution
adopted a few days ago by the General Assembly.
The President: I now call on the Deputy Secretary
of State of the United States of America.
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

Ms. Sherman (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam, for welcoming me as I represent the
United States at the Security Council today. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and Executive
Director Beasley for their briefings today and welcome
Deputy Executive Director Abdulla. Of course, I also
welcome the Ambassador from Ukraine.
It has been five weeks — although it feels like a
lifetime — since Russian President Vladimir Putin
launched his premeditated, unprovoked, unjustified and
brutal invasion of Ukraine. In just five weeks, nearly
a quarter of Ukraine’s population has been displaced,
including more than half of the nation’s children. In just
five weeks, nearly 4 million Ukrainians have fled their
country as refugees. Now the World Food Programme
warns that 45 per cent of the people in Ukraine — nearly
half of the people of Ukraine, living in one of the
world’s greatest breadbaskets — are concerned about
having enough to eat.
Russia’s ceaseless bombardment of Ukraine’s cities
and critical infrastructure has created one of the fastestgrowing humanitarian crises in recent decades. Russian
forces have laid siege to cities such as Mariupol, where
citizens have been left without food, water, heat and
electricity in the depths of winter. People have resorted
to melting snow for drinking water. One mother told
reporters that she could feed her three daughters only
a spoonful of honey a day as they hid from Russian
bombs. Now city officials say people are beginning to
die of starvation. Think about that.
Mariupol was at peace five weeks ago. It was, in
fact, a bustling port city — a grain exporter that helped
feed the world. Today its residents are dying because of
President Putin’s war of choice. The impacts of Putin’s
war are being felt far beyond Ukraine’s borders as
well, with some of the most immediate and dangerous
implications for global food security.
As has been said, Ukraine and Russia are both
major agricultural producers. Thirty per cent of the
world’s wheat exports typically come from the Black
Sea region, as does 20 per cent of the world’s corn and
75 per cent of sunflower oil.
But Russia has bombed at least three civilian ships
carrying goods from Black Sea ports to the rest of
the world, including one chartered by an agribusiness
company. The Russian navy is blocking access to
Ukraine ports, essentially cutting off exports of grain.
They are reportedly preventing approximately 94 ships

S/PV.9008

carrying food for the world market from reaching the
Mediterranean. It is no wonder that many shippers are
now hesitant to send vessels into the Black Sea, even to
Russian ports, given the danger posed by Russian forces.
Russian missiles and bombs have damaged and
destroyed Ukrainian airports, rail lines, train stations
and highways that are critical for getting humanitarian
aid to those who need it and for exporting wheat, corn
and other commodities. Ukrainian Foreign Minister
Kuleba has told his counterparts that Russia is actively
targeting grain silos and food-storage facilities. All of
those actions by Russia are creating a food crisis in
Ukraine and well beyond Ukraine’s borders. Already,
food prices are skyrocketing in low- and middle-income
countries, as Russia chokes off Ukrainian exports.
Across the Middle East and Africa, already high prices
for staple commodities, including wheat, have risen
between 20 and 50 per cent so far this year.
We are particularly concerned about such countries
as Lebanon, Pakistan, Libya, Tunisia, Yemen and
Morocco, which rely heavily on Ukrainian imports to
feed their populations. The world, as we have heard,
was already facing a food-security crisis well before
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The coronavirus disease
pandemic and the resulting economic crisis pushed
millions of families into poverty. Countries around the
world are grappling with drought and other disasters
made worse by climate change.
As we heard from Executive Director Beasley, the
World Food Programme is already feeding 138 million
people in more than 80 countries, from Ethiopia to
Afghanistan, South Sudan to Yemen, Nigeria to Syria.
But now Putin’s war is driving up the costs of providing
food assistance, and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations estimates that as
many as 13 million more people worldwide may be
pushed into food insecurity as a result of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine.
Many of us have heard the Russian Government
blame United States, allied and partner sanctions
for increasing food costs around the world. But
the facts — the facts — are clear. Sanctions are not
preventing grain from leaving Ukraine’s ports. Putin’s
war is. And Russia’s own food and agricultural exports
are not under sanction by the United States or by our
allies and partners. The responsibility for waging war
on Ukraine and for the war’s effects on global food
security falls solely on President Putin.

22-303147/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

The international community must come together
to meet this moment to provide food, water, shelter
and medicine for the Ukrainian people, to support
Ukraine’s neighbours who have taken in millions of
refugees, and to bolster global food security and protect
the world’s most vulnerable from hunger — as a result
of Putin’s war.
The United States is committed to doing our part
to ease the human suffering caused by this war in
Ukraine — and elsewhere around the world. Last week,
President Biden announced that the United States
is prepared to provide more than $1 billion in new
humanitarian assistance for the Ukrainian people, those
fleeing to neighbouring countries and those around the
world feeling the effects of Putin’s war, including rising
food insecurity. The United States is also committed to
providing more than $11 billion over the next five years
to address food-security and nutrition needs around
the world, including in countries where food prices are
rising as a result of Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
But the fact remains that so long as Putin continues
his war, so long as Russian forces continue to bombard
Ukrainian cities and block aid convoys, so long as
besieged civilians are unable to get to safety, this
humanitarian crisis will only get worse — in Ukraine,
for the Russian people and around the world.
Russia must abide by its obligations under
international humanitarian law on the protection of
civilians, including those who are fleeing conflict and
those who are providing humanitarian assistance. We
hope — we really hope — that President Putin will
commit seriously to the peace talks under way. But
we are focused on what Russian forces do, not what
Russia says or what Putin says. And ultimately, the only
way to end this humanitarian catastrophe is through
a durable ceasefire and the complete withdrawal of
Russian forces from Ukrainian territory and away from
Ukraine’s borders.
That decision, like the decision to begin this
unprovoked, unjustified war in the first place lies with
one man, and one man only. Vladimir Putin started this
war and created this global food crisis — and he is the
one who can stop it.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Joyce Msuya and World Food Programme
Executive Director David Beasley for their briefings.
I also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine.
8/23

29/03/2022

The war in Ukraine is a humanitarian catastrophe.
More than 10 million people have fled their homes.
Three million have left the country as refugees. The
speed with which the situation has deteriorated,
the immense damage to civilian infrastructure, the
shockingly high number of civilian and military
fatalities on both sides — all of this reminds us of the
carnage that we have only read about in history books,
and therefore we fear that it could get far worse.
We offer our heartfelt condolences to the families
who are grieving for their relatives killed in the violence.
We also offer our condolences to the Government of
Ukraine, which must now try and provide aid to the
people even as it resists a breaching of its territorial
integrity by the Russian Federation.
We commend Ukraine’s neighbours for opening
their borders to receive refugees of multiple nationalities.
We urge them to ensure that the protections sought are
offered with no discrimination on any basis, particularly
with regard to race or religion.
It is not only Ukrainians who have fled from the
bombings. Thousands of Africans who travelled long
distances to seek their education in Ukraine have also
had to flee for their lives. These African students in
Ukraine, and other parts of the world, travel to study as
representatives of their families’ hopes for betterment.
Thousands made this hopeful journey to Ukraine.
Now they are fleeing before the tanks and bomber
planes sent into the country. They have turned from
hopeful students into fearful refugees.
Statistics are impersonal — they flatten the human
experience — but a humanitarian crisis is humansized. It is a million individual lives shattered by fear
and violence.
Our delegation spoke to Korrine Sky, a
Zimbabwean-born student doctor at Dnipro Medical
Institute. She had to flee for her safety, joined by close
friends to make a dangerous 26-hour road trip to Lviv,
in western Ukraine. It took almost four days to make
the journey and cross the border to safety.
At the border she suffered the indignity and danger
of racism. She encountered that racism as she fled the
impersonal brutality of bombs.
She then co-founded the Black Women for Black
Lives to support thousands of African students fleeing
Ukraine. They have raised funds, gotten the word out
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

and assisted many who, like them, were fleeing from
the conflict. I urge everyone listening to this briefing to
visit their website at https://blackwomenforblacklives.
org for further information about this heroic effort.
Today Korrine is calling for the safety of civilians,
particularly for the African students trapped in Kherson.
Civilians, including foreign nationals, in Ukraine
are not party to the conflict and must not be made a
target. In that regard, all actors must prioritize the
protection of civilians and objects indispensable to
their survival, in accordance with international law
and international humanitarian law. Special and urgent
attention should be paid to those trapped in besieged
cities and villages, such as in Mariupol and Kherson.
We call for the urgent activation of safe passages, with
no restrictions.
The response to Ukraine’s humanitarian crisis has
shown how boldly and generously the world can react in
solidarity. We commend the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme and the many other organizations and
individuals who have come to the aid of the deserving
people of Ukraine.
We urge the European Union and its members to
offer every form of support they can provide to the
African students who have fled Ukraine. It seems
imminently doable that those who have been students
in Ukrainian institutions can receive offers to further
their education in other countries, as well as the
mental-health and material support that they need.
We must also not forget our responsibilities in other
humanitarian crises. Very frequently, the Security
Council is briefed on the shortfalls in financing
humanitarian aid in Africa and the Middle East. The
situation is currently even worse, given the surge in
food and energy prices, owing to the war in Ukraine
and its resulting sanctions.
Development is being reversed worldwide as a
result of the war. Livelihoods are being destroyed.
Farmers in need of affordable fertilizer are struggling
to cope. Inflation is surging upwards. The result of
the domino-like effects will be stunted health for
millions of people and an earlier-than-normal death for
many others.
A few weeks ago, we were urging building back
better after the coronavirus disease. Now we will
need to add the war in Ukraine to that. We urge the

S/PV.9008

Secretary-General to rally the United Nations, the major
economies and international financial institutions
to design instruments that can cushion the most
vulnerable from the effects of the conflict in Ukraine.
In the absence of such action, the solidarity required
will eventually suffer from the rising inequalities and
economic calamities.
In the final telling, the most humane action that can
be undertaken is the cessation of hostilities. We call for
a cessation that has clearly defined contact lines and
humanitarian corridors. The cessation of hostilities
should set the foundations for a lasting peace settlement
that respects the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Ukraine. It should also lead
to the design of a European security order that offers
lasting security, not a generation of new wars in Europe.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would also like to
thank Executive Director David Beasley, Mr. Amir
Abdulla and Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya
for updating the Security Council on the humanitarian
catastrophe that is engulfing the people of Ukraine. I
also want to welcome our dear colleague from Ukraine
among us this afternoon.
The grim realities that have been shared with us
over the past few minutes starkly demonstrate the
human misery caused by this senseless and unlawful
war. And the roll call of devastation caused by Russia’s
war goes on. Daily, we are witnessing the devastating
humanitarian impacts of Russia’s use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. At least 1,100 civilian
deaths have been confirmed by the United Nations,
including more than 100 children. We all know at this
table that the real number is likely to be far higher. The
numbers speak for themselves: more than 3.9 million
refugees have fled Russia’s invasion; 6.5 million
people have been displaced within Ukraine’s borders,
desperately sheltering from a war with diminishing
resources and little to no access to basic needs.
We are deeply concerned about the increasing
vulnerabilities of internally displaced persons and
refugees as the war continues. Reported so-called
deportations, or quite frankly abductions, whereby
Ukrainian citizens are taken forcibly across the border
and into Russia, are simply horrifying. We are also
troubled by the activities of human traffickers, to whom
the war offers optimal conditions to prey on fleeing
women and children.

22-303149/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

I will say it once again: we condemn in the strongest
terms acts of sexual and gender-based violence against
women and violence against children, which have
been reported by humanitarian organizations. That is
particularly unconscionable and, frankly, ranks among
the other horrors being faced by Ukrainian citizens.
There can be no impunity for those responsible. We are
being warned of an emerging child-protection crisis as
the number of unaccompanied and separated children
rises. We have a responsibility to heed those warnings.
We once again call on the Russian Federation to
uphold its obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, to allow full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access for humanitarian
personnel in order for them to reach those in need. The
Russian Federation must also allow all those seeking
to leave Ukraine to do so safely to destinations of
their own choosing. The truth is that only the Russian
Federation can prevent the further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation it has caused.
With the world facing a looming hunger crisis, we
see now that the consequences of this senseless war are
being felt far beyond Ukraine’s sovereign borders. This
unjustified war is already having a multiplier effect
on food and nutrition insecurity, compounding other
challenges, droughts, floods and conflict elsewhere that
were already increasing prices and squeezing supply
chains. The Russian Federation is one of the world’s
biggest grain producers, and, in waging an unprovoked
war against another major producer, is pushing up the
price of staples — putting even a loaf of bread out of
reach for those living on the edge of survival.
In addition, cruelly, Ukrainian farmers are
currently prevented by war from planting, harvesting
and exporting grain. Future harvests are therefore
already lost, with longer-term consequences for
global food security. As we have heard, the war has
already greatly impacted the ability of the World Food
Programme itself to meet hunger needs, materially and
financially, around the world.
We were warned that 2022 was set to be a year of
catastrophic hunger. Now this senseless war has all
but confirmed that ugly catastrophe. As if we needed
reminding, this war brings the connection between
conflict and hunger into stark relief. Lives are being
lost owing to the food insecurity caused by the war.
And even if it ended this afternoon, it will still result in
lives lost from hunger into the future.
10/23

29/03/2022

The war has raged now for five long weeks — five
weeks of destruction, bombardment, loss of life and
loss of hope. What is not lost is our solidarity with the
Ukrainian people. That remains steadfast, and it remains
resolute. The international community and the Security
Council must not be numbed to the ongoing tragedy in
Ukraine. The truth remains, as it has for these past five
weeks, that this war can end if the Russian Federation
has the will to end it.
People trapped in need of aid in besieged cities can
be reached; life-saving aid can be delivered through
safe humanitarian access; further flows of desperate
and vulnerable refugees can be prevented; and countless
lives can be saved — but only if the war ends, hostilities
cease, Russia ends its aggression and complies with its
obligations under international law and the Russian
Federation withdraws all forces unconditionally from
the entirety of the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
We again call on the Russian Federation to do the
right thing, to end this war, to remember diplomacy, to
engage in genuine dialogue in good faith and to restore
peace in Ukraine. I continue to believe it is never too
late to do the right thing.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank today’s briefers. Today we have
heard, and will likely hear again, many calls for a
humanitarian truce, the provision of humanitarian
access, humanitarian pauses and humanitarian
corridors. Such initiatives were advanced yesterday by
Secretary-General António Guterres.
It is hard not to marvel at my colleagues’
inconsistency. Just last Wednesday (see S/PV.9002),
less than a week ago, most of them rejected our
humanitarian draft resolution S/2022/231, which would
have been binding on all parties and which contained a
specific list of steps to be taken to unblock the work of
humanitarian agencies, primarily in eastern Ukraine.
In that context, today’s statements, especially those by
Western delegations, sound very hypocritical.
And yet our proposals contained in the draft
resolution went further than the list presented by our
Western colleagues. It also contained a requirement not
to place heavy weapons in residential areas and not to
use civilians as shields. Their adoption by the Council
could have saved innumerable lives, as the main threat
to civilians in Ukrainian towns and cities comes from
Ukrainian Nazis and radicals, who are using civilians
as human shields. The Internet is full of video evidence
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

of that — from liberated cities or from those who
managed to leave through humanitarian corridors, even
as they were being shelled by Ukrainian armed forces
and nationalists. I hope that Council members have seen
those images. And yet today we are being told that we
are allegedly bombing vessels with grain, agricultural
equipment and grain storage warehouses.
The draft resolution also contained a demand
for respectful and humane treatment of prisoners of
war, taking into account the videos posted online by
Ukrainian Nazis showing extremely cruel treatment
of Russian soldiers being held captive. Have Council
members seen those images? And this is happening
despite the fact that Russia is strictly observing its
international obligations, and there is no threat to
Ukrainians who lay down their arms. Council members
can also find evidence of that in videos on social media.
The Ukrainian Nazis do not shy away from the
most sophisticated torture and reprisals. It is enough
to mention the shocking discovery of civilians tortured
to death in national battalion torture prisons with Nazi
swastikas branded on their mutilated bodies. Have
Council members seen those images?
In the context of such cruel treatment by Ukrainian
radicals and special services of their own citizens,
we have serious concerns about the measures being
undertaken by Kyiv to physically eliminate leaders
publicly espousing undesirable opinions. In our letter
of 21 March (S/2022/253), we officially informed
the Security Council about the abduction by the
Security Service of Ukraine of civilian activist Elena
Berezhnaya, who had participated in Council meetings.
There is still no information on her fate.
Similar reports have since been received with regard
to Vasyl Volha, a Ukrainian opposition politician and
leader of the Union of Leftists party, political scientist
Dmytro Dzhanhirov, opposition political scientist Yuri
Dudkin, journalist and publicist Dmitriy Skvortsov,
historian and public figure Alexander Karevin,
journalist and television host Yan Taksyur and the
editor-in-chief of the Odessa-based publication Timer,
Yuriy Tkachev. The Security Service of Ukraine even
searched the home of another political scientist known
to the Security Council, Mykhaylo Pohrebynskyy. We
have no information about what is happening to him
today. We are waiting a fair assessment in connection
with such a witch hunt from our Western colleagues
and relevant human rights bodies of the United Nations

S/PV.9008

and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe.
The list of problems created by Kyiv keeps growing.
Added danger in the form of drifting Ukrainian mines
has now also appeared at sea. Bulgaria, Romania and
Turkey have already faced, or will soon face, that
dangerous problem. In that context, we would like to
stress that there is no threat to the freedom of civilian
navigation from the Russian armed forces. In order to
allow foreign vessels to leave Ukrainian ports for open
sea, we have established a humanitarian corridor — an
80-nautical-mile-long and three nautical-mile-wide
traffic lane. The corridor operates every day from 8
a.m. to 7 p.m., Moscow time. That information has been
communicated by us to all interested parties.
Although our Western colleagues did not support
the humanitarian draft resolution in the Security
Council, we are unilaterally implementing all our
humanitarian commitments. We are working on the
humanitarian corridors, at our own initiative, on a daily
basis — 10 routes have again been suggested today,
both towards Russia and western Ukraine. We are also
organizing the delivery of basic necessities, medicine
and food to those in need. We have already delivered
more than 6,000 tons of aid to Ukraine, and half a
million refugees are currently being hosted in Russia.
Communication channels have been established and
are successfully functioning among the Ministry of
Defence and the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Russia
and the leadership of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In direct coordination
with the ICRC, we are organizing safe corridors for
evacuations and the search and exchange of prisoners
of war. On 18 March, with the assistance of the Russian
armed Forces, the first United Nations humanitarian
convoy travelled from Poltava to Sumy. It delivered and
distributed 130 tons of humanitarian assistance.
While convoys with tons of food and essential
goods are travelling to Ukraine, what is travelling
from the West to Ukraine, as we all know, are weapons
and missiles.
Today we heard, and will again hear, a claim about
the allegedly imminent global food crisis. According
to Western delegations, it is caused exclusively by
Russia’s actions in Ukraine. By framing the question
in that way, our Western colleagues are deceiving
themselves. After all, the real reasons the global food

22-3031411/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

market is experiencing serious turbulence are by no
means because of Russia’s actions, rather because of
the unbridled sanctions hysteria unleashed by the West
against Russia, without consideration for the people of
the so-called “global South” or its own citizens.
Attempts to isolate Russia economically, financially
and logistically from long-established channels of
cooperation are already turning into an economic crisis
of historic proportions. Even to the average observer,
it is clear that the lifting of tensions in logistics and
financial relations, ensuring the continuity of supply
chains and stabilizing international agricultural
and food markets can be achieved only by rejecting
unlawful unilateral restrictions. After all, the stocks
of food produced in Russia have not decreased. It is
precisely the Western States themselves that are capable
of preventing hunger and food shortages, regardless of
how much they might argue the opposite today and try
to shift the blame onto Russia.
We also cannot fail to express our concern about the
ongoing cases of vehicles with United Nations insignia
being confiscated by the Ukrainian armed forces. It
is good that the Secretariat has finally acknowledged
such offences taking place in Kharkiv and Mariupol.
We are awaiting a response to our most recent enquiry
regarding a United Nations vehicle with diplomatic
plates DP210015, also in Kharkiv, which, according to
witness testimonies, took part in Ukrainian nationalist
combat operations.
We are also aware of cases of radicals using vehicles
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. Our colleagues in Vienna are fully aware of
that information. It is important that both international
organizations provide fair assessments of such incidents.
Incidentally, online publications clearly show that
DHL delivery vehicles have also fallen into the hands
of the Ukrainian armed forces and are being used to
transport weapons. We cannot rule out the possibility
that the vehicles of those organizations or vehicles
with medical markings are being used to transport into
Ukraine the very weapons that the West so generously
promised to Kyiv from neighbouring States, and I hope
that it is clear what reputational damage such a scenario
could do to all international entities that are concealing
the fact of vehicles with their insignia being used for
such purposes.
In conclusion, I would like to respond to a
talking point that has already become common in the
12/23

29/03/2022

vocabulary of our Western colleagues, namely, that
Russia’s military operation is allegedly an unprovoked
war of choice. That is also a formula that we heard
again today. We have repeatedly explained what has led
to the current crisis, and those who accuse us of this
are doing so, inter alia, because they seek to gloss over
their role in provoking the crisis and are pretending that
despite their policies of creating an anti-Russian State
for geopolitical purposes, which is what Ukraine has
turned into, this has nothing to do with them.
If we are going to talk about wars of choice, then
let us recall the United States aggression against
Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya, Afghanistan, Syria and the Viet
Nam War. All those States are thousands of kilometres
away from Washington, and military warfare there led
to nothing except hundreds of thousands of ruined and
broken lives, leaving behind completely devastated
countries and condemning millions of people to
destitution and a miserable existence. Those were wars
of choice, because the United States had a choice not
to start those wars, just as today Washington and its
allies have a choice to stop adding fuel to the fire of
the Ukrainian crisis by supplying the Kyiv regime with
weapons and provoking an international food crisis and
hunger in States around the world.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank the briefers for their
sobering accounts of the situation on the ground.
Russia’s war against Ukraine represents a blatant
violation of international law and the very principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Russia’s war is
causing the largest humanitarian crisis in Europe since
the Second World War. The damage and destruction
to civilian infrastructure, including food systems,
is devastating, as we heard so clearly from the
briefers today.
The attacks on civilians are simply unacceptable.
A quarter of the Ukrainian population has now been
displaced. Once again, we reiterate that international
humanitarian law must be respected and the
civilian population in Ukraine must be protected. A
humanitarian ceasefire in Ukraine is urgently needed,
and we welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative to
request Under-Secretary-General Griffiths to work
directly with the parties on a possible agreement. We
also welcome the renewed dialogue today between the
parties and hope that this will establish the trust needed
for an early agreement on the cessation of hostilities.
Let me highlight just three areas of concern.
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

First, the war is increasing the risk of sexual and
gender-based violence, including sexual violence being
used as a tactic of warfare. That is of great concern.
Prevention, protection and response must be scaled up.
Secondly, immediate action must be taken to
shield children in Ukraine from the harms of conflict,
including suffering from a lack of both urgent and
ongoing medical care. Many children have fled and are
unaccompanied. They are extremely vulnerable and
must be protected.
Thirdly, the massive displacement and refugee flows
have led to reports of a significant increase in human
trafficking. That needs to be urgently addressed by all,
including the United Nations and receiving States.
The Ukrainians are responding with great courage
and commitment, and we recognize the leading role
that women are playing in the response. The work
undertaken by international humanitarian organizations
and their local partners and responders is crucial. The
systematic engagement between them — together with
the people affected — needs to be strengthened. As the
needs grow, their efforts and ability to stay and deliver
must be accelerated.
Humanitarian organizations must be allowed safe,
rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access to people in
need. We also commend the hospitality and solidarity
extended by Ukraine’s neighbours, and we encourage
countries to keep their borders open to all those seeking
protection, without discrimination.
The Secretary-General, the United Nations
Development Programme and other development
organizations are sounding the alarm about
regional — and even global — consequences of the
war. That is both a humanitarian and a development
crisis. It is both a Ukrainian and a global crisis.
Ukraine itself has been set back decades in its
economic development. More than 60 per cent of its
citizens could fall below the poverty line within the
next 12 months.
The conflict will have serious negative effects on
the agricultural sector, likely leading to a global rise in
food insecurity and increased fuel and fertilizer prices,
all contributing to social unrest and instability across
the world.
The ripple effects of the Russian aggression will be
particularly felt by those living in conflict- and crisis-

S/PV.9008

affected countries, such as Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan,
Ethiopia and South Sudan.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
initiative to establish a Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance.
Russia’s aggression has long-term consequences
for Ukraine. It exacerbates other humanitarian crises
and undermines global economic development, peace
and security. Russia must stop that unjust war. That is
the only way to end the humanitarian catastrophe in
Ukraine and beyond.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya and World
Food Programme Executive Director David Beasley for
their briefings on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
India remains deeply concerned at the ongoing
situation, which has continued to deteriorate since
the beginning of the hostilities. We reiterate our call
for unimpeded humanitarian access to areas of armed
conflict in Ukraine. There is an urgent need to address
the humanitarian needs of the affected population. In
that regard, the initiatives of the United Nations and
its agencies, such as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the World Food Programme,
have reinforced ongoing efforts. We also note the
decision by the European Union countries that have
agreed to a permit-free transit of humanitarian carriers
to Ukraine.
We hope that the international community will
continue to respond positively to the humanitarian
needs of the people of Ukraine, including through
extending generous support to the Secretary-General’s
flash appeal and the regional refugee response plan
on Ukraine.
Keeping in view the dire humanitarian situation
unfolding in Ukraine, India has already sent more than
90 tonnes of humanitarian supplies to Ukraine and its
neighbours. Those supplies have included medicines
and other essential relief material for refugees.
We are providing more humanitarian assistance in
the coming days, especially through the supply of
essential medicines.
Allow me to underscore that it is important that
humanitarian action always be guided by the principles
of humanitarian assistance, that is, humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence, embedded as they are at
the heart of the United Nations guiding principles of

22-3031413/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

humanitarian emergency assistance. Those measures
should not be politicized.
The conflict is already having an impact on
the global economy, especially on many developing
countries, including through the disruption of supply
chains. Its adverse impact on energy and commodity
prices is evident.
We reiterate our call for an immediate cessation
of hostilities across Ukraine. Our Prime Minister, on
several occasions, has reiterated this and emphasized
that there is no other option but the path of dialogue
and diplomacy.
We continue to emphasize that the global order is
anchored in international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of States.
We call for purposeful engagement in the ongoing
talks by both sides. We hope that an understanding can
soon be reached. It is clearly in our collective interests
to find a solution that can provide for an immediate
de-escalation of tensions, aimed at securing long-term
peace and stability in the region and beyond.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I would like to begin
by thanking Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, for
their briefings. I also welcome the participation in this
meeting of the representative of Ukraine.
Almost a week after the General Assembly voted to
adopt landmark resolution ES-11/2, with an unequivocal
call for an immediate cessation of hostilities and a
return to the path of dialogue and diplomacy (see A/ES11/PV.9), the signs on the ground have yet to reflect the
sentiments of the international community for an early
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
An unconditional and immediate ceasefire
and the withdrawal of all invading troops from the
internationally recognized borders of Ukraine are
critical to save lives and prevent further devastation
to the Ukrainian people and remain fundamental to
addressing the worsening humanitarian conditions.
Ghana remains deeply concerned about the
continuing military bombardment of cities and civilian
populated areas of Ukraine and is disheartened by
the resulting trauma, especially to the elderly, women
14/23

29/03/2022

and children. We note with regret the loss of lives, the
displacement of people and the overall suffering of the
Ukrainian people from this needless war.
It is more important than ever for the parties to the
conflict to urgently commit to a humanitarian pause
in order to enable the evacuation and safe passage of
civilians and facilitate the delivery of food, medicine
and other essential services to those in critical need
who have been caught up in cities under siege. We
also deplore the attacks on medical facilities and
call for the protection of humanitarian workers and
medical personnel.
We urge the parties to comply with their
commitments under international law and international
humanitarian law, in particular the provisions of the
1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in the Time of War, also known as
the Fourth Geneva Convention. Ghana also encourages
the countries neighbouring Ukraine to facilitate
the free passage of persons fleeing the war, without
discrimination, and to provide them with humanitarian
assistance, including medical care — in line with the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality.
We remain concerned about the impact of the war
in Ukraine on the global economy, in general, and its
disproportionate impact on developing countries and
small economies, many of which are already caught
up in the throes of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We reiterate our urgent call for international solidarity
on the issues of sovereign release of excess food
stocks, calibrated intervention in the oil market and
new debt initiatives and financial access mechanisms
to help maintain global cohesion and stability at this
precarious time.
We note the reported intention of the Russian
Federation to redeploy its forces from certain parts of
Ukraine and urge it to follow through in the ongoing
dialogue in Turkey aimed at a pathway to resolving
the crisis.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join other in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya and Executive Director David Beasley for
their briefings.
Today we once again heard the appalling impact on
the Ukrainian people of President Putin’s senseless war
of choice — 10.3 million have been displaced, with 73
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

confirmed attacks on hospitals and medical centres and
659 schools and kindergartens damaged.
The devastation in Mariupol is almost beyond
description. Civilians remain without food, water or
electricity. People are reportedly resorting to drinking
not just snow, but sewage water to survive. There are
credible reports of mass graves and forced deportations
of residents to the Russian Federation, as well as
incidents of sexual violence and use of landmines.
There will be accountability for those crimes.
There is an urgent need to alleviate humanitarian
suffering in Ukraine. We note the Secretary-General’s
announcement yesterday regarding the role of Martin
Griffiths in pursuing a humanitarian ceasefire, and we
are grateful for the latest data from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Food Programme and the Secretary-General’s remarks
yesterday regarding those they have been able to reach.
We encourage all efforts to help the people of
Ukraine, in agreement with the Ukrainian Government.
The United Kingdom will continue to play its part.
We have provided £400 million to support Ukraine,
including £220 million in humanitarian aid. We call
for close cooperation between United Nations agencies
and other donors in order to ensure that this assistance
reaches and protects the most vulnerable.
But let us be without a shred of doubt. As the
Secretary-General set out yesterday, the only way to
end the suffering is for Russia to end the war. Global
commodity prices were already on the rise before the
invasion as economies recovered from the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We now see spiralling energy prices
and global food insecurity hitting the most vulnerable
the hardest. Almost every Member State is now
suffering because of Russia’s war. As David Beasley
said, we now risk famine destabilization, and we risk
having to take food from hungry children for starving
children. Russia’s appetite for war is taking food off the
world’s table.
The United Kingdom welcomes General Assembly
resolution ES-11/2, adopted last week. United Nations
States Members sent an overwhelming message that
Russia alone is to blame for the humanitarian crisis in
Ukraine and for the shocks being felt globally. For the
suffering to end, Russian bullets and bombs must stop,
and Russian tanks and troops must go home.

S/PV.9008

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Whoever seeks the truth about
Ukraine today comes to the same conclusion — Russian
aggression has caused a catastrophic humanitarian
situation in Ukraine. It must end and give way to not
only a chance for negotiations, but actual negotiations,
with an immediate nationwide ceasefire, as 140
Member States called for just last week (see A/ES11/PV.9). Unfortunately, as we speak, people are still
being killed.
At the end of the Second World War, some
40 million people had been displaced from their homes.
In Ukraine, after only five weeks, a quarter of the
country’s population of 44 million has been displaced by
the Russian aggression. We have been told, repeatedly,
that this war does not concern civilians, but in truth,
it has become mainly a war between the Russian army
and Ukrainian civilians, including women and children.
Mariupol, savagely battered into rubble and
reduced to ashes, symbolizes the extreme brutality of
the Russian invasion. In the words of the city’s mayor,
Russia’s aim is to wipe the city off the face of the Earth,
along with its inhabitants. There is a legal definition for
that despicable practice.
We know it through historical records: cruelty
inflicts untold damage and pain, but it never prevails. It
did not do so during the Second World War; it did not
during the three long years of siege of Sarajevo or the
genocide in Srebrenica; it did not during the horrible
massacres and massive ethnic cleansing in Kosovo.
We know where all those who tried to do so — who
suffered from the strongman syndrome — ended up:
behind bars, at best.
Bombing schools, hospitals, commercial centres,
theatres and cinemas with modern weapons has killed
many and terrified many more, but it has not demoralized
or broken Ukrainians. Instead, it has marked Russia’s
failure and sealed its humiliation. Ukrainian men and
women are not fighting to survive but to win — and
win they will.
No propaganda can erase facts: half the children
of an entire country of 44 million have been displaced;
while nearly 4,500 residential buildings, more than 90
factories and enterprises, more than 650 educational
establishments and 74 health-care institutions have been
damaged or destroyed in Ukraine. In Kharkiv alone,
more than 1,000 houses have been destroyed by Russia.
That extensive damage is not only a consequence — it

22-3031415/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

is in fact the real aim of the aggressor. Unable to occupy
the country, it is simply destroying it.
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has major
implications for food security across the world, as
United Nations reports confirm. It is inflicting severe
difficulties on developing countries. That comes as
2022 is expected to become a year of catastrophic
hunger, more than 44 million people in 38 countries
are on the verge of famine and overall global needs for
humanitarian assistance are higher than ever. People in
conflict areas used to fear dying of war; now they fear
dying of hunger as well. That is another consequence of
Russia’s war.
Troubling facts confirm that Russia has replaced the
right to information with the freedom of disinformation.
Novaya Gazeta, one of the largest independent
investigative newspapers in Russia, led by Nobel Prize
winner Dmitry Muratov, announced that it was forced
to halt publication after being issued a warning from
the Government. They were told they could not tell the
truth and that they could not speak of war.
How many times have we heard, in the most
ridiculous posture, that Ukrainians are inflicting it all
on themselves? That is what Russians are being told
relentlessly now, in an almost closed-circuit information
system. How masochistic would such Ukrainians be?
The simple fact is that they have been attacked in their
home and are fighting to defend it. A total information
blackout will keep Russians in darkness, buried in a
parallel reality that is distorted by propaganda, until
mothers start looking for their missing boys.
The United Nations human rights team in Ukraine
has received information about mass graves in the
besieged city of Mariupol. Other horrors will soon
be unearthed. Everything must be done to ensure
accountability for every war crime committed in
Ukraine. The recently established Group of Friends on
Accountability following the Aggression in Ukraine
will support all efforts to gather evidence and document
the atrocities of the war.
Let me end with a reality check. Now we know that
Russia wanted all of Ukraine, and it has learned the
hard way that it cannot — and will not — get it. Now
it wants to divide it and grab a part. That must not be
tolerated. It must be condemned, and Russia must be
held accountable.
16/23

29/03/2022

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Executive Director Beasley for their respective briefings.
The war in Ukraine is now entering its second
month. Hostilities continue on the ground, as does
the flow of civilians. including African residents
and students, who are attempting to flee the combat
zones. We are carefully following the evolution of the
situation on the ground and are alarmed by the attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, as well as
the attacks that directly impact the provision of vital
public services.
The latest data provided by the International
Committee of the Red Cross indicates that some
18 million people are in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance in Ukraine, of whom only 900,000 have
been rescued and received by the United Nations
and its specialized agencies. The deteriorating living
conditions, which go hand in hand with increasing
health-care needs, including for psychosocial care and
support, no doubt complicate matters when it comes
to the modality and nature of the distribution of aid.
Such aid is required urgently by thousands of people,
whether they decide to remain in their country or flee
the combat zones in order to seek refuge. We know that
the majority of those fleeing are women and children.
We are concerned by persistent reports that there is
a risk of disease resulting from difficulties in accessing
drinking water and sanitation infrastructure and related
hygiene problems. Data from the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations is also a source of
concern, as it predicts food shortages in the next three
months, with 40 per cent of monitored zones impacted,
in particular due to unpredictable harvests. The risk
of food insecurity has global repercussions, especially
in the light of diminishing cereal stockpiles. We fear
the worst in those regions of the world that are already
fragile, such as the Sahel.
Beyond our solidarity with the Ukrainian people,
which we wish to reaffirm, as well as with all people
placed in distressing circumstances due to the war;
beyond the momentum of international solidarity, which
has not wavered since 24 February and has translated
into greater mobilization to provide humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine; and beyond our words of
condemnation that we have spoken before the world, it
is urgent that we respond to the needs of the Ukrainian
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

people and all those suffering alongside them in this
crisis with actions that truly reflect what is at stake.
My country is of the view that the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine must be addressed in isolation,
without any politicization of the issue whatsoever.
Politicizing the situation in Ukraine will only distance
the Security Council from its objective of ensuring
respect for the relevant international conventions
and creating conditions that are conducive to the
protection of civilians in war zones while providing
safe, secure and unimpeded access to humanitarian
workers and humanitarian corridors. That is the
purpose of international humanitarian law, and that
is how we currently address the other issues on the
Council’s agenda.
I wish to reiterate my country’s appreciation for
Ukraine’s neighbours, which continue to mobilize to
host refugees during this emergency. We encourage
them to accord the same welcome to all those in distress,
regardless of their origin or race, including African
residents and students. We ask that their dignity be
respected and call for the equitable treatment of all
persons in distress.
We once again call on the warring parties to respect
the provisions of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
Protocols Additional thereto, and to guarantee respect
for, and the protection of, all medical and humanitarian
personnel. We call on the parties to commit to opening
secure humanitarian corridors and urge an immediate
cessation of hostilities.
The conflict should not end because, as the French
writer Pierre Corneille put it, there are no fighters
left. It should end because we have mobilized to reach
an agreement in line with the humanitarian, political
and security interests of the protagonists. My country
is paying close attention to the negotiations currently
being held between the parties, in particular in Istanbul.
We hope that those negotiations will lead in the short
term to a ceasefire in order to create a climate of
confidence to bring about the necessary calm in which
diplomacy may prevail. We call on the warring parties
and all stakeholders to resolutely engage in constructive
dialogue to find a way out of the crisis.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me start by thanking
the briefers — Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and
Executive Director Beasley — for their presentations
and, above all, for the tireless efforts of both the Office

S/PV.9008

for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and the World Food Programme (WFP) in helping to
alleviate the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. Let me
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Ukraine
to this meeting.
As we enter into another week of hostilities, we
continue to witness the intense human suffering it is
causing. The briefings today highlight yet another grave
dimension of the war — one that affects all countries,
particularly developing States: food insecurity. Brazil
is concerned with the worsening of the global food
crisis. The ongoing conflict is already causing a decline
in food supplies and a surge in food prices. According
to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, around 50 countries depend on imports of
wheat from Russia and Ukraine, not counting other
food products and services.
OCHA’s Global Humanitarian Overview 2022 has
already alerted that food insecurity is at unprecedented
levels. I would like to recall one sentence from
the Overview:
“Without sustained and immediate action,
2022 could be catastrophic.”
The most worrisome part of this assessment is that
it came before the conflict in Ukraine erupted. Now
the prospects are even worse. While the humanitarian
needs are greater, the resources are still scarce, which
is only aggravated by rising food prices. It is deeply
worrisome to note that the WFP has already had to
reduce assistance for refugees and other vulnerable
populations across East Africa and the Middle East.
Adding to the direct consequences of the
conflict in Ukraine, the indiscriminate imposition
of broad economic sanctions may further affect food
insecurity. Unilateral sanctions are not only illegal
under international law, but, as currently applied, they
jeopardize access to products that are essential to the
survival of a large portion of the world’s population.
In the end, sanctions tend to be heavily detrimental to
developing countries, while some developed countries
can protect their interests and guarantee the well-being
of their own populations through sustained funds
during the coming years.
The General Assembly recently adopted a resolution
about the humanitarian situation in Ukraine (resolution
ES-11/2), with the support of Brazil. In our explanation
of vote, we highlighted that the General Assembly could

22-3031417/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

not become a bystander to the shocking images from
the conflict and the desperation of civilians trapped in
the battlefield (see A/ES-11/PV.9).
Neither can the Security Council. As the main
United Nations organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Security Council has the mandate and the
responsibility to address the situation in an effective
manner. We should strive to create the conditions for
increased dialogue on practical measures to minimize
human suffering in Ukraine. Civilians wishing to flee
the hostilities must be able to do so in safety, and those
who decide to stay cannot become targets of attacks. In
the same vein, parties must grant safe passage to relief
consignments to those in need.
The situation in Mariupol is particularly
concerning. We call on all parties to work towards
concrete agreements to allow civilians to leave the city
if they wish to do so. Parties should spare no efforts
to prevent people from going missing and to share
information on the status of protected persons under
their control.
Once again, Brazil reiterates the call for all parties
to fully respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law. No matter the causes of the conflict,
once it erupts, civilians must be safe. The wounded
must receive medical care, humanitarian assistance
must reach those in need, and detainees must be treated
humanely in all circumstances. There must be no
politicization of humanitarian messages, nor selective
applications of international humanitarian law.
Also, geopolitical objectives must not supersede the
endeavour for peace, nor prolong the human suffering
caused by war.
The forecasts of most humanitarian organizations
were already catastrophic for 2022. This conflict, apart
from the enormous human suffering and devastation
caused in Ukraine, will have spillover effects on the
entire world, making it even more difficult to alleviate
the dire situation of civilians in conflict-torn countries.
The longer the conflict drags on, the higher the risk of
further instability, hunger and devastation in Ukraine
and elsewhere.
It is high time to return to the path of dialogue and
diplomacy for a peaceful settlement of the conflict. We
urgently need the cessation of hostilities. De-escalation
of tensions and negotiations are the only way out of this
18/23

29/03/2022

conflict, not only for the countries directly involved,
but also for the whole world.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya and Executive
Director Beasley for their briefings, which gave us a
worrisome account of the situation on the ground.
The conflict situation in Ukraine remains ongoing.
Effectively protecting civilian lives and meeting their
humanitarian needs is a must. China calls for respect
for international humanitarian law to avoid civilian
casualties to the maximum extent and to protect civilian
facilities, to provide safe passage for evacuation and
humanitarian access, and to ensure a continuous supply
of basic necessities, such as food, drinking water and
medicines. Protection of vulnerable groups, such as
women and children, must be strengthened.
We support such agencies as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
the World Food Programme (WFP) in upholding the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality as
they continue to mobilize and coordinate international
support in providing emergency humanitarian relief
to conflict-affected populations and help Ukraine
and its neighbouring countries meet the enormous
humanitarian needs. We must also be cognizant that
the other escalating, sweeping and indiscriminate
sanctions have hit global markets in energy and food,
and across the economic, trade and financial sectors,
and will continue to do so, affecting the life and
livelihoods of the general public and giving rise to new
humanitarian problems.
Developing countries, which make up the majority
of the world, are not parties to this conflict and should
not be drawn into the confrontation and forced to suffer
the consequences of geopolitical clashes and sparring
among major Powers. Right now, global food security
is being seriously challenged, which warrants due
attention. Sanctions and economic blockades, artificial
as they are, will only exacerbate food shortages and
price distortions, further disrupt food production and
the food-supply chain across the world, push food
prices up and put burdens on developing countries that
they do not deserve.
We call for enhancing international coordination
to stabilize the food supply and food prices, refraining
from unjustified export restrictions, keeping the market
working in a stable manner and ensuring global food
security. The United Nations, the WFP, the Food and
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
World Trade Organization and other agencies should
actively contribute to coordinating food production and
trade among countries and helping developing countries
survive the shocks.
If the crisis continues and escalates, further
damage is on the way, which is not in the interest of any
party. The most conclusive way to achieve a ceasefire
and end hostilities is through dialogue and negotiation.
The international community should encourage and
support continued direct negotiations between Russia
and Ukraine until a positive outcome is achieved and
peace is restored. Security is indivisible, and seeking
absolute security by pitting one bloc against another is
precisely the most assured way to achieve insecurity.
The United States, NATO and the European
Union should also engage in dialogue with Russia,
accommodate the legitimate security concerns of all
parties and build a balanced, effective and sustainable
regional security architecture through dialogue and
negotiations. China will continue to work towards, and
play a constructive role in, easing the situation and
resolving the crisis.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United Arab
Emirates.
I thank both the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Joyce Msuya, and the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP), Mr. David Beasley, for their valuable briefings.
Each meeting and briefing that we hold on the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Ukraine serves
to underscore the war’s devastating impact on the
lives of civilians and the failure of the international
community to alleviate their suffering. We are deeply
concerned about the increasing casualties, destruction
and damage to civilian infrastructure.
In particular, we deplore the rate of displacement,
which has seen nearly one quarter of Ukraine’s
population — more than 10 million internally displaced
persons and refugees, most of whom are women
and children — flee their homes in just one month
of fighting.
We reiterate the importance of the immediate
cessation of all hostilities throughout Ukraine. We also
welcome yesterday’s request from the Secretary-General
that Martin Griffiths work with the parties involved to

S/PV.9008

explore the possibility of a humanitarian ceasefire in
Ukraine, and we were pleased to hear today from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) that there was a positive response on both
sides. We strongly support aid agencies as they uphold
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence and coordinate with all parties to ensure
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian workers.
In the light of the dire situation, the United Arab
Emirates believes that it is important to focus on the
following key points in order to help those in need
most effectively.
First, we commend the role of humanitarian
organizations and OCHA in rapidly responding under
extreme pressure to the needs of civilians. Their efforts
during the conflict have made it possible to provide
aid to nearly 1 million people. We also commend the
push to develop an integrated system of aid operations
throughout the country. We support OCHA’s efforts to
create a humanitarian notification mechanism for the
safe delivery of aid. We would also like to see work
done building on the United Nations coordination with
Ukraine and the Russian Federation, which has led to
humanitarian convoys delivering aid to Sumy and, most
recently, to Kharkiv.
Secondly, the United Arab Emirates reiterates the
importance of all parties complying with international
humanitarian law, especially to protect civilians, limit
military operations to exclusively military objectives
and take every precautionary measure. We stress the
need to keep lines of communication open among all
parties in order to coordinate the safe delivery of aid
in a practical and effective manner, as well as to follow
through on proposals for the dignified treatment of
the dead so that they can be identified, their families
informed and their bodies returned on all sides.
We further emphasize the importance of securing
temporary ceasefire agreements in specific areas in
order to allow civilians to evacuate to safety, securely
deliver aid to civilians in need and ensure the protection
of humanitarian workers.
Thirdly, we call for intensifying diplomatic contacts
between the two parties to find a peaceful solution, and
we fully support all mediation efforts in that regard.
We took note of the positive reports from the talks
conducted in Istanbul today, as well as other ongoing
mediation efforts. It is our sincere hope that they will
lead to a diplomatic solution.

22-3031419/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

In that context, we also stress the important role of
women in conflict resolution and peace negotiations,
including to ensure their sustainability and durability.
We should all be alarmed by the WFP Executive
Director’s briefing today. As he noted, Ukraine and
Russia together are a critical breadbasket for the world.
The increasing food insecurity is wreaking havoc on
pandemic recovery, particularly for developing, least
developed and small island developing States. In
the Middle East and Africa, the conflict jeopardizes
significant sources of wheat, including for many
countries on the Security Council’s agenda. That could
lead to further unrest and instability around the world.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its commitments to the humanitarian response, to which
we have contributed both bilaterally and through the
United Nations flash humanitarian appeal for Ukraine.
We also reiterate the importance of constructive
Security Council engagement in alleviating the
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and, more broadly, in
helping to encourage an urgent diplomatic resolution of
the conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Sherman (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, very much for giving me this
opportunity today. It is much appreciated.
I feel that I must make four critical points.
First, I want to be clear that the conflict that is
being suffered by the Ukrainian people is not about
the Russian Federation versus the West. Just last week,
the representatives of 140 countries spoke in support of
ending the conflict and the need to end the humanitarian
crisis; 141 countries supported the initial resolution in
the General Assembly (resolution A/ES-11/1) to say that
the invasion by Russia should stop. I would say to the
Russian representative, with all due respect, that this is
not about Russia versus the West. This is about support
for the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the right of all
countries — all countries — to choose their political
orientation and foreign policy.
Secondly, I myself was engaged directly with
Russian counterparts to find a peaceful way forward
20/23

29/03/2022

to meet the concerns of the Russian Federation. I sat
opposite Russian counterparts and put on the table many
options to address the concerns. We provided, as did
NATO, a paper of very specific ways in which we could
reciprocally and mutually address security concerns.
President Putin chose an invasion, not diplomacy.
Thirdly, in response to the representative of Russia,
as a Jewish American, I cannot help but say, with all
due respect, that this is not about Nazis in Ukraine.
Last week, former United States Secretary of State and
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, and
one of my most cherished personal friends, Madeleine
Albright died. She loved representing the United States
here. She would have been outraged by the words of the
Russian Federation today.
Later in her life, she learned that her parents raised
her as Catholic to protect her from the Nazis because
her family was Jewish. She learned that three of her
grandparents died at the hands of the Nazis while in
concentration camps. She knew that the Jewish President
of Ukraine was certainly not a Nazi and that the citizens
of Ukraine being slaughtered, starving, without food or
medicine, and the subject of this humanitarian dialogue
today are not, and never were, Nazis.
Finally, this dialogue today is about the humanitarian
needs of Ukrainian civilians and the humanitarian needs
of people around the world who, as David Beasley said
so eloquently, are going from feeding hungry children
to feeding starving children. It is about, as he said,
going from a breadbasket to a breadline. We must all
do whatever we can, of course, to stop war. But there is
an easy choice here. And it is a choice that can be made
today in Istanbul by President Putin — and that is to
stop the war. Let us all then — more than 140 countries
around the world — continue to stand with Ukraine.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to respond to the statement by
Ms. Sherman. I will not comment on the part about her
participation in the negotiations. Of course, she is much
more informed about that than I or my colleagues are.
However, because the negotiations did not succeed,
perhaps she fell short in some way in that area, and
perhaps she should have worked better and should have
made more serious proposals, but now we are where
we are.
22-30314

29/03/2022

Ukraine

S/PV.9008

I would like to comment on her remarks with regard
to Nazism in Ukraine. It has already become a common
excuse for people to say that the Ukrainian President is
Jewish, so he cannot be a Nazi. I will not try to convince
Security Council members of the opposite, rather I will
just cite some facts.

more than 1,700 armoured vehicles, almost 600 tanks,
more than 300 artillery systems, 127 aeroplanes and
129 helicopters, almost 100 rocket launch systems,
54 air defence systems and seven ships. That is an
unprecedented blow to Moscow. The numbers of Soviet
losses in Afghanistan pale in comparison.

What do Council members think? Council members
know who Stepan Bandera and Roman Shukhevych
were. They know how many things those people
did that were harmful and bad for humankind. They
collaborated with Nazis and took part in the killings
of Poles, Jews, Russians and Ukrainians. If Council
members have any doubts, they should ask the Polish
people — not Polish politicians — but ordinary people.
I worked in Poland for three years, and I am well aware
of how Poles view Bandera there. And yet Bandera and
Shukhevych are national heroes of Ukraine, and their
national battalions have Nazi symbols in their insignias.

However, after listening to Russia’s Ambassador,
I regret to say that the process of “deputinization” is
lagging behind so far.

NATO recently had to remove a picture of an
Ukrainian female soldier from its official webpage
because there was a Nazi symbol on her uniform. Of
course, such symbols do not mean anything, and it does
not mean anything if its military tortures prisoners
of war and brands Nazi symbols on their bodies.
Apparently, Council members do not consider that to
be Nazism. If the President of a country considers the
national hero of the country to be someone who fought
alongside Hitler, killing Jews, Poles, Russians and
Ukrainians, apparently that does not mean anything
either in the view of Council members. However, we
see things differently, and so do the majority of the
people in Russia and Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the members
of the Security Council, Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya and Executive Director Beasley.
I also recognize the representative of the aggressor
State present in the Chamber in the permanent seat of
the Soviet Union, who is not in fact authorized to speak
on behalf of the Ukrainian people, as he just did.
At the outset, I would like to inform the Security
Council that the demilitarization of Russia, conducted
by the Ukrainian army and supported by the entire
Ukrainian people, is well under way.
Since the beginning of the invasion, the Russian
occupiers have lost more than 17,000 military personnel,

Today’s negotiations in Istanbul have demonstrated
that Russia may be ready to take steps forward,
although it is still a long way to a sustainable ceasefire
and comprehensive de-escalation.
The parties will continue consultations to prepare
and agree on the provisions of a treaty on security
guarantees for Ukraine, a ceasefire implementation
mechanism, the withdrawal of forces and other armed
formations and the opening and safe functioning of
humanitarian corridors on a permanent basis, as well
as on the exchange of fallen soldiers and the release of
prisoners of war and civilians.
The signing of the treaty on security guarantees for
Ukraine will be possible only after the withdrawal of all
Russian armed units to locations as of 23 February 2022.
The negotiation process, which is under way, by
no means removes the need to provide to Ukraine
additional assistance with weapons and to implement
the new sanctions imposed on the Russian Federation
for the act of aggression committed.
Last week, the overwhelming majority of the United
Nations membership expressed once again its resolute
stance against Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified
invasion of Ukraine. The strong humanitarian statements
addressed to Russia left no room for misinterpretation.
The attempts by the aggressor to shift responsibility to
the victim left no room for misinterpretation either.
We demand that Russia immediately and
unconditionally implement all provisions of General
Assembly resolution ES-11/2, entitled “Humanitarian
consequences of the aggression against Ukraine”,
in order to alleviate the humanitarian suffering on
the ground.
I regret to say that, as of now, Russia demonstrates
no willingness to give up its strategy of deliberate
aggravation of the humanitarian situation on the ground.

22-3031421/23

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

There is a clear nexus between concrete security,
the humanitarian situation and food security with
regard to the Russian war against Ukraine. After
the failure of its initial plan for a blitzkrieg, Russian
troops have proceeded to plan B. That plan envisages
provoking humanitarian disaster throughout Ukraine
and destroying the agricultural potential of my country
in order to intimidate the Ukrainian political leadership
and people and incline them to surrender.
The toolbox is broad and extremely cruel. It includes
the deliberate destruction of residential areas and
critical infrastructure; missile shelling throughout the
country; the siege of cities; the violation of arrangements
for humanitarian corridors; and acts of terror against
civilians in the occupied areas, including abductions
and killings. As of now, the invaders have abducted
about 30 local leaders, activists and journalists.
It is hard to imagine that Russia has fired 467
missiles at solely residential areas, with the overall
number of missiles fired being more than 1,200.
That includes ballistic missiles, cruise missiles and
supersonic missiles. That number has already made the
Russian actions the heaviest missile shelling ever in
such a short period of time.
Mariupol remains a bleeding wound in the heart of
Europe. According to local authorities, at least 5,000
people have been killed. Almost 150,000 residents
remain under siege, deprived of all basic conditions
to live.
They need to be evacuated, but not to the territory
of the aggressor. Russian attempts to do so are not only
cynical hypocrisy but also a gross violation of the laws
and customs of war and the norms of international
humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and Protocol Additional I thereto. As of now,
about 40,000 Ukrainians have been forcibly deported
to Russia and Belarus.
At the same time, Russian armed forces are
resorting to firing at evacuation convoys trying to
leave Mariupol for the non-occupied territory of
Ukraine. According to UNICEF, a month of war in
Ukraine has led to the displacement of 4.3 million
children — more than half of the country’s estimated
7.5 million children — including more than 1.8 million
children who left the country as refugees. At least 143
children have been killed by Russian invaders, with
216 injured.
22/23

29/03/2022

Humanitarian action is urgently needed. At
the same time, we should bear in mind that the
humanitarian disaster in Ukraine is an element of the
Russian war strategy. To be efficient, any initiative
should focus on changing the overall Russian approach
towards Ukraine, instead of on idle attempts to engage
the aggressor as a partner on the humanitarian track.
I also reiterate my call to join the Group of Friends
of Accountability following the Aggression against
Ukraine, which was launched on Friday and already
includes almost 50 Member States.
The third element of the nexus — food security — is
also under threat at the global level. We are aware that
the entire world is deeply concerned about the disruption
of food supplies from Ukraine, as one of the major food
exporters. Before the war, more than 55 per cent of all
sunflower oil in the world was exported from Ukraine.
More than 55 per cent of Ukrainian wheat was exported
to Asia and 40 per cent to African States. About
400 million people throughout the world, mostly in the
Middle East, North Africa and Asia, depend upon grain
supplies from Ukraine.
What we in Ukraine are also alarmed about is
that 40 million Ukrainians may face food shortages as
soon as this year. That has prompted the Government
of Ukraine to work intensively on both tracks in order
to secure the country’s export potential to the largest
extent possible and to ensure that Ukrainians, who bear
the primary burden of Russia’s aggression, will not
suffer from hunger.
International solidarity with Ukraine and
understanding that the only root cause of the current
food crisis is Russia’s war against Ukraine will be
crucial to succeed in averting the worst-case scenario at
the global level. It is therefore extremely important not
to spam our discussion with references to issues that
are not root causes, but rather focus on the implications
of Russia’s ongoing violations. It must be clear that
vulnerable countries will remain at risk as long as
Russia continues its war in Ukraine, which includes
shelling the agricultural infrastructure, contaminating
Ukrainian soil and deliberately targeting fuel
storage facilities, thereby disrupting the sowing and
harvesting season.
For instance, this weekend Russian missiles hit fuel
storage sites in Lviv, Dubno, Lutsk and Rivne, all in the
west of the country, far away from the front line. Just
today, Russian troops shelled and launched missiles
22-30314

29/03/2022

S/PV.9008

Ukraine

at a farm enterprise in Dnipro, also far away from
the combat area, destroying vehicles and equipment.
Perhaps the representative of the aggressor State could
explain the reason for that attack — “demilitarization”
or “de-Nazification”?
All Ukrainian seaports remain blocked by
Russia, thereby further aggravating the situation with
supply shortages. Some of them have been occupied.
De-occupation and lifting the blockade could quickly
improve the situation, as Ukraine exports 60 per cent of
its agricultural products through its seaports.
Under these extraordinary circumstances, the
Government of Ukraine is taking comprehensive
measures to respond to food security challenges. The
sowing season is due to start on 70 per cent of our
agricultural land. The Government has also launched an
interest-free loan programme for farmers to strengthen
their capabilities against the backdrop of the war. Steps
to reorient the supply chains by switching to safe routes
are being taken as well.
We are ready to discuss food security issues in
detail with all interested actors. At the same time, we
are unable to proceed to details in the presence of the
representative of Russia, as food security — or, rather,
food insecurity — remains one of the main elements of
Russia’s military planning and its actions on the ground.
The Russian occupants act under the motto “the
worse it is, the better”. And it is highly likely that,
as soon as Moscow receives the report of the Russian
Ambassador, the list of Russian targets will be amended
with new items. We do not want all of Ukraine’s
black soil to be sown with mines or all agricultural
infrastructure destroyed.
Putin is not the first dictator to weaponize food
against the Ukrainian nation. Moscow’s ideological
apostle, Stalin, killed millions of Ukrainians 90 years
ago in the orchestrated Great Famine. It is therefore

not surprising that Putin, who venerates Stalin as a
forefather, resorts to the same practice.
Let me quote a written message recently conveyed
from besieged Mariupol by one of its residents to
his relative.
“Dima, mummy was killed on 9 March 2022. She
died very quickly. Then the house was burned
down. Dima, forgive me that I did not protect her. I
buried her near the kindergarten”.
That written message, with its makeshift map, is a
symbol of several lives ruined by Russia — several out
of thousands in the city of Mariupol alone, but millions
throughout Ukraine. That is the price for the war the
world failed to prevent. That is the price for the sick
mind of the Russian dictator and most of his people.
Civilized nations have tolerated it for so long in a naïve
hope that the Kremlin would at last stop.
It the meantime, Russian society remains in denial.
However, as happened after the defeat of Nazism, when
its supporters were taken to Holocaust sites to break
their denial and open their eyes wide, the time will
come when the supporters of Putinism will be taken
Ukrainian cities and villages burned to the ground and
to the mass graves of thousands of Ukrainians killed by
the Russian invaders.
I will conclude by quoting from today’s video
address by my President:
“The signals we hear from the negotiations can be
called positive. But those signals do not drown out
the ruptures of Russian shells. Ukrainians have
already learned, during these 34 days of invasion
and over the past eight years of the war in Donbas,
that only a concrete result can be trusted”.
The lies poured out here like slop by Putin’s
representative is a vivid confirmation of that.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

22-3031423/23
