PLENARY
MEETING
5
Wednesday,

7 November

1956

at 3 p.m.

Ojljiciul Records
FIRST

EMERGENCY

CONTENTS

SPECIAL

Mr. Rudecindo ORTEGA

AGENDA

ITEM

Neta

York

plea that the armed conflict between Egypt and Israel
presents a danger to the Suez Canal no longer holds
good.
5. My delegation appreciates greatly the promptness
with which the Secretary-General has acted in the
matter of setting up a United Nations Command for
the proposed international police force, and fully associates itself with the tributes that have been paid to his
ability, judgment and impartiality earlier in the course
of the debate, My delegation is also in general agreement with the seven-Power draft resolution [A/3308],
introduced by the representative of Denmark. It hopes
that the steps envisaged in respect of the creation of an
emergency international force in that draft resolution
will go a long way towards producing the desired results in the settlement of the crisis in the Middle East.
6.
GALDO $BoliviaJ
.Y.uw.IsII---,
-.._l.n./mn..-l (translabed
frcTi
announcement of the cease-fire
in Egypi issuid by the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom is a source of satisfaction to us, because it represents some progress in our efforts to
restore peace. There can be no doubt that this is the
first positive result of the firm and dispassionateattitude adopted by the United Nations with regard to the
deplorable events that are convulsing the world.
7. It is encouraging to note that the moral forces
which enhance human dignity still lead to generally
accepted, almost unanimous, decisions in this international Organization, decisions which, endorsed by world
public opinion, may turn back aggression.
8. The Bolivian delegation, faithful to the principles
by which its Government’s international and domestic
policy is always guided, feels in duty bound to declare
that it regards the cease-fire as a preliminary measure
to the immediate withdrawal of the foreign forces
which are on Egyptian territory, a withdrawal which
should begin not within days, still less weeks, but
within hours, or, to be precise, within the number of
hours which the invading troops needed to be flown
from Cyprus to Egypt and to open their parachutes
over the soil of Suez.
9. My delegation urgently calls upon the representatives to maintain their forceful and vigilant attitude, in
o,rder that our Organization may prevent the ceasefire from becoming the beginning of an occupation
which, paradoxically, would be sanctioned by the
United Nations.
10. The course which we should follow in order to
achieve our objective has been clearly marked out by
the various resolutions which we have approved by an
overwhelming majo8rity and which could b,e summarized
thus: cease-fire, withdrawal of the invading troops to
the lines established by the 1949 Armistice Agreement,
and thoroughly constructive and realistic negotiatio8ns
to bring about a just and stable peace. It should be
emphasized that tho.se three measures must be put
into effect successively and with dispatch, in order to

Page

Agenda itan 5:
Question considered by the Security Council at its
749th and 750th meetings held on 30 October 1956
(co~ztintrcd)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*. 105
President:

SESSION

(Chile).

5

Question considered by the Security Council at its
749th and 750th meetings held on 30 October
1956 (continued)
1. Mr. SHA~A~l”(~~~~~~al)~:In explaining my delegat
the 563rd meeting in favour of General
Assembly resolution 999 (ES-I), I stated that I had
apprehended and deplored the attempt and the tendency
on the part of the Powers concerned to present the
United Nations with a fait accon@li by the active use
of force in order to gain their objectives of power
politics and diplomacy. I am afraid my apprehensions
have been amply borne out by the events of the last
few days. The Po#werschiefly responsible for the conflict in the Middle East, having secured their foothold
on the soil of Egypt, do not seem inclined to retrace
their steps, despite the recommendation of the Assembly
that Israel, the United Kingdom and France should
immediately withdraw their troops from Egyptian territory. That is the reason why my delegation has
deemed it fit to sponsor, along with eighteen other
nations, the draft resolution under discussion [A/3309].
2. We have learned with a senseof relief that Israel
has ordered a cease-fire. But the fact remains that it
has not yet withdrawn its forces behind the armistice
lines.
3. It is truly unfortunate that two of the permanent
members o.f the Security Council, The United Kingdom
and France, have doubly proved themselves defaulters
- first, by acting in violation of the United Nations
Charter, and secondly, by refusing to implement the
recommendations of the Assembly. Therefore, my
delegation, in supporting the draft resolution which is
already on the table, demands the immediate withdrawal of the Israel forces b.ehind the armistice lines
and appeals to ,the United Kingdom and France which, as permanent members of the Council, have a
great share of the responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security - to withdraw their
troops from the soil of Egypt immediately.
4. Now that Israel has ordered a cease-fire and the
emergency international United Nations Force is in
the process of being organized pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 998 (ES-I) of 4 November, there
is nothing to prevent the United Kingdom and France
from withdrawing their troops from Egypt. Their
105

A/PV.567

106

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

Nations tacit recognition of the validity of one of the
avoid any hiatus which might be used by certain colomain reasons for the aggression: the intention to renialist interests to disrupt the peace-making efforts.
turn the Canal to the defunct Universal Suez Maritime
11. There is no doubt that those measures will be
effective only if they are carried out in quick succes- Canal Company by the use of force.
22. My delegation considers that it is for Egypt, and
sion. All three are interdependent
and onIy through
not for other nations, to put the Suez Canal back into
their indivisibility
can they have a decisive effect. Any
operation and to reopen it to international trade, with
one of those measures, if taken in isolation, not only
the co-operation of the United Nations Command, and,
would be useless but might even defeat its own purif necessary, with the assistance of certain Members
pose.
of the United Nations which have ample technical and
12. It is also necessary to emphasize tb.at the order in
financial resources, but which are not parties involved
which they are Dut into effect cannot be changed. The
in the conflict.
cease-fire ‘is intended to establish the mater&l condi23. Bolivia also hopes that in the future, in the very
tions essential to a solution of the problem. The withnear future, with all due respect to the economic and
drawal of the invading forces must immediately follow
political sovereignty of Egypt, the United Nations will
the cessation of armed conflict, for it would be imassume the role of guaranteeing freedom of transit
possible to negotiate the stable and lasting peace sought
through that important waterway so that it may no
by the United Nations under the threat of the armies
longer be an element of discord and may instead beof occupation.
come a factor contributing to harmony and co-operation
13. The General Assembly is not obliged to bring
among
all the nations of the world.
about an, armistice, and it would be absurd to attribute
24. .JJ&J~Q&&,(&.~&:
Six days have elapsed since
that character to the cessation of hostilities, because
we are not confronted either technically or morally
the first emergency special session of the General Assembly adopted its first resolution [997 (ES-I)]
recogwith an international war, but with an aggression committed by three Members of the United Nations against
nizing the existence of acts of war on the part of the
another State also a Member of the United Nations,
United Kingdom, France and Israel against Egypt six days which have moved world public opinion and
in flagrant violation of the spirit and the letter of the
centred its attention on this assembly of nations. They
Charter.
have been days of great anxiety and sorrow.
14. Accordingly, if the territory invaded is not im25. It was possible to follow the debates in parliaments
mediately evacuated and if such a situation is accepted
by the United Nations, this would mean, I repeat, the
and to note how deeply the conscience of enlightened
public opinion was perturbed by the risk of a general
tacit countenancing of those violations of the Charter.
I do not think this will happen in any circumstances.
war. The meetings of the United Kingdom House of
Commons revealed beyond any doubt that a large
15. I stress again that the course to be followed has
sector of the British people does not support a policy
been clearly marked out by the resolutions previously
of war and aggressio’n. This ‘(large sector”, is underadopted by the Assembly.
stood
to represent: the majority of the people.
16. Confident that this course will be followed, the
Bolivian delegation will vote in favour of the draft
26. The progressive Press all over the world conresolution in document A/3308 concerning the estabdemned the aggressive acts of the three States and
lishment of the proposed emergency international Force
their use of force as an instrument for the settlement
and in favour of the draft resolution of the nineteen
of differences between nations. A large number of
African and Asian Powers, in document A/3309.
leaders and statesmen from Europe, Asia, Africa and
Latin America raised their voices in condemnation of
17. Witb reference to the former, my delegation dethe policy of force in settling international differences.
clares emphatically that it will give its support on the
understanding that paragraph 2 of the operative part
27. There is no doubt that this crisis, which has been
refers to all the belligerents withouf: exception.
fabricated by two of the permanent members of the
18. The immediate presence of United Nations forces
Security Council - two of the most advanced countries
in Egypt is important
for world peace and security.
of the world, two of the Powers that had fought in
The normal operation of the Suez Canal, as it was
the Second World War to defeat the policy of force operating until the day of the aggression, is of imshows how irresponsible these two Powers felt toward
portance to world trade and economy.
the future of the United Natio’ns and toward the future
of humanity.
19. Egypt, which truly showed its ability to ensure
normal transit through that waterway, has sufficient
28. Their motives have become clear and evident: to
material and human resources to resume its adminisachieve their egotistic goals, irrespective of the grave
tration,
consequences which those goals might entail and in
20. In my opinion, one of the first duties to be disspite of international pleas and requests,
charged by the Command o,f the emergency interna29. The General Assembly has been informed daily
tional Force is the urgent and inescapable duty of proby the Secretary-General of tbe reaction of the three
viding Egypt, and not other nations, with all the moral
Powers to resolution 997 (ES-I) of 2 November and
and material safeguards which .may be required to
to other resolutions. It has also been informed by the
ensure the normal operation of the Canal,
representatives of these States in declarations and
21. In this connexion, the Bolivian delegation constatements made here. When all this information
is
siders that documents A/3306 and A/3307, which conproperly examined, it will be clearly shown that these
tain communications
addressed to the Secretary-GenPowers were, on the one hand, employing the tactics
eral by the Perrnapent Representatives of the United
of delay, and were, on the other, trying to delude public
Kingdom and France, represent a joint manoeuvre deopinion as to their real intentions. It was essential for
signed to present the United Nations with a frti.$ them to play for time so as to be able to achieve their
acco@Zi, the purpose being to obtain from the United s, objectives, and their twisted declarations of intentions

567th

meeting-7

were used as a means of confusing opinion within and
outside the United Nations.
30. I shall illustrate this from the documents which
have been circulated and the statements which have
been made in the Assembly. The attack by Israel upon
Egypt, and its violation of the decisions of the United
Nations, were proclaimed to have been undertaken for
the purpose of destroying the bases from which the
feduyeen were supposed to operate. If this were. thei
intention, then some questio’ns ought to be asked. How
many bases were there to justify the invasion of the
whole Sinai peninsula? Is it justifiable for any State
to go to war or to involve itself and others in the
grave danger of committing a breach of the peace in
order to sLzppress a few dozen people?
31. Even if it is to be assumed that the fedayeelz
were dangerous, was it not the duty of Israel as a
Member of the United Nations and a State which owes
its very existence to this Organization, to bring the
question to the attentioti of the United Nations? It is
unnecessary to say that this pretence does not stand up
to any examination.
It is merely the manifestation of
an aggressive policy which has been basic in the
behaviour of Israel since its establishment.
32. fro sooner did Israel attack Egypt than the United
Kingdom and France began to move, as if by appointment. Their place of rendezvous was the Suez Canal.
They proclaimed
that the Canal was in danger and
that the combatants must be separated and kept apart
at a distance from the Canal. However, they vetoed
any action by the United Nations, issued ultimatums
to Egypt and imposed their solution by attacking Egypt,
thus giving Israel a free hand to occupy Gaza and
the Sinai Peninsula. They called their armed interhowever, it
vention “a police action”. Unfortunately,
was directed against the victim of the aggression, not
against the aggressor.
33. The United Kingdom and France informed the
Secretary-General
[A/3269, 32681, in reply to resolution 997 (ES-I),
that they continued to maintain
their view that the police action must be carried
through urgently to stop the hostilities. But the words
“police action” could not deceive the world any longer:
in the second part of their reply they stated their
willingness to stop military action as soon as the following conditions were satisfied: (1) That both the
Egyptian and Israel Governments would agree to accept a United Nations force to keep the peace, (2), That
the United
Nations would decide to constitute and
maintain such a force until an Arab-Israel peace settlement was reached and until satisfactory arrangements
had been agreed in regard to the Suez Canal, both
agreements to be guaranteed by the United Nations,
and (3) That, in the meantime, until the United Nations
force was constituted, both combatants would agree
to accept forthwith limited detachments of FrancoBritish troops to be stationed between the combatants.
34. There is no need to comment upon these three
conditions,
They speak for themselves. They mean
simply that the United Kingdom and France rejected
the resolution of 2 November and were subjugating
Egypt to foreign occupation in violation of the principles of the Charter and of international law.
35. While these communications were going back and
forth, the France-British
armed forces were attacking
the people of Egypt from the air with a view to
achieving their objective, namely the occupation of
Egyptian territory. When their forces were able to

November

1956

107

land, the United Kingdom representative informed the
Assembly [A/3299] that ‘corders have been given that
all bombing should cease”. But this was only to mislead the Assembly and public opinion, as the remaining part of the reply stated: “Any other form of air
action as opposed to bombing will be confined to the
support o#f any necessary operation in the Canal area.”
36. Is there any need to interpret the explicit intention o#f the British and French forces to occupy the
Canal Zone? Does it need much imagination? Despite
these official statements, the bombing of towns and
civilians has continued up to the present. Again and
again news came to confirm the fact that the attacks
of the British and French forces were mainly directed
at the occupation of key points in the Suez Canal and
at exposing the Canal itself to the danger of destruction,
and thus refuted in a practical way their anxiety to
protect the Canal.
37. The policy of delay and the tactics used to achieve
it have not ceased. The representatives of the United
Kingdom and France have informed the SecretaryGeneral [A/3306, 33077 that their Governments still
require clarification of certain points. What are the
points 7 First, whether the Secretary-General could
confirm that the Egyptian and Israel Governments have
accepted an unconditional
cease-fire, and second,
whether the international force to be set up would be
co’mpetcnt to secure and supervise the attainment of
the objectives set out in the operative part of resolution
997 (ES-I). Yes, if the United Kingdom and France
receive a reply to their satisfaction - and that is
doubtful - then they will agree to stop further military operations.
38. Such an attitude shows, first, an absence of good
will, and secondly, a mistrust of the capacity of the
United Nations to set up the necessary military force
to handle the situation. There are enough experienced
people in the countries Members of this Organization
who know about military affairs. There are enough
States willing to contribute to the setting up of a
United Nations military force, and there are, moreover,
the positive replies af Egypt to the effect that it will
abide by the decisions reached freely at an international
level.
39. But the aggressor did not lose sight of its main
objective. The reply of the United Kingdom Government contains another condition: it pointed out that
the clearing of the obstructions in the Suez Canal and
its approaches was a matter of great urgency and that
the France-British
forces were equipped to tackle this
task and should begin the work at once.
40. Here again we are faced with the same aggressive
objective. Surely the Egyptian Government is in a
position to clear the obstructions, if there are any.
What is more obstructive to the operation of the
Suez Canal than the military operations which have
been undertaken by the United Kingdom and France?
These replies were obviously intended to gain time and
to achieve the objectives o’f the “police action”, that is,
the occupation of the Suez Canal, despite the decisions
of the Security Council,
41. The same game of the United Kingdom and
French Governments
has also been played by the
IsraeIis, who have listened carefully to the voice of
their masters. While Israel was at one stage making
the acceptance of the cease-fire conditional, its representative declared in the Assembly that the General

108

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Armistice Agreements had become a fiction and had no
validity.
42. This reply implied a clear-cut refusal to comply
with paragraph 2 of resolution 997 (ES-I),
which
states :
“The General Asset&y
“2. Urges the parties to the armistice agreements
promptly to withdraw all forces behind the armistice
lines, to desist: from raids across the armistice lines
into neighboring territory, and to observe scrupulously the provisions of the armistice agreements.”
43. It may be useful to add that, from the infommtion
received today, the Prime Minister of Israel said that
his Government will not agree to the stationing of
foreign troops on its territory or the territory occupied by it. This confirms Israel’s attitude of defiance,
_ 44. I do not want to tire the Assembly with examples
from documents which have been circulated to the Assembly or from statements delivered here. There is
plenty of evidence to show that the three States in
question have tried to defy the Assembly, to delay the
undertaking of effective action by it and to sidetrack
the main issue for which the Assembly has been called
upon to meet ia emergency session. It is hardly necessary to point out that our main objective has been to
stop the unprovoked imperialistic
war before other
states become involved in it. All the Arab States in the
Middle East also risk becoming the victims of an aggression similar to that committed against Egypt.
45. It is high time for effective action to be taken in
order to end the actual state of war and to give a
lesson to the aggressors to respect the frontiers of
their neighbours and their territorial integrity. Only in
this way will the Charter and the United Nations have
proved their value to the international
community.
The delegation of Iraq highly appreciates the element
of urgency involved in the setting up of the emergency
international
force and in the immediate withdrawal
of foreign armed forces from the territory of Egypt,
as expressed by the representative of the United States.
46. The plan submitted by the Secretary-General regarding the formation and functioning of an emergency
international force [A/3302]
is conceived in the light
of past experience and is based on sound principles. It
shouId, however, be considered in the light of the
urgency of the problem and the international situation
created, first, by the nature of the conflict, and secondly,
by the previous decisions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council ; and it should, above all, be
considered as an effective means for the implementation
of the resolutions of this first emergency special session
of the General Assembly.
47. It is to be particularly
emphasized that, in the
formation of the international
force, efforts should be
expended to lay the foundations of a mechanism which
will be in a position to enfo’rce, on the one hand, the
immediate withdrawal of the armed forces of Israel to
the armistice line, both in Egyptian territory proper and
in the Gaza section of Palestine and, on the other hand,
the withdrawal of the France-British
forces from
Egyptian territory.
48. In vie’w of the fact that the delegation of Iraq
is anxious to see the conflict brought to a quick end with
the establishment of peace and justice, it will support:
the action of the General Assembly which will ensure
these objectives.

Special

Session--Plenary

Meetings

49. Mr. MICHALOWSKI
(Poland) : The Polish
delegation supports the draft resolution submitted by
the representative of Ceylon on behalf of nineteen
countries [A/3309].
In its opinion, this draft resolution contains the provisions necessary to safeguard the
appropriate
execution of the previous resolutions
adopted by the Assembly.
50. As to the draft resolution submitted on behalf of
the seven countries by the representative of Denmark
at the 566th meeting [A/3308],
I would like to move
a slight amendment the adoption of which would enable
my delegation to vote for this draft. On closer examination of paragraph 6 of the operative part, it is our
opinion that the countries nominated as members of
the advisory committee represent all of the important
regions of the world except one, namely, Eastern
Europe.
51. In our opinion, the action proposed by the draft
resolution, namely, the establishment, for the first time,
of an emergency international
fo’rce of the United
Nations, constitutes a very important step. This action
should be very carefully planned and observed. The
advisory committee will have a heavy responsibility, In
the circumstances, my delegation feels that the membership of the committee should be justly distributed
in accordance with the spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations. No political prejudices should influence the establishment of the committee. It must be a
balanced one in its com&tion.
52. For this reason my-delegation propos.es an amendment to paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, namely,
the inclusion of Czechoslovakia in the list of members
of the advisory committee. I might mention that
Czechoslovakia is one of the countries which offered
a contribution to the emergency international force, as
have most of the countries on the list.
53. I have one more remark to make, which is somewhat legal in character. There is some doubt in my mind
with regard to paragraph 9 of this draft resolution,
which gives the advisory committee the power to request
the convening of the General Assembly. First of all,
I am at a loss to know what kind of session of the
General Assembly is meant - a regular session, a
special session, or an emergency special session? Setondly, I have some doubts concerning not the substance of the matter, but the procedure, namely, whether
such a paragr3ph is in conformity with Article 20 of
the Charter and, consequently, with rules 8 and 9 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. Perhaps those doubts could be clarified by the Secretariat
or by the sponsors of the draft resolution.
54. Mr. BRILEJ
(Yugoslavia) : At the second meeting of this emergency special session [562nd meet&g],
on that memorable night of l-2 November, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 997 (ES-I), in which it
called upon all parties to agree to an immediate ceasefire and, as part thereof, to halt the movement of military forces and arms into the area. In the same resolution the Assembly urged Israel promptly to withdraw
its forces behind the armistice lines.
55. Four days have elapsed since the adoption of that
resolution -four
days in which the attack against
Egypt has increased in scope and momentum and in
which the bombing o,f Egyptian cities has been relentlessly pursued and the threat o’f a major conflagration
increased by the hour, As a result of these four clays
of aggression against Egypt, both the Israel and the
France-British
ground forces have occupied parts of

i
i

1~

~

i
1~

567th

meeting-7

Egyptian territory. Now, four days later, the United
Kingdom, France and Israel have agreed, although belatedly to a cease-fire. This in itself is an important
achievement. It is a victory for world p&lie opinion
and evidence of the moral weight carried by United
Nations recommendations.
56. This, however, is not enough. It is not enough to
achieve a ceas.e-fire although, of course, a cease-fire is
an essential first step. The cease-fire must be followed
speedily by the withdrawal of the invading forces from
all Egyptian territory. Otherwise, a cease-fire on the
lines resulting from the present state of military operations would be little more than a consecration of the
aggression. In other words, resolution 997 (ES-I) of
2 November and the subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly must be implemented in their entirety.
57. Neither Israel nor France nor the United Kingdom has so far indicated a readiness to follow up the
cease-fire with a prompt withdrawal of its armed
forces from Egyptian territory. The Government of
Israel, on the contrary, has made it abundantly clear
that it has no intention of relinquishing the part of
Egyptian territory which its armed forces now hold.
As to France and the United Kingdom, according to the
communications
addressed yesterday to the SecretaryGeneral [A/3307,3306],
they have confined themselves
to a cease-fire-and,
I would say, a qualified cease-fire
at that. They make no mention of the withdrawal of
,their forces from Egyptian territory.
58. To ,ensure the speedy withdrawal of British,
French and Israel forces from Egyptian territory is
the immediate task now confronting the General Assembly. The draft resolution submitted by the Arab and
Asian countries [A/3309]
addresses itself to this immediate task in what my delegation considers to be a
clear and unequivocal manner. This draft resolution
will have the full support o’f my delegation.
59. I should like now to address myself briefly to the
other draft resolution which is before the Assembly
[A/3308].
This draft appears to be a natural sequel
to the two previous resolutioas dealing with the question of the establishment of an emergency international
force [PPS (ES-I) and IOU0 (ES-I)],
in accordance
with the terms of resolution 997 (ES-I). My delegation voted in favour of the two previous resolutions
because it considered that the measures envisaged therein would be helpful in ensuring implementation
of resolution 997 (ES-I), which provides for a cease-fire and
the withdrawal of the invading forces, but, of course,
nothing beyond that. My delegation will, therefore, also
vote in favour of this draft resolution.
60. It is our hope that both of the draft resolutions
before us will be adopted promptly by the Assembly
and that they will lead to a prompt withdrawal of
foreign forces from Egyptian territory and the restoration of peace in that area.
61. With regard to the amendment submitted a few
moments ago by the delegation of Poland to the draft
resolution in document A/3308 - namely, the inclusion of Czechoslovakia in the proposed advisory committee -its
adoption would, in my opinion, give the
committee a mo,re broadly representative character. My
delegation, therefore, will vote in favour of that amendment.
62. Before concluding, I should like to associate my
delegation with these other delegations which have
paid a well-deserved tribute to our Secretary-General
for the devotion and skill which he has shown once

November

1956

again in discharging
United Nations.

109

his new task on behalf of the

ment 01 the cease-fire would be confirmed by a ceasefire in fact. Unfortunately,
from what the representative of Egypt told us at the 566th meeting and from the
telegram of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Egypt
circulated in document A/3312 a few moments ago,
it appears that aggression is continuing in Egypt
despite the urgent appeals of the United Nations. The
blood of Egyptians-men,
women and children-is
still flowing. The time has come to take decisive action.
64. We urgently request that the resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly concerning the cease-fire and,
in particular, the withdrawal of the invasion troops be
applied immediately. A cease-fire without a withdrawal
of troops could not settle the situation and would only
sanction the aggression. This is why, along with
eighteen other Asian-African
countries, we have submitted a draft resolution [A/3309]
to reaffirm our
previous resolutions, and we ask the General Assembly
to adopt it unanimously.
65. My Government’s attitude on the tragic events
under consideration was clearly expressed in a telegram to the Secretary-General.
In order not to take
up too much of your time I shall merely quote thq
final passage :
--I
“It is a time of trial for the United Nations ta
comply with the recommendations and promises of
the Charter and to stop the aggressors from their
unlawful and unwarranted action, Afghanistan earnestly hopes that the United Nations and its loyal
peace-loving Members will take effective steps against
this aggressive act which seriously endangers international peace and security in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and demonstrate that
liberty and independence of all countries shall be
maintained and guaranteed. As a loyal Member of
the United Nations Afghanistan will fully and wholeheartedly support all efforts and endeavours of the
world Organization
to condemn and frustrate this
aggression.“l
The telegram was signed by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, for the Prime Minister.
66. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank the
Secretary-General
for the efforts he is exerting to
restore peace in the Middle East.
67. Lastly, at this most tragic hour, I should like to
express once again the deep sympathy of my people
and my Government for the innocent Egyptian victims.
68. We firmly believe that it is the duty of the United
Nations to do its utmost to overcome the effects of
the destruction inflicted on Egypt and to undertake
as soon as possible reconstruction work worthy of the
Organization. The General Assembly must appreciate
the terrible damage done to Egypt and consider appropriate measures to remedy the situation.
69. M
: The guns, we have been
told, A;:
py shores of Egypt. The
criminal war which the nostalgic colonialists and frustrated militarists of France, the United Kingdom and
Israel launched against the hapless towns and hamlets;
of Egypt, bringing death and destruction,.misery
and
we hope, has;
sorrow, in its wake - that butchq,
1 Quoted in English,

-A

110

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

temporarily come to a halt. If the guns and the bombs
of the aggressors have been silenced, it was primarily
due to the heroic defence of the people of Egypt,
soldiers and civilians alike, who by their courage and
their determination
to die, if need be, so that their
honour and freedom might be saved, have shown the
invaders that their conquest of Egypt was not going
to be the promenade Messrs. Eden and Mallet expected
it to be.
70. If the thunder of war has subsided in Egypt, it
is because the aggressors have had second thoughts
about the vulnerability
of Arab nationalism, that nationalism which proudly stands as a formidable barrier
to imperialist
dreams, that nationalism
which has
proved a deadly weapon against colonial tyranny, that
nationalism, finally, which they set out to destroy. If
the roar of the aggressors’ guns has been silenced, it
was by the indignant and mighty uproar of mankind
that stood up to aggression, that craves for peace, that
believes in human liberty and freedom, that refuses to
plunge this unhappy planet of ours into a holocaust of
unprecedented magnitude to satisfy the endless ambitions and lust for power of some or the criminal designs of others.
71. In these fateful moments, our thoughts and
sympathies go to all those w’ho are suffering, to the
wounded, to the bereaved and to all the victims of this
senseless adventure, to whichever camp they belong.
It is fitting, I believe, to pay a particular tribute to the
brave people of Egypt, to the heroic defenders of Port
Said, Ismailia,
Suez, Alexandria
and other martyr
towns, for the gallant fight that they have waged
against the ruthless invaders, for they too were imbued
with the spirit which brought that great American,
Patrick Henry, to say “Give me liberty or give me
death I”
72. The tragic days through which we have gone, the
unanimous voice with which the civilized world has
rebeIled against the war of aggression perpetrated
against Egypt have, I believe, sufficiently established
the responsibility. We need not dwell on this matter
any further at this time. Nor would it be profitable to
attempt to apportion responsibility among the respective
invaders for their brutal aggression, I am sure that
history will take care pf that.
73. We should not sit back in our chairs and delude
ourselves that the aggression perpetrated against Egypt
has ended and that peace has been restored. The success the Assembly has had so far is very limited indeed
and does not go beyond putting an end temporarily to
the senseless fighting.
74. A cease-fire is indeed a great achievement in itself.
Those who have contributed to its attainment-the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General,
the statesmen o,f the world-have
done a magnificent job, However, the cease-fire does not bring peace to the victim
of aggression, nor does it rectify the wrong inflicted
upon Egypt. It therefore becomes incumbent upon the
Assembly to pursue and intensify its efforts with one
objective in view, namely, that of implementing
all the
provisions of resolution 997 (ES-I), in particular that
which urges the withdrawal of all forces behind the
armistice lines - and this refers, of course, to Israel
- and that which deals with the withdrawal of all
other invading forces..
75. As far as the three aggressors are concerned,
official reaction has been received only from Israel to
the General Assembly’s request that Israel forces should

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

be withdrawn behind the armistice lines. This reaction
was a Aat and insolent rejection of the Assembly’s request. Since it came from a Government that has impudently and consistently defied the will of the civilized
world, expressed in the Assembly’s resolutions, it was
no surprise that Ben-Gurion should amlounce to his
Knesset this morning that Israel has no intention of
relinquishing Egyptian territory which it now holds by
conquest. Having gotten away with murder, having
grabbed by conquest vast territories to which it has
no juridical or moral claim, Israel hopes to get away
with this new act of aggression.
76. The test of the Assembly’s effectiveness as an instrument of world peace is yet to come. It is not
sufficient to obtain a cease-fire. The wrongs inflicted by
aggression must be entirely rectified and justice restored. If the present efforts of the General Assembly
to restore the peace, so brutally shattered by FrancoBritish-Israel
aggression, are to have any meaning,
if these efforts are to prove fruitful, the following
facts must be borne in mind.
77. The present war of aggression against Egypt
has nothing to do with the Palestine problem. My delegation has said before, and we repeat again here, that
the war which was Iaunched against Egypt was a
colonial war, a war of conquest, a war to stamp out
an Arab nationalism whose interests conflicted with
those of the colonial Powers. Israel entered the picture
only as a tool, providing the excuse for France-British
intervention. To claim, as does Ben-Gurion, that the
withdrawal if any, of Israel forces behind the armistice
lines, as requested by General Assembly resolution
997 (ES-I), will have to await the peaceful settlement
of the Palestine problem and is contingent upon that
settlement, can have onlv one aim in view : that of
torpedoing the Assembly’; present efforts and stopping
it from bringing them to a successful conclusion.
78. The General Assembly, which has shown firmness
in dealing wit11 mightier aggressors, will, I am sure,
remain firm in the face of this Zionist rebellion and will
use the powers and means provided in the Charter to
enforce the rule of law, Whatever territorial advantages
may have accrued to Israel as a result of its dastardly
attack upon Egypt - a sneak attack? made possible by
Egyptian involvement with the UnIted Kingdom and
France - cannot and must not be allowed to be used
by Israel to enhance its bargaining power in a problem,
the Palestine problem, which, I repeat, has nothing to
do with the present conflict.
79. If I have dwelt at some length on this point, it is
because of Lebanon’s ardent desire that the present
efforts of the General Assembly should be brought to
a ‘happy and successful conclusion. Only one part of the
Assembly’s request has been met, namely, the ceasefire. Egypt, quite rightly, has accepted the cease-fire on
condition that the other part of the Assembly’s resolution is implemented - that is, that all the invading
forces are withdrawn from Egyptian territory.
80. The draft resolution presented in the name of the
Asian-African
delegation ([/J/3309],
which was read
out by the representative of Ceylon at the previous
meeting, has as an objective precisely to reinforce and
facilitate the efforts of those working for a restoration
of peace in Egypt. In our view, its adoption is a necessary step which must be taken if the Secretary-General’s plan concerning an emergency international Us+
ted Nations Force, and the draft resolution relative
thereto, are to have any meaning at all.

567th

meeting-7

81. In this connexion, I must make clear that my
delegation’s understanding of the phrase “immediate
withdrawal of all forces” is that such withdrawal should
take place in the shortest possible time and, in any
case, not later than forty-eight hours. The guns in
Egypt may or may not be silent; we receive conflicting
reports about that matter. But this silence, even if it
were true, can only be temporary, and is contingent
upon the withdrawal of all the invading forces from
Egyptian territory and behind the armistice lines.
82. Inasmuch
as the draft resolution embodied in
document A/3308 aims at the complete implementation
of Assembly resolution 997 (ES-I), particularly its
cease-fire and withdrawal provisions - I repeat: and
withdrawal provisions - my delegation will vote in
favour of it, subject, of course, to the reservations
which the representative of Syria made in his able
statement at the previous meeting and which I shall
not repeat here in view of the general desire in the
Assembly to proceed rapidly to the vote on the draft
resolutions before it.
83. However, my delegation would be very appreciative if the Secretary-General could, at an appropriate
moment, throw light on the status of the General
Armistice Agreements in the area and of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
Such light,
I feel certain, would be of considerable help and would
clear up some of the points raised in the SecretaryGeneral’s second and final report in document A/3302.
84. Sir Leslie MUNRO
(New Zealand) : My Government has today reaffirmed its willingness to contribute
to the emergency international United Nations Force.
Its support for the establishment of a force and its
readiness to contribute to that force are based on the
assumption that the size, nature and composition of the
force will be such as to ensure that it will be able to
carry out its intended functions effectively and, in particular, that it will be capable of preserving peace and
order in its area of operation, On this understanding,
and recognizing the need for speedy action to establish
the force, my delegation is prepared to support the
seven-Power draft resolution [A/3308].
85. The second draft resolution before us [A/3309]
calls,
&er a&, upon the United Kingdom and France
once again “immediately
to withdraw” - I stress the
word “immediately”
- “all their forces from Egyptian
territory”.
86. In the view of my delegation, the withdrawal of
United Kingdom and French forces must be related
to the readiness of an effective and suitably constituted
United Nations force to estabmlish itself in the area.
An immediate withdrawal - construing the word literally - might make it extremely difficult for a United
Nations farce to take up its position in the area and
perform its intended functions. For this reason alone,
my delegation cannot support the draft resolution submitted by the nineteen countries.
87. My delegation is also obliged to note, however,
that, cansidered as a whole, the draft resolution is no
more than an unconstructive repetition of resolutions
adopted in a situation which differed from that which
obtains today. Since the Assembly last met, substantial
progress has been made towards restoring peace and
order in the Middle East. Any resolution we may now
adopt should at the very least take account of events.
Let us be realistic.
88. My delegation, therefore, hopes that the nineteenPower draft resolution will not be pressed to a vote.

November

1956

111

It is our feeling, mo’reover, that the time is rapidly
approaching when the Assembly should turn its attention towards constructive efforts for the future. Out of
the developments of the past week has come a golden
opportunity to bring about a definitive settlement of
outstanding problems in the Middle East, an opportunity which is unlikely to recur. It would be disastrous to
permit a return to conditions in which a full-scale
conflict can break out at any moment. The Suez Canal
question must also be promptly settled.
89. While reserving its right to comment at the appropriate time upon the contents of the two United
States draft resolutions ([A/3272 and A/3273]
of 3
November, my delegation is in general agreement with
their purposes. We recognize the reasons why immediate action has not been taken upon them, but that does
not mean that we would favour any further substantial
delay in taking up the vital matters with which they
deal. We shall, therefore, support their consideration
either at this emergency session or at a very early
stage in the eleventh regular session.
: This is no time for re90.
ice, but this much I want
cou
to say. When I arrived here last Sunday from my long
journey I at once realized that I had entered into a
crisis which had been before the United Nations for
ten days. Since my arrival I have noticed, also, that
many representatives have hardly slept. The task before
us goes around the clock-not
just seven days a week,
but also seven nights. Mr. President, fellow representatives and members of the staff of the United Nations,
I salute you for your tenacity, your determination
and
your uninterrupted
devotion to duty. I shall try to
conform to your rigid requirements.
91. In a more profound sense, I do not believe that
this devotion to duty is really exceptional, for what is
at stake is veritably not only what geographers and
others call the Middle or Near East, but the world
itself. Actually, today, this area is at the very centre
of the world. If peace is not restored to the centre,
then the peripheries, Europe, the Western Hemisphere
and Asia, will be also drawn into whatever tragic fate
befalls it.
92. Today, however, we are meeting at a moment in
history where, happily, further tragedy may be averted.
Lives have already been lost; they cannot be restored.
Property has been damaged; it can be, in peace, recovered. Thousands of persons are living in desperation,
not knowing where next week’s food will come from.
Nevertheless, the news we have had today clearly implies that further tragedy can b,e averted. The ceasefire, for which this solemn Assembly has endlessly
striven, appears to be won. As I speak, far the first
time in ten days bombs and bullets are not wrecking
the lives and fortunes of ilmocent people. A cease-fire
has been accepted by all the participants in this unwarranted use of force and so, in some measure, we
are relieved that the United Kingdom,
France and
Israel are no longer inflicting the evils of war upon the
Egyptian Government and the Egyptian people.
93. We welcome the fact that some measure of sanity
has finally returned to them. But a cease-fire, good as
it is, is not enough. We have before us a draft resolution submitted by my Government in conjunction with
other Governments. I am referring to the draft resolution contained in document A/3309 and introduced at
the previous meeting by the representative af Ceylon.
This draft resolution, which representatives have before

112

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

them, calls for the withdrawal of all armed forces from
Egyptian territory. It calls for, frankly, a return to the
st&u,~ quo an& and for scrupulous observation of the
Armistice Agreement of 24 February 1949. I know
that there are some delegations here which feel that
this draft resolution does not go far enough, but
whatever may be the feelings of some other delegations
I earnestly appeal to our friends who seek peace to
support this draft resolution.
94, I come now to the other draft resolution f-4/3308]
which my Government is co-sponsoring with the Governments of Argentina,
Ceylon, Demnark, Ecuador,
Ethiopia and Sweden. The delegation of Burma has
supported this draft resolution because of its deep
b;elief in peace and its emphatic conviction that peace
cannot be obtained as matters stand at present when
hostile troops still occupy Egypt. We must put the
emergency international United Nations Force into the
field immediately. To us “immediately”
means without
any delay whatever, and it means consequently immediate withdrawal of British, French and Israel troops. I
repeat, to us implementation
of resolution 998 (ES-I)
recommending the creation of an emergency international United Nations Force requires immediate evacuation of the troops which have invaded Egypt. Only
this will satisfy us that the cease-fire means what it
says.
9.5. We strongly favour the immediate creation of
the advisory committee provided for in paragraph 6
of the draft resolution. I have no doubt that the
Assembly will be unanimous in its choice of the chairman of that committee: the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, whose untiring efforts have brought
this international
United Nations Force into being.
We do not, however, insist that there should be any
specific number of countries represented on the committee. For us, the important #point is to come to an
agreement and adopt the draft resolution, so that the
United Nations Force may act rapidly and decisively.
96. Burma is determined that peace should be maintained and will lend all its support to attain that end,
Because it so firmly believes this, I am happy to announce to the Assembly that my Government will
contribute its share of forces - however small that
may be in terms of numbers - to the emergency international United Nations Force.
sponsored b; seven Powers~ [A/3308], would approvd
the setting up of an international
force, and proposes
certain administrative
measures to that end. The other,
sponsored by nineteen Powers [A/3309], would call
for the immediate withdrawal of British, French and
Israel trootis from the positions which they have taken
up.
98. I do not need to go far back into the past in
order to explain the attitude of Her Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom towards these draft resolutions,. I must, however, repeat that Her Majesty’s
Government considered that a grave emergency suddenly arose when Israel forces attacked Egypt, and that
that emergency had to be dealt with at once. It was with
just such emergencies that the United Nations was intended by its founders to deal, but, unfortunately
for reasons with which we are all familiar - the United Nations has not hitherto been equipped with the
means necessary for that task. It was in that situation

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

that Her Majesty’s Government and the Government
of France regarded it as their duty to step in.
99. Since, however, we have believed from the beginning that this is a situation with which the United
Nations should properly deal, we have heartily welcomed the idea of sending a United Nations force to
the area to take over the responsibilities which we have
felt bound to shoulder. The draft resolution presented
by seven Powers contains a proposal for such a force.
It goes without saying that we welcome the conception of
an international force. It will naturally be understood
that further study will be needed of some of the features
of so intricate and important
a project. Whether
the international
force should be composed of contingents from the larger or the smaller Powers is not
a matter on which we would break our hearts, provided that the force is competent and effective for the
purposes specified in the letter which I addressed to
the Secretary-General on 3 November [A/3269].
100. It follows from our whole approach that Her
Majesty’s Government cannot accept that part of the
nineteen-Power
draft resolution which calls for the
immediate withdrawal of British and French forces.
If these forces were withdrawn before a United Nations
force was abJe to arrive and take control, the separation of the parties which we have achieved would break
down ; the risk of hostilities between the parties would
revive in an acute form ; and the United Nations Force
might arrive too late to prevent a new conflagration.
There would also be, once again, a serious threat to the
security of the Suez Canal. That, in fact, would amount
to a return to the dangerous and uncertain conditions
which have obtained in the area for many years. We do
not believe for a moment that the Assembly wishes to
see a return to such conditions, I hope, therefore, that
the nineteen-Power draft resolution will not be put to
the vote. If it is put to the vote, I shall not be able to
support it.
101. One point, however, arises out of .the nineteenPower draft resolution on which I think it would be
opportune for me to make my Government’s position
quite clear. I refer to the policy of Her Majesty’s Government in regard to the Israel attack on Egypt. That
policy is to ensure that Israel forces withdraw from
Egyptian territory.
102. Reverting to the seven-Power draft resolution,
which would approve the setting up of an international
force, I should like briefly to elaborate the approach of
Her Majesty’s Government. As the Assembly is aware,
Her Majesty’s Government declared yesterday [A/33061 that it would agree to stop further military
operations if the Secretary-General could confirm that
(a) the Egyptian and Israel Governments had accepted
an unconditional cease-fire, and (b) that the international force to be set up would be competent to secure
and supervise the attainment of the objectives set out
in the operative paragraphs of General Assembly resolution 997 (ES-I). As is well known, Her Majesty’s
Government has already ordered its forces to cease
fire unless attacked. The Governments of France and
the United Kingdom
have stated that all further
military
operations would be stopped on receipt of
confirmation
from the Secretary-General
regarding
the above-mentioned points (a) and (fi). It will, of
course, be necessary even :then that an effective force
should be interpolated as a shield between Israel and
Egypt. The idea that such a shield is essential seems
to be universally accepted. It is the hope of Her Ma-

567th

meeting-7

jesty’s Government
that the proposed international
force will be set up as quickly as possible to take over
this function.
103. Her Majesty’s Government stands ready to enter
into discussions with the appropriate authorities regarding all questio’ns involved in the transfer of responsibilities to the international Force. It is our belief that
this international Force should be autharized to prevent
the resumption of hostilities between Israel and Egypt
and to secure the withdrawal of Israel forces. It is the
earnest hope of Her Majesty’s Government that the
presence of the international Force in the area will
help to bring about, among other things, a generally
acceptable settlement of the Palestine and Suez Canal
problems. In the view of Her Majesty’s Government,
the international
Force should remain in the area until
all these probaems have been solved, and we ,think that
the logic of events will make this clear.
104. I now turn briefly to another point, a point of
practical urgency. The technicians which have been
introduced with the France-British forces are equipped
to tackle the task of clearing the obstructions in the
Suez Canal and its approaches. We are prepared to put
them forthwith under the command of a United Nations technical officer for this purpose. This, of course,
would be in no sense a military operation, but an
essential task undertaken by technicians in the interest
of world shipping and trade. We in no sense make this
a condition of our acceptance of the plan for the international force, but it seems to us only reasonable that
we should undertake this task, as no one else at present
is in a position to do so.
105. At the same time, we feel that energetic steps
should be taken by the United Nations to bring about
new and constructive solutions of the basic problems
of the Middle East. With this in view, Her Majesty’s
Government
has suggested to the Assembly, as is
already known, that an early meeting of the Security
Council should be held at the ministerial level in order
to work out an international settlement which would
be likely to endure, together with the means to enforce
it IA/3293].
106. I am glad to announce that with these explanations I am authorized to vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by the delegations of Argentina,
Burma, Ceylon, Denmark,
Ecuador, Ethiopia
and
Sweden [A/3308].
107. Mr. DERESSA
My delegation has
” .I -*>a,,
_,,,
“j/(EthiqRia),:
,I,,
the honc$ii~~‘%%!%nmend
to the General Assembly the
draft resolution contained in document A/3308, which
is sponsored by seven delegations, including my own.
It may be observed, however, that the draft resolution
which is before the Assembly for its consideration was
introduced by the sponsors with a view to giving practical eff,ect to the final report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral this morning. [A/3302 arzd Add. 1-4, A/3302 Add. 4/Rev. 1, A 3302JAdd. 5-71.
108. By its resolutions 997 (ES-I) and 1000 (ES-I),
the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General
to secure a cessation of hostilities, to supervise the
truce and, to that end, to organize a United Nations
Command which would act in the capacity of an international police force. The draft resolution in document
A/3308, which is now before the General Assembly,
gives directives (to the Secretary-General regarding the
purposes and functions of the police force.

November

1956

109. It is, however, the understanding of the Ethiop
ian delegation, as one of the sponsors of this draft
resolution, that the police force -to be created will have
limited functions and duties to perform. These functions have been set out in paragraph 12 of the Secretary-General’s report as “to secure the cessation of
hostilities in accordance with all the terms of the
resolution 997 (ES-I)
of 2 November 1956”. Consequently, my delegation finds itself in complete agreement with the representative of Sweden who said at the
566th meeting that the international force would not
be sent to the Midle East to take over the functions
which the France-British
forces had set out to accomplish. I will add further that in my delegation’s clear
understanding the nature and the duties to be assigned
to the international
police force shall not exceed the
objective of securing the cessation of hostilities m
accordance with the terms of General Assembly resolution 997 (ES-I), which, of course, includes the supervision of the withdrawal of invading troops from
Egyptian territory.
110. With this important point in mind, my delegation
has no hesitation in recommending the draf,t resolution
contained in document A/3308 to the General Assembly.
111. Since my delegation is one of the co-sponsors,
needless to say it will vote for the draft resolution contained in document A/3309, which was read out to the
Assembly this morning by the representative of Ceylon.
That draft resolution is part and parcel of the effort
that the Assembly has been making to restore peace in
the Middle East.
112. Before leaving this rostrum, 1 should like to pay
the homage of my delegation to the Secretary-General
for the prompt and efficient manner with which he has
performed the difficult task that has been laid upon
him. We are grateful to him and to his staff.
) : We are facing a
idly, and today we
ons regarding which
I wish to state the views of my delegation. But first
I should like to comment on one aspect of the matter
which has been in my mind from time to time and
which I hope will not escape the attention of other
delegations at this Assembly. I think that we should
not for one moment forget that a heavy burden of
responsibility rests upon the Soviet .Union for the
developments which led up to the present situation in
the Middle East. Had it not been for the Soviet Union’s
action in supplying arms to Egypt, thus upsetting the
delicate balance of forces in the area, then the United
Nations might very well not be facing today the crisis
that is upon it.
114. The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions,
one proposed by the delegations of Argentina, Burma,
Ceylon, Denmark,
Ecuador, Ethiopia and Sweden,
which carries further the decision of the Assembly
looking to the early establishment of an international
force. It also has before it the nineteen-Power draft
resolution which was submitted by the representative
0 Ceylon. I wish to say a word first about the latter
draft: resolution although, of course, it follows in time
the draft resolution submitted by the seven Powers
earlier today.
115. The nineteen-Power
draft resolution in many
ways is substantially a repetition of the first AsianAfrican draft resolution [A/3275],
a draft which the
Australian delegation was not able to support.

114

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

116. In this connexion, I must take exception to the
references made by some speakers, particularly by .the
representative of Syria at the preceding meeting, when
he asserted that previous Assembly resolutions had
been opposed only by-1 use his words-“the
aggressors and their accomplices”. Such language is not only
offensive to the United Kingdom and France, which
came here and explained their action, but it is also
offensive to my delegation and other delegations, which
have seen fit, on very good grounds, to accept the
assurances given by the United Kingdom and France
and which feel able to understand the objectives ‘that
are being pursued by those countries in relation to the
conflict in the Middle East.
117. The objections that we previously stated to the
first African-Asian draft resolution still stand, and we
see Iittte point in the Assembly repeating itself in a
swiftly moving crisis of great importance. Moreover,
given the attitude of Israel as just stated again today,
it seems to us that the present draft resolution, if
effect is given to the requirement for the immediate
withdrawal of United Kingdom
and French forces,
would ‘ensure an early resumption of ithe EgyptianIsrael conflict.
118. The draft resolution ignores the offer made previously by the United Kingdom and France, which has
been fallowed up by the introduction
of a cease-fire.
More than that, the draft would appear to obstruct,
in our view, the operatioa of setting up the international
force which has been proposed in the other draft resolution tllat is before the Assembly.
119. We feel that the essential and urgent thing at the
moment is to put first things first, to lay the foundations for a new regime of peace and stability in this
troubled area. The Assembly should concentrate its
attention upon the urgent establishment of an international force and its early movement into ‘the area of
hostilities. The stated objectives of such a force would
correspond, I trust, to what the African-Asian
draft
resolution seeks to accomplish. Therefore, we believe
that priority should be given to the seven-Power draft
resolution,
120. I should like to express our appreciation of the
enormous work which the Secretary-General and those
associated with him have put into the elaboration of the
detailed proposals that are before the Assembly. I am
sure that all representatives are extremely grateful for
this devoted application of his great abilities to the
task.
121, I should remark, however, that the Australian
Government, in considering the documents submitted
within the last few hours, has felt some doubts regarding the effectiveness of some of the arrangements proposed and the enduring nature of the international
police force which it is proposed to establish, There is
some question in our minds as to whether it will remain
in the area long enough effectively to secure the
Egyptian-Israel
situation along the lines that are necessary for the establishment and maintenance of peace
and, we hope, a permanent settlement. Nevertheless,
despite the sort of doubts that may arise in our minds
as we examine some parts of this proposal as set out
in the document before us, it is the view of my delsegation and of my Government that it is a matter of
urgency to proceed with the establishment pf an international force and for the force to take up the duties
which the Assembly is entrusting to it.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

122. If we have one specific criticism to make of the
seven-Power draft resolution, it is that this element of
urgency is perhaps not sufficiently stressed. For that
reason, I should like to propo,se a very small amendment consisting of the insertion of one additional word
in operative paragraph 4. We should like to introduce
the word “forthwith”
after the word “proceed”, so
that the paragraph would read:
“‘Requests the Chief of Command, in consultation
with the Secretary-General as regards size and composition, to proceed forthwith with the full organization of the Force ;“.
123. It is our fervent desire that every assistance
should be given, so that this task can be accomplished
as rapidly as possible. The Australian delegation therefore supports the draft resolution before us, and moves
the small but, I think, important amendment that I
have just presented.
GAUD,, ..,.(~Fr,~c%~~-~Szuted
.:*G
French) : The French delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s efforts. Thanks to him, resolution
998 (ES-I), originally submitted by the Canadian delegation, will culminate in the creation of an international
United Nations Force. The French Government is
especially gratified to see that an idea which was
first suggested by France is thus finally materializing.
About forty years ago LCon Bourgeois advanced the
idea of an international
army. In 1919, during the
Peace Conference which marked the end of The First
World War, the French Government made specific
proposals for the establishment pf an international
force. The time was not yet ripe. We again submitted
our proposals to the League of Nations, but our efforts
met with complete apathy, and The Second World War
extinguished them altogether.
12.5. In 1945 the United Nations incorporated provisions in its Char,ter for the organization of an international force. During the first years of the Organization the Military Staff Committee, under the authority
of the Security Council, attempted to define the principles in accordance with which the provisions of Article
43 of the Charter might be applied. We all know which
permanent member of the Security Council constantly
thwarted
those efforts.
126. In the case now under consideration France, in
complete agreement with the United Kingdom, has
again taken the initiative. In fact, the France-British
declaration of 2 November explicity envisaged the establishment of a United Nations force to take over the
mission undertaken by the France-British
forces.
127. The French Government, like the vast majority
of the Members of the Assembly, will therefore support
the draft resolution submitted by Argentina, Burma,
Ceylon, Denmark, Ecuador, Ethiopia
and Sweden
[A/3308].

128. We should like to see such an international force
set up as soon as possible. At this stage, we do not contemplate participation in it. The energy and perspicacity
manifested by the Secretary-General, particularly during the past days, are a sure token of success. The problems involved in the establishment of an international
force are, of course, exceedingly complex. The definition of its functions and the manner in which it is to
be used also raise questions of great importance which
must be settled in detail. We should also be careful to
ses to it that the Security Council retains its competence
in all matters pertaining to the application of the meas-

567th

meeting-7

ures provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter. We
’ are confident, however, that in time all the difficulties
involved in the execution of so vast an undertaking
will be satisfactorily overcome. We have always made
it clear that our forces would leave the Suez Canal
zone as soon as international forces were in a position
to carry out the vital missions we are performing, and
I should like to make the same declaration once again
from this rostrum.
129. As regards the draft resolution sponsored by the
African-Asian
Powers [A/3309],
we are not in disagreement with its terms. We hope to be in a position
to withdraw our forces promptly. But the realization
of our wishes in this respect depends upon the rapidity
with which an international force capable of carrying
out the tasks described in my letter of 5 November
[A/3294]
to the Secretary-General is established. I
have already pointed out that my Government favoured
the establishment of the force and that the SecretaryGeneral could be relied upon ‘to set it up. Hence, we interpret the words “. . . immediately to withdraw all
their forces from Egyptian territory, consistently with
the above-mentioned resolutions” in paragraph 3 of the
draft resolution in the light of the foregoing remarks.
Among the resolutions in question, the one concerned
with the organization of the first units of the intemational force, is specifically mentioned, The objective
pursued by the Assembly is thus the same as ours on
this point. Indeed it could not be otherwise, It is essential to the maintenance of peace that there should be no
vacuum between the Egyptian and Israel forces.
130. Nevertheless, we would abstain on the draft resolution if the Assembly were called upon to vote on it,
in the first place because we consider that the problems
raised in this text will be settled by the adoption of the
draft resolution sponsored by the seven Powers [A/33081 approving the Secretary-General’s
report, and
secondly because we believe that these problems are,
by their very nature, within the jurisdiction
of the
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace. These problems have
both military
and political aspects, the complexity of
which we all realize, and they must be settled dispassionately in an atmosphere of undisturbed calm.
131. It is our firm conviction that the Security Council
should endeavour to solve them by meeting as soon as
possible at the foreign-minister
level; and we earnestly
hope that its work will produce concrete results.
132. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In the course
w&-y; “‘;jirifications
have
of the d
been directed to me. I feli that at this stage of the discussion it might be useful if I gave a reply.
133. At the 566th meeting, the representative of
Syria expressed the fear that in case of non-compliance
by Israel with the request for the withdrawal of forces
behind the armistice demarcation lines, there would
arise, on the basis of the position taken in my report,
a situation where Egypt would be presented with a
fait acconzfiZi, as the United Nations Force is not at
present established with a view to enforcing the withdrawal of forces. The representative of Syria said that
he could not but feel the deepest misgivings concerning
this situation.
134. My reply is simple. Were the unfortunate situation envisaged by the representative of Syria to arise,
I would consider it my duty to bring it at once to the
attention of the General Assembly or of the Security
Council for such measures as those two main organs

November

1956

115

of the United Nations might decide upon. Egypt would
thus not be faced with a fait accompli but could resort
to the means provided for in the Charter. My position
as to the functions of the United Nations Force in no
wa limits the right in these respects, I consider the
dd m‘ti on of those functions in the report to be sound
as a basis for this first stage in the setting up of the
Force.
135. Another question which has been directed to me
concerns the interpretation
of the legal situation in
respect of withdrawal of non-Egyptian
forces other
than the Israel forces. In my view, it follows from resolution 997 (ES-I)
that all non-Egyptian
forces with the obvious exception of the United Nations
Force which will be there with the consent of the
Egyptian Government have to withdraw from
Egyptian territory. It goes without saying that “Egyptiau territory” in this context must be understood in the
sense which follows from international
law and the
Armistice Agreement.
136. Still another question which I should like to
clarify concerns the interpretation
of my indication that
the United Nations Force will have to operate within
a region extending from the Suez Canal to the annistice demarcation line as established in the EgyptianIsrael General Armistice Agreement. What I intended
to say was entirely directed to the situation with which
we are faced. The United Nations Force will have to
come in at what is at present the dividing line between
the Egyptian and Israel forces. It is at whatever may
come to b.e the dividing line that it will have to function.
As the situation is, that means that United Nations
activities will have to start close to the Suez Canal, but
that after the expected compliance with the recommendations of the General Assembly they would end up at
the armistice demarcation line.
137. Other points have been raised on which I find
it difficult to elaborate what I have said in the report,
which to me seems to be self-explanatory. For example,
I have been asked for an interpretation pf what I have
said about the length of the assignment of the Force
being determined by the need arising out of the present
conflict. I am sure the Members will appreciate that,
in the still unclear situation, it would be premature for
me to say how the needs might develop after the end
of the immediate crisis. However, the Force being
under ultimate authority of the General Assembly, I
think that this point need not give rise to worries. Likewise, I find that the interpretation
of my statement
concerning previous decisions, to the effect that there
is no intent in the establishment of the Force to influence the military balance in the present conflict and
thereby the political balance affecting efforts to settle
the conflict, should be evident, However, this aspect
too will certainly be followed closely by the General
Assembly.
138.
: We are gathered
here
cy session of the
Gene
: (1) to consider
the report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of
General Assembly resolution 998 (ES-I)
[A/3302]
and (2) to consider the nineteen-Power draft resolution
submitted at the 566th meeting.
139. Before addressing myself to these two specific
topics, I want to say, on behalf of my delegation, that
at this stage when we hope we are ,entering into a
phase where collective responsibility and the collective
will of the world are being brought to bear on the

Kl6

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

question for beneficent ends, it is desirable to look
back only to the extent essential for the consideration
of this problem, We have come to the stage when we
must look forward and apply ourselves to the various
aspects of this question. My Government desires me to
state before the General Assembly-because I have
just come from India-its
general reaction and attitude toward the present difficulties.
140. Our country, our people and our Government,
indeed our whole par,t of the world, have been shocked
by the developments that have taken place in relation
to Egypt. We desire to state witho’ut any superlatives
that we regard the action of Israel as an invasion of
Egyptian territory, and the introduction of the forces
of the United Kingdom and France as an aggression
without any qualification. We have said this from the
very beginning.
141. W,e received this news not only with a senseof
shock but also with a great deal of sadness. 1 say
“with a great deal of sadness” for two reasons, first
because of the great physical harm that is being inflicted upon the people of Egypt, and secondly because
those engaged in a part of .this aggression, namely the
France-British alliance, are countries and peoples with
whom we have very close kinship. That is particularly
so in the case of the United Kingdom. It is therefore
more in sorrow than in anger that we approach this
problem. During &helast several weeks of great anxiety,
we have tried to exercise our influence by way of
persuasion to change the course of these developments.
142. I think that I should leave this aspect at this
stage, stating the minimum that is required. Later I
shall point out why it is necessary to refer to it. I
shall come now to the first of the draft resolutions,
namely the nineteen-Power draft [A/3309].
143. There is very little that one need say about this
draft, except that it is very largely a reiteration of
previous resolutions. Jt was submitted becauseprevious
resolutions have not been complied with. However,
there are certain new factors, namely, that the call for
a cease-fire and for the withdrawal of foreign forces
from Egyptian soil has been partly complied with by
those countries that are now engaged in the invasion
of Egypt. The United Kingdom and France, and
E pt, effected a cease-fire, according to all reports,
at7 p-m. (New York time) yesterday. However, there
have been expressions of view in the Assembly that the
fighting was continuing. Let us assume, for our purpose, that the cease-fire has been effected and that a
beginning has been made iu regard to the observance of
the General Assembly’s resolutions.
144. Two other factors remain, however., One concerns the statement in operative paragraph 2 of that
draft, in which Israel is once again called upon to withdraw immediately all its forces behind the armistice
lines established by the Armistice Agreement of 24
February 1949. I think that ;the Assembly will appreciate the importance, not only of reiterating this request,
but of taking it very seriously and of going along with
the Secretary-General in the observations which he has
just made.
145. Repeated calls have been made to Israel to withdraw its invading armies from the territory of Egypt,
which are there in violation of the Armistice Agreement,
in violation of the provisions of the Charter and in
vioIation of all known standards of international conduct. The problems which we are subsequently going to
consider, indeed the problem of terminating the con-

Special

Session-Chary

Meetings

flict and attempting to find the beginning of a solution
of the basic problems there, are only possible within
the context of this withdrawal.
146. This particular matter is not a question of how
much or how little can be done or of whether it can
I>&done in one day or in two days; the withdrawal of
Israel forces to their own frontiers as establishedby
the Armistice Agreement is fundamental to any settlement.
147. I am sure that the Assembly is perturbed, as
was my delegation, at the recent official statements
made by the Government of Israel, statements which
have been criticized even by the other two Powers that
are now engaged in operations in Egypt. The Prime
Minister of Israel has stated that there will be no withdrawal from the advanced positions occupied. However,
there has been a communication to the Secretary-General in regard to the cease-fire. That is one of the reasons why this draft resolution has become necessary.
148. My delegation is heartened by the statement just
made by the Secretary-General, in which he expressed
I am sure, the will and the views of practically the
entire representation of this Assembly, namely, that if
this request is not complied with, then the Assembly
must turn at once to the other provisions and remedies
that are open to it under the provisions of the
Charter.
149. Operative paragraph 3 of the draft calls upon
the United Kingdom and France once again immediately ,to withdraw all their forces from Egyptian territory. Perhaps I am not quite correct about this, but
there seems to be a technical inaccuracy here, because
when we first called upon the United Kingdom and
France it was in regard to the introduction of forces
into the territory of Egypt. At that time the landings
had not taken place. However, the landings took place
subsequently and the territory of Egypt was occupied.
Now there has been a cease-fire, but the cease-fire is
only a beginning and only a part of the request made
by the General Assembly. It must be followed by the
withdrawal of all forces.
150. Every practical person will realize that the word
“immediately”, in a political resolution cannot be interpreted in the senseof instant action, because troops
have to be moved. What this draft resolution seeksto
do is to express the view of its sponsors that it is not
possible to think in terms of these France-British
forces remaining on Egyptian territory contingent upon
some other element. It is necessary to state this, because the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom has
repeatedly said that these forces would so remain. But
the history of Egypt is one of occupatioa by various
invading troops throughout the past, even though they
sometimes came after stating that it was only for
temporary purposes.
151. Operative paragraph 3, therefore, should not
present any difficulties to those who agree with the
general idea that the aggressive forces must be evacuated. That is what it calls for. Therefore, the removal
of these troops must begin forthwith and its termination must take place without delay. That is the meaning of this clause. My deleghtion is not prepared to set
an hour by the clock when this should be clone, but
the substance of the paragraph is entirely clear,
152. Wlith great respect, I should now like to make
some observations in connexion with paragraph 3 which
leave become necessary as a result of the observations

567th

meeting-7

made by the representatives of the United Kingdom
and France. They are entirely free to place their own
interpretations
on these questions, but as far as my
delegation is concerned and as far as we understand the
substance and purpose of this draft resolution and the
report before us, we do not believe that the parties
which have committed aggression can lay down the
conditions under which they are willing to withdraw.
The United Nations has requested them to withdraw
as part of the termination of that aggression.
153. We cannot accept the position that the invading
forces lay down the conditions, ostensibly in the interest
of the invaded party. If we do that, we put ourselves in
the position of justifying the invasion itself. And that
is a position which my Government is not ready to
accept. We are quite prepared to appreciate that there
are practical problems involved. Therefore, any reasonable space of time that is required for the physical removal of troops is something that one can understand.
But we cannot accept the view that the pursuit of some
purposes with which we can be in agreement or which
are in conformity with the Charter necessitates these
forces remaining on Egyptian soil.
154. With those explanations, I would like to commend this draft resolution to the acceptance of the
Assembly and I hope that it will be possible for the
United Kingdom
and France, which have expressed
doubts about it, and for those who have supported them
in their positions, to accept this draft so that it can
go forward unanimously, and that at this stage, therefore, the aggression would be terminated by rcommon
consent.
155’. Then I proceed to the second draft resolution,
that submitted by Argentina and six other countries
[A/3308]
and introduced by the representative of Ceylon at the previous meeting. But before I speak about
that resolution, I would like to make a statement relative
to the second report which the Secretary-General has
placed before the Assembly. I should like to join all
the speakers before me on this rostrum in paying my
tribute to the hard work, the diligence and ,thoroughness which has entered into the preparation of this
report, and I am sure that I am not exaggerating when
I say that the Assembly and the world owe a debt of
gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his applying
himself so diligently to this problem.
156. Since we are now embarking on a very serious
phase of activity on behalf of the United Nations, and
since those countries that would be contributing troops
or in other ways contributing to the maintenance of the
international
police force would be taking on responsibilities, it is essential that clarification should be sought
and made and interpretations given.
1.57. I am directed by my Government to deal with
this matter in that way, Two or three days ago, when
this question was discussed between the SecretaryGeneral and our Government, he very kindly gave us
his view of the context and conditions in which any
participation
of countries in the international
United
Nations Force would take place. My delegation has
formulated these conditions [A/3302/&d.
B/Rev. I]
and further discussed them with the Secretary-General,
and we understand that they represent the accurate
set of conditions and circumstances in which such a
force would function ; and we would like this to be put
into the record.
158. The ,participation of a Member State would be
based upon these conditions: first, that the emergency

November

1956

117

Force would be set up in the context of the withdrawalof the France-British
forces from Egypt and on the
basis of the call to Israel to withdraw behind the
armistice lines ; secondly, that that Force would not in
any sense be a successor to the invading France-British
forces or would in any sense take over its functions ;
thirdly that it would be understood that the Force
might have to function through Egyptian territory and,
therefore, that the Egyptian Government must consent
to its establishment; fourthly that the Force would be
a temporary one for the emergency, Its purpose is to
separate the combatants, namely, Egypt and Israel, with
the latter withdrawing as required by the Assembly
resolution. The Force must be of a balanced composition. The agreement that we are now making would be
one in principle and we would reserve our position with
regard to actual participation
until the full plan is
before LE.
1.59. I have been instructed by my Government to
communicate to the Secretary-General-which
I have
done--that the Government of India would be willing
to participate in the United Nations Force contemplated
by his report in the context of the conditions that I
stated and would be willing, when the arrangements
are made final and the consent of the Assembly received, to send officers immediately to enter into consultations with the Secretary-General in regard to the
details. Of course, when we say “immediately”,
we are
taking into account the fact that communications between India and this country have now been somewhat
interrupted by the damage done to the airfields in the
Middle East.
160. The .Government of India has been able to accede to the position that its contribution would be something on the order of a battalion in strength. I am
instructed to say that transport facilities, including
airlift, would have to be provided through the United
Nations, because it is not possible for us to transport
this body of troops and equipment on such short notice
without outside assistance. It will be possible to implement such agreement as we may make in a very
short period, not more than ten days from the day of
agreement, although it may be possible to send advance bodies beforehand. I have already made this
communication
to the Secretary-General
[A/3302
Add 4/Rev. I] and it is among the papers that have
been circulated.
161. I want to draw the attention of the Assembty
to the Secretary-General’s report which is contained in
document A/3302. My delegation is glad to note that it
is specifically stated in paragraph 4 that the authority
of the United Nations Commander would be so defined as to make him fully independent of the policies
of any one nation.
162. I would also like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to another observation by the SecretaryGeneral in the report, with which my delegation is not
only in agreement but which it desires emphasized :
“It may in this context be observed that the
France-British
proposal, to which I have already
referred, may imply that the question of the composition of the staff and contingents should be subject to agreement by the parties involved, which it
would be difficult to reconcile with the development
of the international
force along the course already
being followed by the General Assembly.” [A/3302,
pwa. 6.1

118

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

163. The report goes on to say that this Force should
bet set up on an emergency basis “to secure and supervise the cessation of hostilities in accordance with all
the terms” of the General Assembly resolution. The
emphasis should be on the words “all the terms” of
the General Assembly resolution. So far we are in clear
agreement; we have no difficulties.
164. Now we come to paragraph 8 of the report and
I should like the Assembly to look at the last two sentences of paragraph 8. Here the difficulty is not perhaps
so much one of substance, but in a matter of this kind,
in view of the not always happy experience that my
Government has had in dealing with similar problems in
Korea and in Indo-China,
clarification beforehand is
essential in order that work may proceed without impediments, and also so that we may not have difficulties
with other participants. Paragraph 8 says the following:
“It follows from its terms of reference that there
is no intent in the establishment of ,the Force to influence the military balance in the present conflict and,
thereby, the political balance affecting efforts to settle
the conflict. By the establishment of the Force, therefore, the General Assembly has not taken a stand in
relation to aims other than those clearly and fully
indicated in resolution 997 (ES-I) of 2 November
19.56”.
16.5. I confess I am a little perplexed by this statement.
I do not know quite what its implications would be. If
it means that the United Nations Force is not intended
to support the parties in the aggression or to intervene militarily,
then I dnderstand it. But if its meaning is that the occupation forces wouId remain where
they are and therefore that their military balance would
not he affected then of course it is totally contrary to
its purpose. I draw attention to this because as the
statement stands it is a little perplexing,
166. The Secretary-General
will bear with me. We
have had difficulties of this kind - I would not say
without number, but quite a number-both
in IndoChina and in Korea, of a very serious character. My
Government would have grav.e apprehensions in undertaking military
obligations which are subject to the
interpretation
of foreign office lawyers of different
countries afterwards. Therefore,
I think that some
clarification of this paragraph would greatly relieve our
minds.
167. The Secretary-General
has told us that this is
the second and final report, but I suppose that that is
only a procedural description, because it goes on to say,
in paragraph 11: “However, the general observations
which are possible should at this stage he sufficient.”
Therefore, my delegation wants to be assured that
there is no finality about this report in the sense that it
is a kind of army manual in regard to these forces.
There, again, it is not because we want to be punctilious,
but because we have been once bitten, twice bitten,
and are three times shy at the moment.
168. Again, when w,e come to paragraph 12, which is
the most important part, I should like, first, to obs.erve
that any interpretation which we make in regard to the
draft resolution when we record our vote ought to be
bounded by paragraph 12. That is to say, we could not
vote on the draft resolution and then go on to think
that we can depart from the essential features of paragraph 12 in the Secretary-General’s
report.
169. I b.elieve that it is permissible to elaborate, in
the sense that my delegation has done, by reading out

Special

Session-Plennry

Meetings

the context, as we understand it, which we agreed with
the Secretary-General. Therefore, when votes are cast,
it should be with the definite understanding that this
draft resolution urges, in accordance with the terms of
resolution 997 (ES-I), that “all parties now involved in
hostilities in the area agree to an immediate cease-fire
and, as part thereof, halt the movement of military
forces and arms into the area”. This was at the time
when the landings had not taken place in Egypt and
invasion was only by way of aerial bombardment. But
now we have a new situation and, therefore, the sense
of that sentence is not merely to halt the movement of
military forces but to reverse the movement of miIitary
forces and withdraw them. Therefore, I feel sure that
the Secretary-General would agree that this is the
implication of this paragraph.
170. Paragraph 12 says further :
“These two provisions combined indicate that the
functions of the United Nations Force would be,
when a cease-fire is being established, to enter Egyption territory with the consent of the Egyptian Government, in order to help maintain quiet during and
after the withdrawal of non-Egyptian
troops.”
“Non-Egyptian
troops” now would mean all nonEgyptian troops since, at the time this resolution was
passed, the only non-Egyptian troops in Egypt were the
Israel troops, and, therefore, it must be meant to include the others.
171. We turn now to a point on which we wish to
lay some emphasis. The last sentence of paragraph 12
reads as follows:
“Its functions can, on this basis, be assumed to
cover an area extending roughly from the Suez Canal
to the armistice demarcation lines, established in the
Armistice
Agreement between Egypt and Israel.”
It must be clearly understood that when we say “an
area extending roughly from the Suez Canal to the
armistice demarcation lines”, it is only in the sense
that Egypt will permit the use of its territory by the
troops in order to perform their functions, which are
to keep the Israel invading armies within their own
frontiers. It cannot in any sense at any time be construed that this Force has any occupation function in
these areas or will in any way infringe the sovereignty
of Egypt, but only that it has the right of way whereever necessary.
172. My Government is not only in agreement, but
would stand with the Canadian Government in the view
which ‘it has put forward in a comnzuniquk just now
issued by the Canadian Cabinet, which is referred to
in paragraph 14 as follows: “General experience seems
to indicate that it is desirable that. countries participating in the Force should provide self-contained units in
order to avoid the loss of time and efficiency.” We subscribe to that, and that is why, when the request was
made to us in the report on this matter, the Government
of India, although it has a very small army and has its
own commitments, agreed to furnish troops of a battalion in strength.
173. Finally, the Secretary-General goes on to say,
in paragraph 19, that he is fully aware of the exploratory character of this plan, which means ,that all the
details will have to be worked out.
174. My delegation will support the draft resolution
that has been put forward by the delegation of Ceyfon
on its own behalf and on that of six other delegations
I#$@$], ,, I We hope that, in agreeing to the decision to

567th

meeting-7

set up this international police force under the supervision of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General
will look into all the legal aspects, and if there are any
legal loopholes, will seek to close them ; even in performing what we think is a useful action, it is essential
that we conform to the spirit and letter of the Charter.
175. There are two other small matters to which I
wish to refer while I am at this rostrum, and those are
the two communications
addressed to the SecretaryGeneral - one from the United Kingdom [A/3306]
and the other from France [A/3307].
I would refer
particularly to the latter, point 3 of which reads as follbws :
“The French Government considers it necessary, in
accordance with the suggestion made to you by Mr.
Christian Pineau in his letter of 5 November [A/32941, that a meeting of the Security Council should
be called at the ministerial level as soon as possible
in order to work out the conditions for a final ceasefire and a settlement of the problems of ,the Middle
East.”
176. I regret to say that my delegation is not able to
comprehend this paragraph in relation to what we are
doing because, while no one can object to its being
a very good thing for the Council to meet at the ministerisf level - it was so contemplated in the Charter
- the final condition of the cease-fire is the operation
now contemplated by the draft resolution under discussion, and if we are going to send the question from
pillar to post without knowing where the decisions are
to be made, I am afraid that the urgency of this matter
will not receive attention, and the whole of the arrangement that we are now trying to establish will flounder.
Therefore, this paragraph - while the French Government in its wisdom is no doubt entirely free to communicate what it likes and what it thinks is right cannot be regarded, I think, as a provision of the ceasefire, and the General Assembly cannot be committed
in any way to the idea that the cease-fire arrangements
must await a meeting of the Security Council for
settlement. It is exactly because of the Security Council’s inability to perform its duties on account of the
French veto, that this matter has come before the
Assembly, and if it is to go back to the Security Council,
then other conditions will have to prevail. It is not in
any sense to giv.e expression to a rivalry between these
two bodies, but to take this matter as it stands todaynamely, that a country having been invaded without
cause, and the security provisions having become inoperative on account of the exercise of the veto other procedures have been adopted. I should like to
say that, in the present case, we have an instance of
great suffering and tragedy-tragedy
in the sense not
only of physical suffering and physical damage, but also
of spiritual damage that has been done to the principles
of the United Nations.
177. As I said in the beginning, the problem before
the Assembly is a matter of great sadness for us because
at least one of the parties concerned stands in extremely
close relations with us, and our country is seriously
concerned as to whether it represents a r,eversal of the
great processes of human emancipation that have been
t=aking place in Asia and Africa during the last halfcentury, in which the United Kingdom has made very
significant contributions. It was a heartbreaking thing
for us to see that there was a reversal of this process I do not want to call it by familiar names - which
would have meant the imposition of military power over

November

1956

119

a weak nation and an attempt to settle disputes by the
arbitrament of arms. It has been of brief duration,
and we hope that, as soon as this problem is out of the
way, the General Assembly, including those Members
which are now not voting for these draft r,esolutions,
will participate in the attempt to bind up the wounds,
both physical and otherwise, that have occurred as a
result of present developments.
178. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spanish) :
The Secretary-General wishes to say a few words in
reply to the comments which we have just heard from
the representative of India.
Q,QL.: I shall speak
f India has raised a
great number of points. On several he has attempted
an interpretation
of what I intended to say, and I
think I can say that on all those points, to the extent that
I could fully grasp what the representative said, I can
confirm that his interpretation
of my intentions is
correct.
180, There were two points on which direct questions were addressed to me. The first one was concerning the character of the report which I have called
final. The report is final only in the sense that it is the
last report I shall issue under the mandate decided upon
by the Assembly on the morning of 4 November [5&d
meeti?zg] with a forty-eight hour margin. Of course,
the Assembly may look forward to further reports on
the development of the Force.
181. As to the question of intent - as I expressed
it, “no intent . . . to influence . . ,” [A/3302, @~a. S]
- I wanted by that sentence to express only the view
that the basic political decisions of the Assembly, of
course, constitute the fundamental law of this whole
operation.
gencv snecial session of t
gation &i&es to refer only to the three most important
documents which are at present before us. The first of
those documents is the second and final report of the
Secretary-General on the plan for an emergency international United Nations Force [A/3302].
183. My delegation associates itself with the statements of approval made by various r,epresentatives
with regard to the Secretary-General’s final report. My
delegation would like, however, to voice some doubts
regarding the scope of the functions of emergency
United Nations Force, as outlined in paragraph 12 of
the report. That paragraph states among other things:
“The Force obviously should have no rights other
than those necessary for the execution of its functions, in co-operation with local authorities. It would
be more than an observers’ corps,” - I wish to
emphasize these words : “more than an observers’
corps” - “but in no way a military force temporarily controlling the territory in which it is stationed;
nor, moreover, should the Force have military functions exceeding those necessary to secure peaceful
conditions on the assumption that the parties to the
conflict take all necessary steps for compliance with
the recommendations
of the General Assembly.”
184. It is these last words that cause my delegation
some misgivings, because it would seem that the functions of the emergency United Nations Force would
be conditional upon the States involved in the conflict,
being prepared to take, and in fact taking all the neces-

General

sary steps to comply

Assembly-J?irst

Emergency

with the recommendations made
by the General Assembly at this special session.
185. We wonder what would happen if one or more
of the parties involved in the conflict failed to take the
necessary steps to comply with the recommendations
of the Assembly, the fundamental purpose of which is
not only the suspension of hostilities, but also the withdrawal of the invading forces from Egyptian territory
and the re-establishment of the stutus quo preceding the
warlike acts which led to the urgent calling of this
special session of the Assembly.
186. My delegation is nevertheless prepared to support the d&t resolution proposed by Argentina, Burma,
Ceylon, Denmark,
Ecuado!,
Ethiopia
and Sweden
[A/3308], in which, inter alza, the Assembly would concur in the definition of the functions of the Force as
stated, in ,paragraph 12 of the Secretary-General’s report. We consider that, if the Assembly should SO concur, its approval would be provisional and that consequently, if circumstances so required in the future, the
Assembly could extend the scope of the emergency
Force’s functions.
187. We prepared this brief statement, hut after hearing the statement of the Secretary-General a few moments ago we see that our predictions were correct:
the functions of the emergency Force could be extended
later if circumstances so required. We thinlc we have
correctly interpreted the Secretary-General’s words.
188. My delegation is fully prepared to vote in favour
of the draft resolution proposed by the nineteen Member States [A/3309], because it considers that that
draft embodies points of undoubted urgency at this
stage of the events in Egypt and of the General Assembly’s deliberations. Under that draft resolution the
Assembly would call upon Israel once again, and with
every justification,
to withdraw immediately
all its
forces behind the armistice lines and would also call
upon the United Kingdom
and France immediately
to withdraw all ,their forces from Egyptian territory.
189. In the opinion of my delegation, if Israel, the
United Kingdom and France comply with this recommendation of the General Assembly, which is, moreover, but a repetition of previous recommendations,
they would show their support of the principles of the
Charter and their sincere desire to contribute to the
restoration of international
order in r.egard to the
disturbance which has broken out in the Middle East.
That would strengthen the position of France, the
United Kingdom and Israel and of the United Nations
in general in regard to the very serious events which
are casting a pall over the noble people of Hungary
in their anguished struggle for freedom, those people
with regard to whom Israel, the United Kingdom and
France have adopted an attitude which is supported
and applauded by the vast majority of the free peoples
of the world.
I shall be very brief.
e operative (paragraphs
of the draft resolution in document A/3309 in the
light and context o.f the second considerandum of the
same draft resolution. We believe that it is nobody's
interest to create a vacuum, so to speak, even of a
temporary nature. It is with this understanding that we
shall lend our support to the nineteen-Power draft resolution.
191. We shall also support in its present form the
draft resolution presented by Argentina, Burma, Cey-

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

lon, Denmark, Ecuador, Ethiopia and Sweden, as contained in document A/3308.
,,*_,
..~~,x~d (translated
from
explain very briefly my delegation’s position on the two draft resolutions before us.
193. My delegation wholeheartedly supports the draft
resolution presented by the delegations of Argentina,
Burma, Ceylon, Denmark, Ecuador, Ethiopia and Sweden [A/3308] and will vote in favour of it.
194. With regard to paragraph 6 of this draft resolution, while I should like to thank the delegations which
nominated Iran as a member of the proposed advisory
committee, I would suggest that Ceylon should replace
Iran. If my suggestion wer,e accepted, the advisory
committee proposed in paragraph 6 would be composed
of Brazil, Canada, Ceylon, Colombia, India, Norway
and Pakistan.
195. May I take this opportunity of addressing my
warmest thanks to the Secretary-General and of expressing to him my delegation’s admiration
of the
superhuman efforts that he and his assistants have made
to submit to us so comprehensive and constructive a
report in so short a time.
196. As regards the other draft resolution, the nineteen-Power draft [A/3309], my delegation being one
of the sponsors I need hardly say that we shall support
it. We hope that the international United Nations Force
proposed by the Secretary-General will be set up immediately, so that it may replace the France-British
forces without delay and may be able to ensure and
supervise the cessation of hostilities and perform its
other duties.
posed by seven Members of the Assembly
which embodies the point of view expressed by the
Secretary-General in his final report [A/3302]. Incidentally, I want to compliment Mr. Hammarskjold
and
the Secretariat for the splendid work they have done.
198. On the other hand, Brazil will abstain when
the vote takes lace on the nineteen-Power draft resolution [&‘3309 4 , This draft is perfectly acceptable and,
reaffirms what the General Assembly has already decided. But paragraphs 2 and 3 of the operative part
call upon Israel, the United Kingdom and France toi
withdraw immediately from Egypt, whereas this withdrawal would take place as soon as the international
Force arrives there - perhaps in one or two days if the seven-Power draft resolution is adopted. It
seems to me that the word “immediately”
does not correspond to the reality we are facing.
199. Mr. ABIDIA
(LibxaJ: Ten days ago the aggressors ~~~%~“i$?l&‘and
Israel - took advantage of the delicate international situation and declared:
war on Egypt to satisfy colonial and Zionist ambitions,
The Security Council twice tried to put an end to that
aggression. The first attempt was defeated by the veto.
of the two Western Powers, the United Kingdom an&.
France, and, in the second case, the Securitv Council
most regretiully refused even td agree to co;sider the
draft resolutioa sponsored by the delegation of the.
USSR [S/3713/Rev. 1-J.
200. The General Assembly has now been doing its
best for seven days to put an end to this fire set by
the United Kingdom, France and Israel in the Middle
East, which was about to engulf the whole world, but
the Assembly has not yet achieved any firm result..

567th

meeting-7

While its historic resolution, which was approved by
sixty-four delegations, representing the great majority
of mankind, was accepted by Egypt, the victim, it was
ignored by the United Kingdom, France and Israel,
the guilty parties.
201. This was a great and savage crime carefully
arranged by the Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom, France and Israel against Egypt. The Israel army
launched the crime by attacking the northeast part of
Egypt, and, when the Egyptian marched to stop the
aggressor, the United Kingdom and French Governments seized the opportunity and threw in heavy military forces to destroy Egypt, in the belief that this
would be an easy matter and would not take more than
a few hours. The battle took place - two big Powers
and another aggressive country matched against a
small, peaceful nation having nothing but faith in God,
courage and the will to freedom. It was a wild and
savage war. Thousands of innocent women and children were killed and many of the vital elements of life
were destroyed. The aggression continued, and the
aggressors, drunk with the dream of victory, started to
put forth one condition after another for the surrender
of Egypt until their plans foundered on the rock of the
courage of the Egyptian people.
202. Let us face the facts, and nothing but the facts.
We have heard the United Kingdom, the leader of the
allied aggressors, give many reasons to justify the fight
against Egypt, First, it was claimed that the purpose of
all this was to protect Egypt against Israel. At the same
time, the aggressors took advantage of the Israel attack to attempt to occupy the Suez Canal. Later, when
the United Nations intervened to stop the aggressors,
the United Kingdom laid dowI conditions such that
Egypt would have had to accept a forced settlement
for the Palestine and Suez Canal questions. The United
Kingdom tried in that way to justify its military action, because that would sound right to many innocent
people.
203. Neither a settlement of the Palestine problem nor
a settlement of the Suez Canal question was the real
reason beh&~d everything that happened in the Middle
East, but rather colonialism and Zionism. Egypt and
the other Arab States were sincerely seeking a settlement of the aforesaid questions, based on justice and
the resolutions of the United Nations and the provisions of the Charter, but not based in any way on force
or military
action.
204. The history of colonialism and Zionism in the
Middle East is a dreadful one, full of troubles, selfishness and bloodshed. Colonialism has always oppos.ed
freedom and independence movements out of selfinterest and at the expense of poverty, sickness and
ignorance in the Middle East. Zionism established its
aggressive State on the misery of one million Arab
refugees, and is now continuing its aggression against
an Arab State to fulfil a part of its Zionist ambitions.
When the people of the Arab States decided to lead a
peaceful, free life and to put an end to ,this tragedy, the
colonial and Zionist Powers joined together against
them, in particular, and against all young, independent,
free countries everywhere in general.
20.5. The situation is still dangerous ‘in the Middle
East. The United Kingdom, France and Israel did not
comply with the United Nations resolution calling upon
them immediately to withdraw their aggressive forces
from Egyptian territory, Moreover, they are now trying
to take advantage of the emergency international police

November

1956

121

fa,rce to involve that body in the battle against Egypt
and so realize for them the colonial dream of occupying
the Suez Canal and enforcing a settlement of the
Palestine problem at the expense of the Arab States.
And if they fail - and I hope they are going to fail in the same way they will, after a period of rest, try
again to finish Egypt, that brave country.
206. My Government believes that the first and most
urgent action which must take place now is the withdrawal of all the aggressor troops from Egyptian soil,
including the Gaza strip, the Sinai desert and Port Said,
without any conditio8ns. Secondly, the duty of the emergency international police force must be limited to safeguarding the demarcation line between Egypt and
Israel established by the Armistice Agreement of 1949.
Thirdly, the aggressors, the United Kingdom,
France
and Israel, should be considered entirely responsible
for all the loss of life and damage they committed
against Egypt as a result of their aggression.
207. The PRESIDmENT
(tra&ated
frons S@nish) :
The representative of India has asked for permission
to intervene again in this discussion, and I call upon him
to do so.
,JJ&ia,) : I am thankful
lpence in allowing me to
speak again. I come back to &e rostrum for <wo reasons. First, I wish to express the appreciation of my
delegation to our colleagues from Canada for their
initiative with regard to the problem that the Assembly
is now considering. It has been the privilege of my
delegation to work closely with the Canadian delegation
on this question, and the Assembly owes a debt of
gratitude to Mr. Pearson, the Canadian Secretary of
State for External Affairs, for all the work he has
put into this question and for the very great persistence
with which he has pursued his difficult task.
209. Secondly, I come helie because, after I had left
the rostrum, there came into my hands a memorandum
that had been issued to press correspondents, presumably at United Nations Headquarters. It reads:
“United Nations Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold today received a cablegram from Major General E. L. M. Burns, Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, stating that
Israel military units this morning were expected to
make ‘a raid’ on the Truce Supervision Organization
Headquarters in Gaza, General Burns reported that
Colonel R. F. Bayard, Chairman of the Israel-Egyptian Mixed Armistice Commission, had sent messages stating that the Israelis were reported intending
to seize his radio transmitter but leave the receiver
and to restrict all observers and jeeps to the Mixed
Armistice Commission compound; also, that food
purchases may be restricted.
“General Burns reported that the last transmission
received from Colonel Bayard indicated that he did
not expect to be able to reestablish connexions. He
added that it is presumed tbat the Israelis forced their
way into the Mixed Armistice Commission House
to accomplish their mission. He did not expect
UNTSO personnel would be harmed. When this information was conveyed to the foreign press, General
Burns reported that it was held up by the Israel
censor.
“Secretary-General
Hammarskjold
made an immediate strong dkql*arclze to the representative
of
Israel for prompt transmittal to his Government.

General

Assembly-Fht

Emergency

“Previously,
on 3 November, the Israel Government requested the withdrawal of the personnel of
UNTSO
from Gaza and Beersheba.”
The memorandum goes on to say:
“In a reply of 4 November, the Israel Foreign
Ministry
referred to the statement by the Israel
representative before the General Assembly . . . to
the effect that the General Armistice Agreement had
become a fiction and was no longer valid . . .
lrOn 6 November, Colonel Nursella of the Israel
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, informed General Burns
that the Government of Israel ‘required’ the withdrawal of UNTSO
personnel from the Gaza and
Beersheba areas and that instructions to this effect
had been issued to the army commanders concerned.
When General Burns asked for clarification of these
statements, Colonel Nursella replied that Israel had
not intended to imply that force would be used relative to the withdrawal of UNTSO
personnel from
Gaza and Beersheba. Colonel Nursella added that
the UNTSO would have to abide by the regulations
of the Israel military governor and would be asked
not to use the United Nations radio station”, and so
On.

210. I think that in the context of what the Assembly
is considering - namely, the withdrawal of the invading forces behind the armistice lines - a statement
of this character, coming at the present time and
reported not by any party but by the very United
Nations off?cial who is in charge of these matters, represents a very serious development. And, as will be
noticed, this is not a private document : it has been published, and it could have serious reactions on the other
parties concerned with this matter. I would, therefore,
urge the Assembly to take this new development into
consideration and recognize, in the light o,f it, the importance of obtaining implementation
of the Assembly’s
decision to bring about the withdrawal of all invading
forces behind the armistice lines. The territory to which
reference was made is on the Egyptian side of the
armistice lines, and, what is more, if the Truce Supervision Organization is to suffer this kind of treatment,
what is its relation with and bearing upon the international force itself, which is, in a sense, no more than
a supervisory organization ?
211. This is not a matter on which my delegation
wishes to create alarmist feelings, but I think that,
coming at this time, and in the context of all the discussions that are going on here and in the midst of the
Assembly’s efforts to establish institutions and procedures whereby conflicts would be terminated, it seems
to be a very untoward development.
212. Perhaps the Secretary-General
will have something to tell us - whether this is a matter which we
must now take into consideration at this session, or
whether it will go before the Security Council or any
other organ.
213. The PRESIDENT
(tran.slated from Spa&h):
The Secretary-General wishes to make a brief statement
on the point just raised by the representative of India.
21
The matter
raised by the representative of India is not one which
I would like to put before the Assembly. The text to
which he refers is a news release which is based on an
official report from General Burns, but I think that
the matter is better handled in regular diplomatic and
administrative
forms. I have just this minute received

Spedal

Session-Plenary

Meetings

a further cable referring to the same matter which,
to my satisfaction! clarifies the situation in one important respect, and with the President’s permission I should
like to refer briefly to what I find in this new report,
as follows :
“The representative of the Israel Government
called and tendered apologies on behalf of the Government for the action taken in the forcible closing
of the radio station at Gaza. He stated that, through
a misunderstanding
of his instructions, the officer
in Gaza had exceeded his authority and taken action
which was not intended. The forcible closing of the
radio station in Gaza was never the intention of the
military
authorities. He informed me that orders
had been given by General Dayan that the radio
transmitter will be replaced at once, and that the
station can continue to be used.”
215. Iv@.. NUlPEZ
PORTUONDO
(Cuba) (transamc*n,,r.i,
n”La
“a,e*/(I
lated f?BT,S~anzsh)
:-La*
Apf
t?iY?%iL~the
debate, my
delegation would like very briefly to give its opinion on
the draft resolutions before us, but first of all, it
wishes to express to the Secretary-General and to all
members of the Secretariat its appreciation for the way
in which they have handled the momentous problem now
under discussion by the United Nations General Assembly at this emergency special session.
216. The Cuban delegation has voted for all the draft
resolutions which have been proposed on this question:
Those contained in documents A/3256,
A/3275,
A/3276 and A/3290. It will also vote in favour of the
draft resolution proposed by Argentina, Burma, Ceylon,
Denmark, Ecuador, Ethiopia and Sweden [A/33083.
217. We cannot, of course, vote for the amendment
proposed by the representative of Poland [para. 52
above], because we feel that the present membership
of the proposed advisory committee will enable it to
function more efficiently.
218. My delegation will also support the draft resolution contained in document A/3309, because it considers that the immediate withdrawal of all troops from
Egypt is something which is possible, logical and in
accordance with the resolutions previously adopted.
That is to say, inasmuch as the Canadian delegation
proposed, and the General Assembly approved, the
establishment of an international force to prevent the
continuation of the conflict between Israel and Egypt,
it is logical to expect that, before the occupying forces
have entirely withdrawn! this United Nations Force will
reach the area, surely wlthin not more than four or five
days.
219. My delegation has accordingly defined its position, b.ut it wishes to draw the Assembly’s attention
to the fact that in the question of Egypt, happily,
through the efforts of the United Nations, a cease-fire
h,as been brought about, the slaughter is over, and there
will be no more casualties.
220. The United Nations General Assembly must now
also try to bring about a cease-fire in Hungary and
put a stop to the slaughter there, because if the Assembly fails in its duty, there will not, in view of the
way in which the persecution is being carried out by
the forces of the Soviet Union, be any Hungarians left
alive in Hungary by the time the Assembly arrives at
an agreement.
221. I would therefore ask of the President and of
the Secretary-General that, as soon as we have taken
a vote on the question now before us, we should give

567th

meeting-?

immediate attention to the question of Hungary. Let
it not be that the Latin-American
countries here r,epresented alone show compassion and vote when the
question of Egypt and Israel is being discussed, whereas other Member States neglect the very serious problem of Hungary, which affects not only the prestige
of the United Nations, but civilization itself.
‘draft r&oh&n
priposed”by the group of Asian and
African countries [A/3309] and that proposed by the
seven Powers [A/3308], two of which are sister countries of my own.
223. The first draft resolution is merely a reaffirmation of one of the essential provisions contained in the
Lecommendations approved on 2 and 4 November, but it
does not fix a strict time-limit
for the SecretaryGeneral to report on the execution of the resolution as
was the case with a preliminary draft released yesterday
to the Press.
224. My delegation will also vote for the second draft
resolution, that proposed by the seven Powers, because
we believe that it conforms generally with the purposes
expressed in resolution 998 (ES-I), originally sponsored
by the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs
and adopted by the Assembly on 4 November.
225. I should now like to draw the General Assembly’s
attention to the need to study with the greatest care
the implications
of the highly significant second and
final report presented by the Secretary-General [A/33021 and, in particular those o,f paragraphs 8,9 and 12.
226. My delegation thinks that the Assembly should
clarify and elucidate as may be appropriate the scope
of the corresponding paragraphs of the draft resolution,
taking into account, of course, the very important
statements made at this meeting by the SecretaryGeneral himself.
227. I feel that the foregoing observations are all the
more pertinent in that the statements of the Governments directly concerned raise further problems and
doubts concerning the emergency international United
Nations Force and the powers and functions of the
Command.
228. Furthermore, in voting for the two draft resolutions, my d’elegation will be doing so because it believes
that they are irrevocably linked together, for we do
not think that it would be practicable for a Force such
as that proposed to be sent to the area of hostilities
unless all the parties arie prepared to respect the recommendations which the Assembly has made.
229. I should like, in conclusion to add a few words
of congratulations and thanks to our Secretary-General
and his efficient aides for their zealous efforts to comply
speedily with the various demands made upon them by
the General Assembly.
230. M
J,*;,,,My statement is in the
vote. My delegation will
nature 0
vote for both draft resolutions.
231. The draft resolution sponsored by the seven
Powers [A/3308] is in implementation
of the original
idea o$ an international force. I think that idea is in
fact a turning point in all our efforts. Today, although
we have not yet reached it, w,e ‘have our final objective
in sight, thanks to that creative idea first propounded
to us by the Secretary of State for External Affairs of
Canada and efficiently matured by our Secretary-

November

1956

123

General. I prefer that draft resolution as it stands, as
amended.
232. The other draft resolution [A/3309] calls for the
withdrawal of the troops of Israel, the United Kingdom
and France. I shall vote for that draft. In fact, when
these questions were debated in the Security Council I
favoured a cease-fire and withdrawal. In my first
speech here [56lst ~~+~etirzg], I also favoured a ceasefine and withdrawal. There has been some question or
doubt with regard to the word “immediately”.
If we are
not careful, that word “immediately”
may cause us
trouble. If we all act in good faith, that word will not
create trouble. If any party should not conduct itself in
good faith, then no text can save us from future
trouble. That, in fact, is the crux of the matter. Perhaps some other phrase would have been better, but I
think that, as the situation is now, all parties are acting
in good faith. In that cas’e, when the President announces that the resolution is passed, nobody will pull
out a watch and say whether the troops are on the
march or not. It is not that kind of operation. If any
conflicts or divergencies arise out of the word, my
delegation will certainly judge them by the nature of the
delays or the trouble. The main basis of the judgment
would be whether or not the parties were acting in
good faith.
233,.,.
tyg@) : My delegation is in
agree
al terms of the draft resolution which has been submitted to implement the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in his most
valuable report [A/3302]. We have previously stated
the agreement of the Portuguese Government with the
principle of an international force. We shall, therefore,
cast our vote in favour of that draft resolution

[A/3308-J.

234. With regard to the nineheen-Power draft resolution [A/3309],
we believe that as matters stand
serious risks might be incurred if a dangerous situation of emptiness was created in the area just before
the arrival of the international
force, The Portuguese
delegation will abstain on that particular draft resolution.
‘&g&
gy;;;;
$2
explanation of vote.
236. We have before us three documents : the second
and final report of the Secretary-General, and two
draft resolutions.
237. The purpose of the Secretary-General’s’ report
is to give full effect to the proposal made by Mr.
Pearson, the Canadian Secretary of State for External
Affairs, and I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Mr. Pearson on his initiative.
238. After listening to the explanations given by the
Secretary-General
in connexion with the vi’ews and
doubts expressed by various representatives, my delegation considers itself bound to state its general agreement witb the contents of this report and at the same
time to express to the Secretary-General its most sinceae appreciation for the manner in which he is discharging the delicate mission entrusted to him by the
General Assembly.
239. After the initial proposal by Canada and the
adoption at the 565tb meeting of the resolution constituting the second stage in this process, it was only
logical to expect a draft resolution such as that of
Argentina, Burma, Ceylon, Denmark, Ecuador, Ethio-

124

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

pia and Sweden, which would embody the more significant sections of the Secretary-General’s
report and lead
to the establishment of an international
police force.
240. The Peruvian delegation will give that draft
resolution its firm support, but at the same time wishes
to state that it does not consider the amendment proposed by the Polish delegation appropriate.
241. We also have before us the nineteen-Power draft
resolution which is designed to reiterate .the resolutions
which have preceded it and to meet any emergency
that might arise and may require a decision by the
General Assembly on the basis of the measures already
adopted.
242. There is clearly a close link between these two
draft resolutions, so that one cannot be conceived of
without the other, In my delegation’s view they do
not represent different, even if paralllel, courses of action but converge towards the same goal of bringing
about speedy compliance with the first General Assembly resolution on a oease-fire and the withdrawal of
troops [997 (ES-I)].
My delegation therefore thinks
that, irrespective of the comments made concerning the
wording of paragraph 3 of the nineteen-Power draft
nesolution, it must be inter.preted in the sense that it
implies the execution, and the faithful execution, of
the original resolution.
243. As I have said, the Assembly cannot make arrangements or adopt resolutions that are incompatible.
As the delegation of Peru considers that the two draft
resolutions constitute one complete whole and should
be interpreted o.ne in the light of the other or, to be
more precise, one as a function of the other, it will
also give its support to this draft resolution.
1: I shall be excomments on the
statements made by two nepresentatives during the debate.
24.5. The representative
of Australia
suggested an
.amendment to operative paragraph 4 of the draft
‘resolution contained in document A/3308. He suggested that after the word “proceed” the word “forthwith” should be inserted, so that the paragraph
would read: “Requwks the Chief of Command . . . to
proceed forthwith with the full organization of the
Force”.
246. I personally consider this an improvement. I have
‘been able to contact all of the sponsors except one, and
I think I can say on behalf of all of them that they
are prepared to accept this amendment,
247. The representative of Poland asked what was
meant in operative paragraph 9 by the words, “the
Advisory Committee . . . shall be empowered to request
.the convening of the General Assembly . . .“. He wanted
to know whether this meant an ordinary session, a
special session or an emergency special session. The
idea in this wording was that the session could be of
any kind, according to the relevant rules of procedure,
If the representative of Poland would consider it satisfactory to insert the words “through the usual procedures” after the words “shall be empowered to request”, I do not think any of the sponsors would
object.
248. Finally, in ,explanation of my delegation’s vote
concerning the draft resolution of the nineteen Powers
in documlent A/3309, I would underline the words
stated by a speaker here a few moments ago, namely,
that we have to act on the assumption of good faith, I

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

very much agree. After tlze interpretation given by the
representative of India, Mr. Krishna Menon, that in
fact %nmediately” means the same as “promptly”, my
dellegation will be able to vote in favour of this draft
resolution.
249. Mr. GUNEWARDENE
CCexlon)
only
$y-=“&-~a~~~’
is :theTheremark
Provo
made by my esteemed friends from Cuba and Brazil
on the subject of the interpretation of the word “immediately”.
As the Assembly knows, the nineteenPower draft resolution flows from resolution 997
(ES-I), adopted on 2 November. The requirements of
certain parts of that resolution have been carried out,
but some portions remain unfulfilled. We are therefore repeating the request, and we are asking the Israel,
British and French forces to leave the territory of
Qznt.
250. By the word “immediately”
we do not necessarily mean that a very rigid interpretation should be
made. What we mean is without delay, promptly. All
we want to convey is that Israel, British or French
troops have no legal or moral right to remain on the
territory of Egypt. The Assiernbly, by its resolution,
rejected in unmistakable terms the explanation that
their action was a “police action”; it was an invasion,
a military operation conducted against Egypt. In those
circumstances, they have no legal or moral right to
remain there, and there is no reason why they should
lay down as a condition that they would remain until
the United Nations emergency police force took over.
Our position is that they are in the position of intruders, that they are unlawfully there, and that therefore they should leave as quickly as possible. Nobody
appointed them policemen. That was their own unilateral action.
251. The question is now befone the United Nations.
If a problem arises as a result of a resumption of
hostilities, the responsibility for settling it rests on this
august Assembly ; it is not for one nation or another to
say, “We are there as policemen until you come in.”
Such a position is unthinkable. I would therefore ask
these troops to comply with the ordinary decent requirements of the Assembly’s resolution that they make
arrangements to leave the territory of Egypt as
quickly as possible, without delay. That is the explanation I have to offer.
2.52.
The position of the
Italian
con which forms the
subject of our debate has been clear and consistent
since the beginning of the debate. We supported the
draft resolution submitted at the 562nd meeting by the
United States delegation [A/3256]
and we voted for
it. We gave our consent to the draft resolution presented
by Afghanistan, Burma, Ceylon and other Statics [A/32751 at the 563rd meeting. We accepted and welcomed
the draft resolution introduced by Canada [A/3276]
at the same meeting, and gave our full consent to the
creation of an emergency international United Nations
Force to secure and supervise the oessation of hostilities in accordance with tbe terms of resolution 997
(ES-I) adopted by the Assembly on 2 November.
253. The next day, on 4 November [565th meeting],
we approved the draft resolution introduced by Canada,
Colombia and Norway [A/3290]
concerning the implementation of the ‘resolution previously approved for
the creation of a United Nations force.
254. Wte now have two more draft resolutions, The
draft presented ,by Argentina, Burma, Ceylon and others

567th

meeting-7

[A/3308]
seems to me to be a reasonable document,
which is intended to implement resolution 1000 (ES-I).
However, with respect to operative paragraph 8 of the
draft, I am not sure what is meant by the words “under
the present and other relevant resolutions”. I understand that this draft resolution concerns this subject, the
international
force, not nelated subjects. I really do
not see the necessity for the words “other relevant
resolutions”. They reaffirm things which have already
been said. As has been very well explained by the representative of Peru, this text has to be interpreted in
the light of the others! and, among others, of this very
draft resolution contamed in documlent A/3308, which
is before the Assembly tonight. I shall, however, vote
for it. I do not see the necessity for those words, but
because I voted for the others, I shall vote for this
draft tonight,

sent o.f all the representatives
of the Latin American Republics, I am going to read
out the decision taken today by the Council of the
Organization
of American States concerning the questions .before the Assembly at this session. It is as
follows :
“The Council of the Organization
of American
States,
9Vheread :

“1. In accordance with Article 1 of the Charter
of the Organization af American States, within the
United Nations, the Organization of American States
is a regional agency,
“2. Pursuant to Article 53 (ie) of the Charter, it
is the duty of the Council to promote and facilitate
collaboration between the Organization of American
States and the United Nations,
“3. In view of the serious events in Egypt and
Hungary, the Unibed Nations has adopted important
resolutions designed to maintain the peace and the
juridical
order consecrated in the Charter of the
world organization, and
“4. All the member States of the Organization
of American States, as Members of the United Nations, have stated their concurrence with those resolutions.
“Resolves :
“1. To declare its firm adherence to the abovementioned action of the Unibed Nations;
“2. To reaffirm once again the traditional solidarity that unites the American States.”
256. All the representatives of the Latin American Republics accredited to the United Nations wished to have
this resolution which has been adopted by the regional
organization made known to all so as to show that the
entire continent is united in support of the cause of
peace, justice and law.
Mr. SERRANO
(Philippines),:
I merely wish
~l~~~~-~~~~~~~~i~~~‘~~f
“...“$v*Government
as a
co-sponsor with eighteen other countries of the draft
resolution contained in document A/3309, and to raise
a point of order with respect to the draft resolution
contained in document A/3308.
258. With referenoe to the former draft resolution,
my Government wishes it to be understood that in sponsoring it with eighteen other countries, operative para-

November

125

1956

graphs 2 and 3 thereof are understood to bie within tke
context of the second paragraph of the preamble of this
draft resolution, and that the purport of the whole
draft should be brought into harmonious relation with
the operation of the draft resolution in document
A/3308.
259. With respect to the latter draft resolution, I
would ask for a separate vo’te on operative paragraphs
1, 3 and 6.
260.
Mr, $ PEARSON
(Capada)>:
to
speak ‘fdr’
.~~.““~f<~“ii.-y.~~i’to
explainI merely
& votewish
of my
delegation on the draft resolution in document A/3309.
In this connexion, my delegation supports the view
which has been expressed by the representative of
Peru and others as to the interconnexion and the &se
relationship between the two draft resolutions which are
before us and the impossibility
of separating the implementation of one from that. of the other. In that
sense we give the same interpretation
to the word
“immediately” that has been given by others, that is “as
quickly as possible”. In our minds, there is a relationship, implicit in the word “immediately”,
between the
withdrawal of the forces reSerred to in the resolution
and the arrival and the functioning
o,f the United
Nations Force.
261. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Sjanish):
There are no more speakers on the list, The Assembly
will accordingly prooeed to a vote.
262. We shall vote first on the draft resolution proposed jointly by seven Member States and appearing
in document A/3308. Four amendments have been
proposed to this draft. The first, proposed by Australia,
has been accepted by the sponsors and has consequently been incorporated in the text of the draft resolution.
263. We shall now vote on the amendment proposed
by Poland to the effect that Czechoslovakia should be
included as a member of the advisory committee whose
establishment is proposed in the draft nesolution.
The amendment

was rejected

by 31 votes to 23, with

14 absterttions.
264. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Span&) :
We also have an amendment by Denmark which I
shall ask Mr. Cordier to explain, as the Secretariat
has not had time to issue it as a document.
265. Mr. CORDIER
(Executive Assistant to the
Secretary-General) : In paragraph 9, after the words
“to request” add the words “through the usual procedures”.
266. The PRESIDENT
(tramlated from Spantih) :
We shall now vote on the Danish amendment.
The alnendment was adopted by 53 votes to none,
z&h 13 abstentions.

267. The PRESID,ENT
(tramlated from Spalzish) :
The representative o’f Iran has requested that, in paragraph 6, the name of Iran should be replaced by the
name of Ceylon. If there are no abjections, I shall
consider the amendment adopted.
It was so decided.
268. The PRESIDENT
(Cranslated from .S$anish) :
We shall now proceed to a separate vote on certain
paragraphs of the draft resolution, as requested by the
representative of the Philippines. This request refers
to the operative paragraphs 1, 3 and 6.

General

126

Paragraph

Assembly-First

Emergency

1 was adopted by 59 votes to none, with

14 absbentions.
Paragraph 3 was adopted by 61 votes to none, with
12 absteaztions.
Paragraph 6, as amended, was adopted by 61 votes
to T+one, with 13 abstentions.

269. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Span&) :
We now have to vote on the joint draft resolution as
a whole with the amendments proposed by Australia,
Iran and Denmark, all of which have been adopted. A
request has been made for a roll-call vote.
A vote was taken by roll call.
Azutralia, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called ZL~OYZto vote first.

T?z favozlr : Australia,
Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia,
Brazil, Burma, Cambodia,
Canada, Ceylon, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, ,Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordan,
Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg,
Mexico,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Unibed States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina.
Against : None.
Abstaining : Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Hungary, Israel, Poland, Romania, Ukrainian
Soviet Sociahst Republic,
Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Albania.
The draft resohtioa
as a z&oEe, m amended, was
adopted by 64 votes to none, with 1.2 abstentions.
270. The PRESIDENT
(tmnslated
fronz Spa&&)

:
Several delegations have expressed a desire to explain
their votes as soon as we have finished voting on the
two draft resolutions, but the delegation of Pakistan
wishes to explain its vote on the nineteen-Power draft
resolution [:A/33091 before we proceed to the next
vote. If, there are no objections, I will give the floor to
the representative of Pakistan.
271. Mr. MIR KHAN
($akist+lnS : I shall ,be very
brief in %$%%i?~~‘%~*vote
on the draft resolution
that we have co-sponsored, because the views of the
Pakistan delegation on the whole question are known
well enough. Some questions have been raised about
the withdrawal of the British and the French forces
from Egypt on the ground that this step would remove
the shield between the Israel and the Egyptian forces.
The view of my delegation is that this draft emphasizes
the urgency and speed with which the emergency intiernational Force is to be set up and brought to the
scene of recent hostilities. I am fully aware of the
enormous burden which our Secretary-General
has
been carrying on his shoulders and I have no desire to
add to the strain on him. He is doing a magnificent
job in discharging the functions assigned to him by the
General Assembly in its various resolutions and I am
sure that he has the drive and the dedication to get the
emergency United Nations Force ready without any
avoidable delay.
272. At any rate, we should concentrate our efforts
on getting the international
Forae ready and operating
as quickly as possible. The idea of such a force has

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

been accepted by the Members of the Assembmly, including the parties concerned. The arrival of this Force
on the scene without loss of time is essential.
273. My Government’s view on the matter of withdrawal of foreign forces is that the presenoe of the
United Nations Force there at once is necessary for the
immediate withdrawal, so that the withdrawal and the
manner of withdrawal may not produce circumstances
to the disadvantage of Egypt. This is what we mean
by paragraphs 2 and 3 of the nineteen-Power draft
resolution, which is based on resolution 997 (ES-I) of
2 November and which appears to have unanimous
support.
274. .*Tl?e, “?RESIDENT,
(translated from Spuni.&) :
“‘; ,,.a
I,,%,
.I,..*.
The representatives of Brazil and Norway have asked
for the floor for the same purpose as the representative of Pakistan.
275. Mr. DE FREITAS
VALLE
“.X..l.w.~I”IwI*,,*..
.”(Brazil) : About an
hour agb:‘r”~~~~~~~~S~~~~‘fwas gomg to abstain on the
nineteen-power draft resolution [A/3309]
on account
of the word “immediately”.
It was linked with the
withdrawal of troops of Israel, the United Kingdom
and France. But since explanations have been given
to the effect that the word “immediately” means as soon
as the international
force will be there, I have no
further reason to abstain and I will vote in favour of
that draft.
276. ._Mr
ENGEN (Norway)
: I wish to say just two
-J”--“...-~~.,-.
_,,,,
words in explanation of?& vote which my delegation
will cast on the draft resolution. My Government has
on various occasions supported the call to the parties
to withdraw their forces from Egypt promptly. We are
contributing
modestly to facilitate such prompt withdrawal in accordance with the plans worked out by
the Secretary-General at the request of the General
Assembly, and adopted by the General Assembly a moment ago.
277. In this connexion, I take note of the statements
made by the representatives of India and the Philippines and other sponsors of this draft resolution, and
in particular I would take note of the explanation of
vote which was given by the representative of Canada
a while ago, a statement with which I associate myself
fully. I would like to have this statement and my explanation included in the reco,rd of this meeting. With
that understanding of all these points in paragraphs 2
and 3 of the draft resolution, my delegation will vote in
favour of it.
278. The PRES’IDENT
(translated @crowSpanish) :
We n&$~li?Z~
Zit~ bb the nineteen-Power draft
resolution appearing in document A/3309. The vote will
be taken by roll-call.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Liberia, having been draw+,? by lot by the Preside&,
was called zbpon to vote first.
In. fuuow : Liberia, Libya, Mexico, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sweden,
Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemnen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Canada, Ceylon, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El

567th

meeting-7

Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Ioeland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordon, Lebanon.
Against : Israel.
Abstaining : Luxembourg,
Netherlands,
New Zealand, Portugal, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia,
Belgium, France, Laos.
The draft resolzktion wm adopted by 65 votes to 1,
with 10 abstendions.
gaGon wishes to make a few comments in connexion
with its vote.
280. Despite the fact that, as long ago as 2 November,
the General Assembly adopted resolution 997 (ES-I)
calling for the immediate cessation of hostilities, the
United Nations has been unable, in the considerable
space of time since that date, to put an end to the
aggression undertaken by the United Kingdom, France
and Israel against Egypt, and has proved helpless to
prevent the occupation by the aggressors of a large
area of Egyptian territory.
281. As we see from the telegram received today from
the Egyptian Minister of Foreign Affairs, war is still
going on on Egyptian soil, although many hours have
already passed since the time fixed for the cease-fire.
In his telegram the Egyptian Minister
of Foreign
,
Affairs says :
6‘* . . the French and British armed forces are
continuing their hostile military action and are firing
at both military and civilians at Port Said. They
have furthermore encircled the city and severed i);”
communication
from ,the- rest pf the country . . . .
[A/3312].
282. We cannot in this connexion disregard the fact
that it was not until they had inflicted heavy damage
on the Egyptian people, perpetrated a mass slaughter
of the civilian population, seized a large part of the
country’s territory that the aggressors consented
halt their military operations,
283. And now the aggressors, in their cease-fire conditions, have put forward new demands, indicating that
they propose to install themselves in the Suez Canal
zone for a long time to come and lord it over the zone.
Thus in the United Kingdom representative’s letter
dated 6 November addressed to the Secretary-General
[A/3306]
- with which, as the Secretary-General
has informed us, France has also associated itself - the
proposal is made that the technicians accompanying
the France-British
force should remain in the Suez
Canal region indefinitely to clear the Canal of sunken
vessels and open it for navigation.
284. It is also plain from that letter that the United
Kingdom and France actually wish to make the presence
of their forces in Egypt dependent on whether or not
the international
force to be sent to Egypt will be
competent, in their opinion, to secure and supervise
the attainment of the objectives set out in General
Assembly resolution 997 (ES-I) of 2 November.
285. And all this is now being presented to us as a
success on the part of the United Nations in calling
a halt to hostilities and protecting Egypt, -the victim of
aggression.
286, Once hostilities have ceased, the primary task
of the United Nations will be to secure the immediate

November

1956

127

withdrawal of all France-British
and Israel troops
from Egyptian territory, as General Assembly resolution 997 (ES-I) requires.
287. The Soviet delegation voted for the nineteenPower draft resolution which calls upon the Governments of the United Kingdom, France and Israel immediately to withdraw their forces from Egyptian
territory, In so doing, the Soviet delegation took the
view that the immediate withdrawal of France-British
forces from Egyptian territory and the withdrawal of
the armed forces of Israel behind the demarcation line
would create the neoessary conditions for the restoration of peace in the area.
288. In the Soviet delegation’s opinion, however, the
resolution would be more likely to achieve its purpose
if it set a definite time-limit
for the withdrawal of
Israel forces to their own territory and the removal of
United Kingdom and French forces from Egypt.
289. The General Assembly has adopted a proposal to
set up an international
force, It follows from the text
of the resolution and the Secretary-General’s report on
the matter that the United Nati~Js,~e~~~~,~~~~~,.,
and French 1”,,/.
condition,+@
the
the United
wI~(_*CI.lII,I.“II,.IIC.~III-I.
,.
II B*,IB_Kin dom
Q2”~e”~~.~.-.l~s
,should remain on
i6YiGL~a~~
the Egypt&n*~erritory
they have seized until the United Nations has constituted its own armed force and
stationed it at localities designated with Egypt’s consent.
290. Surely, there can be no doubt that the draft resolution, providing as it does for the tt-ansfer~q$c9~tro!
ove~~th~~ncz_.C~~~,~.o.~
internatjon,@rce,
is an undisguised attempt to bring about a settlement of the
SuezCanal question favourable td the United Kingdom
and’Franck &dt&,endow
such a settlement with the authority of the United Nations,
291. The Soviet Union regards
. _ the presence_, of ths
aggressors’ armed forces in the sovereign state or
Egypt as inadmissible. As regards the creation, and
stationing on Egyptian territory of an international
police force, the Soviet delegation is obliged to point
created in violation of the
,Iu__)__I-Y”-c_m--~-~~~
1/.
ly resolution on the basis of
which it is now proposed to form this Force is inconsistent with the Charter. Chapter VII of the Charter
empowers the Security Council, and the Security Council only, not the General Assembly, to set up an international armed force and to take such action as it
may deem necessary, including the use of such a force,
to maintain or restore international pleace and security.
293. The resolution on the creation of an international
armed force is also inconsistent with the purposes for
which the United Nations Charter permits the creation
and use of an international
force. The Charter envisages the use of such a force to help a State victim of
aggression to repel the aggressor and to defend such
a State against the aggressor.
294. But the resolution 1000 (ES-I) of 5 November
1956 and the plan for its implementation, which is contained in the resolution just adopted provide for the
use of an international
force for quite another purpose
than that of repelling aggression against Egypt. The
plan provides for the introduction of the international
force into Egyptian territory and the transfer of a
large part of that territory, including the Suez Canal
zone, to its control.
295. No one can fail to see that the occupation of
the Suez Canal zone by an international force really

128

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

means removing the Canal from Egyptian administration - and that, as we all know, was one of the purposes of the United Kingdom and France in launching
aggressive operations against Egypt.
296. For these reasons, the Soviet delegation regards
the proposal for the establishment by the General Assembly of an international
force to be stationed on
Egyptian territory,
a proposal which by-passles the
Security Council, as contrary to the United Nations
Charter.
297. However, in view of the fact that in this instance the victrm of aggression has been compelled to
agree to the introduction of the international
force, in
the hope that this may prevent any further extension of
the aggression, the Soviet detegation did not vote
against the draft resolution, but abstained.
298. The General Assembly must address all its attention and its efforts to solving what is now the main
question - the immediate withdrawal of foreign armed
forces from Egyptian territory.
299. The Sovilet Union is prepared to make its own
contribution ttowards putting an end to the aggression
against Egypt in the briefest possible space of time,
towards a settlement of the Suez problem based on due
regard for thle interests of Egypt, a sovereign and independent State, and towards ensuring freedom of navigation for all prospective users of the Canal. Such a
settlement of the Suez question would also serve the
cause of world peace.
like to explain in a few
words the Belgian dIelegation’s vote on the draft resolution in document A/3309.
301. The withdrawal of the foreign forces which are
now in Egyptian territory is already implied in the
resolutions previously adopted by the Assembly. The
nineteen-Power draft resolution adds nothing new in
this respect.
302. Moreover, the Assembly, by adopting the draft
resolution in document A/3308, has approved the functions of the United Nations Force as they are defined
in paragraph 12 of the Secretary-General’s
report
[A/3302].
Now it is clear from this paragraph that
the withdrawal must be co-ordinated with the stationing of the United Nations Force. The word “immediately” in the nineteen-Power draft resolution [A/3309]
can have no other mleaning. Accordingly, this draft constitutes an unnecessary repetition; that is why the Belgian delegation abstained in the vote.
303, Mr. LOD’GEDnited ,*~~w,,w,yY**&-”
States L.““nPuur.n~n-,~#~~“e
of America) : I
Come+%?%?‘?i$%%m
Just to say how gratrfied the
United States is that the resolutions before the Assembly have now been adopted and that the United
Nations Force is about to come into being. I wish also
to make one brief announcement
on behalf of the
United States Government.
304. I have just informed the Secretary-General that
the United States is ready, subject to his wishes and
wherever possible, to transport first contingents of the
United Nations Force on their way from their bases
to Egypt immediately.
305. But we also say this. We understand that the
withdrawal will be phased with the speedy arrival of
the international United Nations Force. We hope that

Special

Session-Plentlry

Meetings

this phased operation, as contemplated by the resolu:
tion, will begin as soon as possible, and the sooner the
better,
/
306. Mr,~,.~~~~~~~,.“.(Syria) : I should like briefl{ to
explain the vote which my dIelegation has just cast. We
voted in favour of the draft resolution submitted by
Argentina, Burma, Ceylon, Denmark, Ecuador, Etbiopia and Sweden on the understanding that the words
“and other relevant resolutions” contained in paragraph
8 of the said resolution mean the other relevant resolutions adopted so far by the General Assembly during
the present emergency special session.
307. We voted in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the nineteen Powers, with the understanding
that the word “immediately”
means ‘rpromptly”, In
this connexion we must state that we do not accept
the interpretation given to the word by the representative
of Canada, because we believe that the withdrawal
of forces has nothing to do with the emergency international United Nations Force. The interpretation given
by the representative of Brazil is equally irrelevant. We
believe that the withdrawal must take place immediately
without regard to the organization, composition or despatch of such a force to the area or any other consideration.
es) : We abstained
YlZift resolution in
ccument A/3308 because that paragraph approved in
its entirety the exposition of principles contained in
paragraphs 6 to 9 of the Secretary-General’s report.
While we are in full agreement with those principles,
we cannot subscribe to a sentence contained therein, in
so far as it relates to the possibility of using this international police f oroe for collective action under Chapter
VII of the Charter. We feel that to open the door to
that possibility is rather dangerous and may create
serious apprehensions in the minds of contributing Governments.
309. We also abstained on operative paragraph 3 of
the same draft, because the reference to a “balanced
composition” of the international Force is ambiguous,
Since the sponsors of the draft have not sought to
clarify that phrase, and sinoe it is fraught with unhappy possibilities, not only as to an undesirable preponderance with respect to numerical strength of a
force contributed by one nation but also as to an undesirable preponderance of strength with respect to
groups of nations contributing, we are unable to accept the provisions in its present form.
310. We also abstained on operative paragraph 6, because we See1 that the Advisory Committee should not
only concern itself with a study of the planning and
operation of this international police force, but should
include within the scope of its studies the functions of
this police force. We have stated that, in the performance of its functions, this international police force may
come to grips with political problems, and thorough
study by the advisory committee is therefore required.
311. However, we voted in favour of the whole draft
resolution because, subject to the reservations we have
stated, we believe it is a rnajo,r step toward the prompt
implementation
of the resolution calling for the creation of an international police force.
312. The PRESIDENT
(translated fralm S$&&,l:
If no other representative wishes to explain his vote,
I shall caI1 on the Secretary-tier-al,

567th

meeting-

313. The SECRETARY-GENERAL
: Before this
meeting is adjourned, I should like to inform the AssembIy that, despite the responsibilities which the Middle Eastern question has placed upon me and my staff,
we are giving serious consideration to our responsibilities under resolution 1004 (ES-II)
on the question of
Hungary,
adopted by the General Assembly on 4
November, That resolution has been formally called to

-7 November

1956

129

the attention of the two Governments most directly concerned. I shall shortly be in a position to report on
further steps that will be taken in implementation of
the .resolution. In the meantime, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is
working with other welfare agencies to meet the need
for food, medicine and similar supplies.
The meeting rose at 7.45 P.m.
