A /77/PV.65

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

65th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 29 March 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Wallace
(Jamaica), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 29 (continued)
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Draft resolution A/77/L.61
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Lemogang Kwape, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Botswana, to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.61.
Mr. Kwape (Botswana): At the outset, let me convey
my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting on the agenda item
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”, the
annual consideration of which provides an opportunity
for the General Assembly to renew its commitment to
ensuring that diamonds remain a force for economic
development instead of a driver of armed conflict.
I should also indicate that today’s meeting also
officially marks the end of the term of my country,
Botswana, as Chair of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, a mechanism created more than
20 years ago to prevent the flow of conflict diamonds
in the global diamond trade. During our tenure in
2022, Botswana successfully hosted and presided over
the Kimberley Process intersessional meeting held in
the tourism resort town of Kasane in June 2022 and
the plenary meeting held in Gaborone in November,

which adopted a consensus-based Kimberley Process
communiqué. I should also note that progress was
made on several aspects of the work of the mechanism,
including the promotion of capacity-building with
regard to the compliance of countries with set standards.
As a Kimberley Process-compliant diamond-producing
country, and because no country should be left behind,
Botswana welcomes efforts aimed at promoting
compliance and the sharing of lessons learned and
best practices.
Progress was also made in relation to the
establishment of an ad hoc committee on review
and reform of the Kimberley Process. It is expected
that the review and reform process will enhance the
effectiveness and fitness for purpose of the Kimberley
Process. Another milestone achieved in 2022 was the
selection of the location of the permanent secretariat
of the Kimberley Process. Botswana is grateful for
that expression of confidence in our country by fellow
Kimberley Process participants. Having chaired the
Kimberley Process during its formative years in 2006,
Botswana was particularly honoured to serve again
in 2022. That sense of honour stems from our deep
commitment to the Kimberley Process and the special
meaning that natural diamonds have for Botswana. In
our country, diamonds are for development. As members
of the Assembly may be aware, diamonds are the
mainstay of Botswana’s economy and have been so for
more than five decades. Diamonds currently contribute
one quarter of our gross domestic product, more than
90 per cent of foreign export earnings and one third of
Government revenues. That is how important diamonds

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08949 (E)

*2308949*

A/77/PV.65

are to Botswana. In that regard, Botswana is steadfast
in ensuring that the Kimberley Process effectively
promotes the reputation and economic viability of that
precious natural resource.
As outgoing Chair, Botswana is honoured to submit
a report on the activities of the Kimberley Process
during 2022 for the consideration of the General
Assembly, accompanied by draft resolution A/77/L.61,
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict:
breaking the link between the illicit transaction of
rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution
to prevention and settlement of conflicts”. The text of
the draft resolution is balanced and reflects the shared
commitment of Member States to preventing diamonds
from fuelling conflict. I therefore take this opportunity
to thank delegations for their constructive participation
in the negotiations and for being committed to finding
common ground.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Botswana’s
commitment to the Kimberley Process and reassure
the incoming Chair, Zimbabwe, of our support during
its tenure.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): We join other
delegations in thanking the Republic of Botswana for
spearheading the introduction of the important draft
resolution A/77/L.61, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
We also thank Zimbabwe for its able stewardship of the
Kimberley Process and the facilitation of the negotiation
of the draft resolution, which is remarkable given these
difficult times. The Kimberley Process, we know
today, is the initiative of African diamond-producing
countries. For that reason, the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the African Union
welcome the adoption of draft resolution A/77/L.61.
We acknowledge the role of the Permanent Observer
Mission of the African Union in facilitating the process.
I wish to highlight the following aspects of draft
resolution A/77/L.61, which are of high priority to the
54 members of the African Group.
First, we believe that it represents the progress
achieved in the Kimberley Process during the past 20
years and, more importantly, notes the challenges we
are facing today as diamond-producing countries.
2/20

29/03/2023

Secondly, the draft resolution recalls the positive
benefit of the legitimate diamond trade to diamondproducing countries and therefore underlines the need
for continued international action with regard to the
ethical exploitation, sale and trade of diamonds.
Thirdly, it also calls for efforts to enhance
cooperation and assistance to diamond-producing
countries on best practices, capacity-building and
compliance in maintaining standards, rules, procedures
and certification, an area long advocated for by African
member States in the Kimberley Process.
Fourthly, we welcome and deeply appreciate the
decision by the 2022 plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process to establish the Kimberley Process secretariat in
Gaborone, Botswana.
Most of the African continent is dependent on
proceeds from sales of diamond resources. Diamonds
alone represent an industry worth more than $81.4 billion
per year, with more than 50 per cent of global production
sourced from Africa. The Assembly can therefore
appreciate the value we place on this very important
subject and the discussion of natural diamonds
generally. The importance of diamonds to Africa’s
development agenda is therefore unquestionable. To
Africa, diamonds are for development. It is in that regard
that most countries of the continent have sponsored
this draft resolution for the past 20 years, with a view
to protecting the integrity of the diamond sector. The
unanimous adoption of this important draft resolution
therefore reaffirms the importance of the diamond sector
in promoting socioeconomic development in Africa.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm African’s
commitment to the Kimberley Process initiative and
assure the incoming Chair, Zimbabwe, of the region’s
continued cooperation and support during its tenure. We
look forward to constructive intersessional and plenary
sessions in Victoria Falls during the year.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. De La Maisonneuve (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the potential candidate country Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
23-08949

29/03/2023

The EU member States are joining the consensus
on draft resolution A/77/L.61 today. We commend
Botswana for its good offices in building consensus.
I would also like to welcome the presence here today
of His Excellency Mr. Lemogang Kwape, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Botswana.
Conflict diamonds have played a major role in
funding some of the most devastating civil wars in
Africa. We have come a long way since the Kimberley
Process was established. It has contributed to peace,
security and prosperity. It was constituted as a
multilateral tool for conflict prevention, and it has had
a valuable development impact in improving the lives of
people dependent on the trade in diamonds. As a joint
initiative of Governments, civil society and industry,
it has reinforced the message that diamonds belong to
the communities that mine them, not to militias. For
several countries and communities, in particular on the
African continent, the Kimberley Process has made the
difference between war and peace. We fully recognize
the contribution of the Process to the settlement of
conflicts and the consolidation of peace, for example
in Angola, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Under its current narrow definition, it has reduced the
proportion of conflict diamonds in the global diamond
trade to less than 1 per cent.
Since 2016, the EU has funded almost €10 million
in projects aimed at reinforcing governance in the
diamond sector and developing alternative livelihoods,
for example through the Mano River Union, supporting
cooperation among Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone, and in the Central African Republic.
However, we must continue to work to reform the
Kimberley Process. We should be guided by the words
of Mr. Festus Mogae, former President of the Republic
of Botswana, who stated last year, at a special meeting
of the Economic and Social Council in this very Hall,
that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme is not
as effective as when it was created, agreeing with those
who demand that it should be looked at.
We are meeting in extraordinary times. The
Kimberley Process is facing unprecedented challenges.
We must make sure that natural resources contribute to
sustainable development and peace rather than paying
for weapons that are used to attack States in violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, sowing death
and destruction. Within the Kimberley Process and
everywhere else, we must continue to work to make
sure that natural resources do not finance war or human

A/77/PV.65

rights abuses but are a source of sustainable growth.
We need to seize the opportunity of the current review
and reform cycle to broaden the definition of conflict
diamonds to capture the evolving nature of conflicts
and the realities on the ground.
The Kimberley Process is deeply rooted in full
respect for State sovereignty. Today’s draft resolution
reminds us of the obligations that the Charter places
on States regarding the maintenance of international
peace and security and ensuring full respect for State
sovereignty. We therefore can only condemn Russia’s
war of aggression against Ukraine, enabled by Belarus.
We are resolved in our unwavering solidarity with the
people of Ukraine. For several years the EU led the work
of reforming the Kimberley Process in a major effort to
help it remain relevant. We now face fresh challenges
linked to the role of the Process in conflict prevention
and in protecting the communities suffering in war-torn
countries. For the Kimberley Process to remain relevant
and credible in a changing world, it is vital to ensure
that it can address wider situations of armed conflict,
systemic violence or human rights violations related to
or financed by the trade in rough diamonds. That is a
debate we need to have. The EU therefore makes a plea
to the Kimberley Process to engage in an open dialogue
and to bring the core conflict-prevention mandate that
is at its heart to the current reform agenda.
Finally, on a positive note, the EU and its member
States welcome the Kimberley Process decision
to establish the Kimberley Process secretariat in
Gaborone, and we look forward to working with
Botswana in that endeavour. We also look forward
to working with Zimbabwe this year as the incoming
Kimberley Process Chair.
Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): The delegation of Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement just made on behalf of
the European Union and would now like to add some
remarks in its national capacity.
Ukraine decided to support the consensus on draft
resolution A/77/L.61 on the role of diamonds in fuelling
armed conflict. We recognize the Kimberley Process
as an important initiative whose objective is to prevent
the flow of conflict diamonds and help to protect the
legitimate trade in rough diamonds. The Process
is a unique tripartite platform that brings together
stakeholders in Government, the industry and civilsociety coalitions in order to discuss and take action to
prevent conflict diamonds from entering the diamond

23-089493/20

A/77/PV.65

trade. It has been an effective multilateral tool for
conflict prevention by stemming the flow of conflict
diamonds for many years.
However, today the Kimberley Process faces
unprecedented challenges. The situation has
dramatically changed since 24 February 2022, when
Russia started an unprovoked and unjustified full-scale
invasion of Ukraine in flagrant violation of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, which has
direct global implications for the diamond trade. The
full-scale war waged by Russia against Ukraine, with
the complicity of Belarus, has already led to thousands
of deaths among the innocent people of Ukraine. As of
today, Russian troops continue to commit war crimes
and acts of terrorism, launching massive missile and
artillery attacks on civilian targets, killing civilians
and destroying critical civilian infrastructure. By
attacking energy and water supply infrastructure,
Russia is trying to destroy the Ukrainian nation as part
of a genocidal policy.
Despite a number of requests by Ukraine and its
partners during the last year to include on the provisional
agenda of the plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process the issues related to the consequences of the
Russian aggression against Ukraine in the context of
the activities of the Kimberley Process, the relevant
decision was not adopted. It is worth mentioning
that Russia and Belarus do not share the values of
the Kimberley Process and undermine the rules of
that initiative. In particular, Russia actively uses
disinformation against Ukraine and whitewashes
itself as a responsible participant of the Kimberley
Process. Let me remind the General Assembly that
Russia violated the administrative decision in terms
of the submission of quarterly statistics of mining and
trade in diamonds. We believe that neither Russia nor
its allies should hold positions within the Kimberley
Process. Ukraine is also opposed to Belarus serving
as Vice-Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2023. Our
delegation would like to emphasize that the notion of
diamonds that are directly and exclusively involved in
the financing of rebel movements against legitimate
Governments is outdated. Today, they are also used for
financing wars and obtaining revenue from their trade
by such States as Russia.
For its part, Ukraine supports the main objectives of
the Kimberley Process, namely the promotion of peace,
security and sustainable development and contributes
to the implementation of the requirements of the
4/20

29/03/2023

Kimberley Process and the recommendations of that
initiative, as well as its administrative decisions. While
we demonstrated our respect for the long-standing
practice of adopting this year’s draft resolution on
this issue, A/77/L.61, by consensus and showed some
flexibility throughout the negotiation process, we are
obliged to express our regret that it does not contain any
language on the Russian aggression against Ukraine,
including any reference to resolution ES-11/6 of
23 February, entitled “Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations underlying a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in Ukraine”. At the same time, Ukraine
welcomes the inclusion in the draft resolution of the
references to the respect for State sovereignty and
conflict prevention. We appreciate that draft resolution
A/77/L.61 recognizes the importance of the issue of
the revision of the definition of conflict diamonds,
which is one of the priority activities of the Ad Hoc
Committee on Review and Reform, and of Ukraine in
particular. In conclusion, we emphasize the importance
of continuing the discussion of the implications of the
Russian aggression against Ukraine in the context of
the Kimberley Process.
Ms. Keen (Australia): Let me begin by expressing
Australia’s appreciation to Botswana for its efforts
as Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2022. We also
look forward to working with Zimbabwe as Chair this
year. Australia congratulates Botswana on taking on
the important role of hosting the Kimberley Process
secretariat. We acknowledge the efforts of all the
stakeholders who contributed to the outcomes of the
Kimberley Process in 2022 and who continue to work
diligently to ensure that the Kimberley Process remains
fit for purpose. To that end, Australia specifically looks
forward to engaging with the Ad Hoc Committee on
Review and Reform established at the 2022 plenary
meeting. We want to ensure that the Kimberley Process
continues to deliver on its mandate to prevent conflict
fuelled by diamonds and eliminate such conflict
diamonds from legitimate trade. The ongoing efficacy
of the Kimberley Process will depend on its ability to
remain relevant to the international environment in
which it operates, and its mandate of conflict prevention
must remain central to its deliberations and activities.
Australia would like to reiterate the call we made
at Kimberley Process meetings in 2022 for participants
to examine the implications of Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine for the Kimberley Process. Aggression cannot
be normalized, and it cannot be minimized. We will
23-08949

29/03/2023

continue to advocate through all relevant forums,
including the Kimberley Process, for Russia to be held
to account for its illegal and immoral invasion.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation notes the diplomatic
efforts of Botswana as the Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2022 and also as the author of the initial
version of draft resolution A/77/L.61 on the role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict. We support its adoption
by consensus; at the same time, we cannot help but
note that the text that was initially presented, in our
opinion, was balanced and objective — and I would like
to underscore that last word. It objectively underscored
the outcomes of the work of the Kimberly Process
in 2022 and also the tasks for the future within the
Kimberley Process.
We note that during the discussions on draft
resolution A/77/L.61, the absolute majority of comments
were made by a small group of participants who sought to
dispute the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process and
raise doubts as to its achievements. Not having dared to
impose their mercantile aims on the participants in the
Kimberley Process at its 2022 meeting, those countries,
in the context of the work on the draft resolution,
sought to revise the conclusions of the Kimberley
Process. I would like to underscore that those decisions
were adopted by consensus. That was the aim of the
majority of the amendments proposed by Western
countries, in connection with which the constructively
minded delegations, including the Russian delegation,
were forced to show the greatest possible flexibility in
order to find the lowest common denominator. The text
of the draft resolution that we have before us today is
essentially a forced compromise, a fine line between
preserving the Kimberley Process as an effective
multilateral mechanism and its transformation into a
tool for the advancement of the geopolitical interests of
a small group of countries. During the discussions on
the draft resolution, a narrative was actively fostered
about certain unprecedented challenges that the
Kimberley Process was allegedly facing.
For our part, we are convinced that the main threat
to the Kimberley Process today is the destructive actions
of a number of countries that seek to destabilize the
ongoing work of the Kimberley Process for the benefit
of their geopolitical interests. They openly neglect
the interests of the diamond-mining countries and the
diamond sector in general. In that regard, we would like
to point out that those countries bear full responsibility

A/77/PV.65

for the broad and vague wording of the draft resolution,
which could ultimately lead to the critical polarization of
approaches in the further development of the Kimberley
Process, and could seriously undermine the format for
constructive cooperation among the representatives of
Member States that has existed in the Process for 20
years, which brings together States, the diamond sector
and civil society.
We believe it is extremely important to resist those
attempts to transform the Kimberley Process into
another tool to exert political and economic pressure
on sovereign States. We will consistently defend the
achievements of the Kimberley Process aimed at
preventing conflict in diamond-mining areas for the
benefit of local communities and at supporting the
sustainable socioeconomic development of the States
participating in the diamond sector. At the same time, we
believe that carrying out the aims of Western countries
would contradict the interests of not only the members
of the Kimberley Process but also a broad range of
developing countries. We urge the States Members of
the United Nations to cooperate constructively within
the framework of the Kimberley Process.
Mr. Setia (India): Diamonds have played a
particularly significant role in causing and prolonging
conflict in a number of countries as a result of the misuse
of the wealth they generate. In addition to financing
devastating armed conflicts, the illicit trade in rough
diamonds also has a negative impact on the legitimate
international trade in diamonds. My delegation
continues to believe that efforts to address the problem
through the perspective of an overall development
agenda should focus not only on the supply side but
on all parts of the supply chain, including processing,
trading and purchasing by consumers. There is therefore
no denying that over the years, the Kimberley Process
has emerged as a model for multi-stakeholder efforts
and that today a substantial number of the diamond
mining, trading and processing countries are part of the
Kimberley Process.
India is the world’s largest cutting and polishing
centre for diamonds, accounting for more than 90 per
cent of polished diamond manufacturing globally and
registering more than $24 billion in exports in 2022.
We are a founding member of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme. Since the Scheme’s inception,
India has played a pivotal role in the progress and
advancement of this unique tripartite structure,
recognized by the United Nations, which brings together

23-089495/20

A/77/PV.65

stakeholders in Government, industry and civil society
in the quest to prevent conflict diamonds from entering
the diamond trade. The fact that the Scheme has had a
valuable development impact in improving the lives of
people in diamond-mining communities and contributing
to the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals has been quite eloquently affirmed in today’s draft
resolution (A/77/L.61), which my delegation welcomes.
We also welcome the recognition in the draft resolution
of a voluntary system of self-regulation through the
System of Warranties, in accordance with the Scheme,
and the ongoing work of the Working Group of Diamond
Experts on the digitalization of the Kimberley Process
certificates and adoption of a new technical guideline, No.
17, on potentially diamondiferous exploration samples.
For the past 20 years, the Kimberley Process
fraternity, consisting of participants and observers,
has made a notable contribution to stemming the flow
of conflict diamonds and having a significant impact
in the area of development by improving the lives of
many people dependent on the trade in diamonds. The
continued success of the Kimberley Process remains
an important goal and commitment for us. India will
continue to participate actively in the work on various
fronts and to pursue the collective goals of the Kimberley
Process to ensure that it continues to be inclusive and
capable of facing the emerging challenges. We stand
committed to supporting international efforts aimed at
totally eliminating conflict diamonds and promoting
the legitimate trade in rough diamonds, and join other
Member States in recognizing that the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme has helped to protect the
legitimate diamond trade.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank Botswana
and Zimbabwe for the work done in steering this process
to its conclusion, as well as participating delegations for
their invaluable contributions. We associate ourselves
with the statement made by the representative of Sierra
Leone on behalf of the Group of African States.
South Africa remains committed to upholding the
integrity and credibility of the Kimberley Process and
to ensuring that it remains relevant. We regret any
politicization of this matter, and we urge all States to
return their focus to the core purposes of the Process.
We underline the importance of continued regional and
international action to prevent the problem of conflict
diamonds from negatively affecting the trade in legitimate
diamonds, which makes a critical contribution to the
economies of producing, exporting and importing States.
6/20

29/03/2023

Over the 20 years of the Kimberley Process’s
existence, producing countries have put in place
legislation and systems to curb the flow of conflict
diamonds while ensuring that no negative impact is
felt on the trade in legitimate diamonds. For many
diamond-producing countries, the diamond sector is an
important catalyst for promoting economic and social
development, which is essential to poverty reduction
and the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals. It is therefore important for entities such as the
Kimberley Process to recognize and work closely with
regional institutions that seek to determine the fate
of diamond development for the benefit of all people,
especially on the African continent.
We acknowledge that undertaking any review
and reform process is always challenging but also
very necessary. In that regard, the approach adopted
by the Ad Hoc Committee on Review and Reform
should be continued. It should seek the improvement
of the Kimberley Process to ensure that its mandate in
regulating the trade in rough diamonds is fulfilled. It
is worth noting that the Kimberley Process continues
to have a positive impact in reducing the opportunity
for conflict diamonds to play a role in fuelling armed
conflict and remains a unique tripartite initiative that
has had a valuable impact on development, improving
the lives of people in diamond-mining communities and
contributing to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Ms. McNamara (United States of America): The
United States thanks the General Assembly for its
constructive engagement on draft resolution A/77/L.61.
We also thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Botswana for being here with us today and for his role
in facilitating the Kimberley Process.
The United States welcomes collaboration on
the Kimberley Process. The measures outlined in the
draft resolution will continue to play a critical role
in promoting the ongoing efforts to stem the flow of
conflict diamonds while also affirming the importance
of the mandate to develop a new and broadened definition
of conflict diamond that reflects the evolving nature
of conflicts and realities on the ground. It is critically
important to ensure that the Kimberley Process evolves
to address new challenges facing the rough-diamond
supply chain, or it will lose its relevance.
Finally, the draft resolution was negotiated as one
Kimberley Process participant continues to invade
another. We regret that the draft text does not explicitly
23-08949

29/03/2023

reference Russia’s war against Ukraine — as I noted,
both are Kimberley Process participants — and nor
does it mention the important role of the Panel of
Experts of the Security Council’s Central African
Republic Sanctions Committee. We nonetheless affirm
that the General Assembly continues to provide crucial
support for the implementation and further evolution of
the Kimberley Process.
Mr. Makarevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The Republic of Belarus welcomes the willingness of
our countries to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.61 by
consensus. However, we cannot help noting that in
the process of our discussions and debates we have
come up against several problems. While the technical
aspects were dealt with constructively, some individual
issues were frankly destructive and required special
attention. A number of States attempted to politicize the
draft resolution, making unfounded accusations about
specific countries while admitting that their claims had
nothing to do with the text itself. Today, in the context
of this meeting’s debate, we have seen that borne out.
We also believe that the unfounded negative references
to some countries contained in such documents, such as
the reference concerning the Kimberley Process, could
set a negative precedent in the context of the adoption
of General Assembly resolutions in future, and we
categorically oppose that sort of approach. Belarus has
always acted — and will always act — in an exclusively
constructive manner, on the basis of equality and mutual
respect for all of the parties involved, when considering
generic resolutions in the General Assembly, and we
call upon our colleagues to do the same.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.61.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.61, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.61
and in addition to the delegations listed in document, the
following countries have also become co-sponsors of
draft resolution A/77/L.61: Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,

A/77/PV.65

Cyprus, Czechia, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, Namibia, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.61?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/277).

A/77/L.61

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Report of the International Court of Justice
Draft resolution (A/77/L.58)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
resume its consideration of agenda item 70, entitled
“Report of the International Court of Justice”.
We will now continue to hear statements in
explanation of position on resolution 77/276, entitled
“Request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the obligations of States in respect
of climate change”.
Mrs. Larue (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the historic adoption
of resolution 77/276, of which we are a co-sponsor.
We also congratulate Vanuatu and the core group of
States for proposing it. We are proud that the initiative
was started by a group of young university students
motivated by the urgency that the cause deserves.
As a small island developing State, we understand
the magnitude of the effect of climate change on our
countries, and we strongly believe in the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities and national
capabilities. As Prime Minister Kalsakau said (see A/77/
PV.64), it is time to give climate justice the attention it
deserves. We believe that resolution 77/276 is a part of
the response needed to strengthen the implementation
of resolution 76/300 on the human right to a clean,
healthy and sustainable environment. We would like to
express our country’s commitment to doing everything
possible to ensure the early realization of a consultative

23-089497/20

A/77/PV.65

opinion. The Assembly can count on the Dominican
Republic as an important actor in the multilateral
sphere to continue to promote an issue that is so crucial
for our countries.
Mr. Matea (Solomon Islands): Solomon Islands
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Tonga on behalf of the States of the
Pacific Islands Forum and by the representative of the
Federated States of Micronesia on behalf of the Pacific
small island developing States (see A/77/PV.64).
I have the honour to deliver this statement in my
national capacity.
Solomon Islands supports the adoption of resolution
77/276 requesting an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice on the obligations of States
under international law in respect of climate change. The
number of sponsors of that landmark resolution and its
adoption by consensus send an important message of
restored faith in multilateralism in addressing climate
change. We congratulate our closest neighbour, the
Republic of Vanuatu, on its championing of that significant
initiative, and we would like to thank the honourable
Prime Minister of Vanuatu, Mr. Alatoi Kalsakau, for his
important remarks this morning (see A/77/PV.64). We
also thank members of the core group of States for actively
engaging the United Nations membership and ensuring
that a meaningful, inclusive and transparent process
ensued. On that note, we would also like to recognize
the contribution of our young people from the Pacific
islands, who took the first step in the whole process.
Climate change is the single greatest threat to the
livelihood, welfare and security of the blue Pacific,
including Solomon Islands. Last year, our country
experienced a devastating earthquake, which caused
damage to Government buildings and other important
infrastructure. Our country remains under threat from
cyclones, tidal waves, flash floods and sea-level rise.
The recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change shows that the current commitments
under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change are
insufficient and instead put us on a pathway towards
a 3°C warmer world. We need stronger ambitious
climate action now. Solomon Islands notes that
resolution 77/276 characterizes climate change as an
unprecedented challenge of civilizational proportions.
Accordingly, we believe that international courts and
tribunals, in particular the International Court of Justice,
should not be silent bystanders in the formulation
and implementation of responses to climate change.
8/20

29/03/2023

Solomon Islands believes that international
law advances our shared goals of security, peace,
prosperity, human rights and environmental protection
most effectively when it operates as an integrated
system. We therefore welcome consideration by the
International Court of Justice of the international
treaties and principles of international law cited in
the resolution in respect of their implications for the
obligations of States in responding to the climate
crisis. Solomon Islands emphasizes its view that the
Court’s consideration will complement and enhance the
goals and processes of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement.
We would like to recall and reiterate the statement we
made at the adoption of the Paris Agreement, when
we declared that no provision of the Agreement could
be interpreted as derogating from the principles of
general international law as they apply to climate
change; that our acceptance of the Paris Agreement in
no way constituted a renunciation of any rights under
international law concerning State responsibility for
the adverse effects of climate change and that failure to
stabilize global temperature at a safe level below 1.5°C
of warming would severely undermine our efforts to
achieve sustainable development.
In conclusion, we note that the historic resolution
adopted today seeks to ensure the well-being of future
generations, and more importantly for our people in the
Blue Pacific. We therefore express the hope that the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
will be keenly focused on the interests of our future
generations and that the perspectives of the members
of our society who are most vulnerable to climate
change will be given a voice in the proceedings and
its outcomes.
Mr. Sekeris (Greece): Greece aligns itself with
the statement made this morning by the delegation of
the European Union (EU) on behalf of the EU and its
member States (see A/77/PV.64), and would like to add
some observations in its national capacity.
We want to add our voice to those of other
delegations in thanking Vanuatu, as well as the core
group of States, for taking the initiative regarding
the request by the General Assembly for an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
obligations of States in respect of climate change. By
this act, on the basis of Article 96 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the General Assembly is exercising its
prerogative to address a question of a legal nature to the
23-08949

29/03/2023

International Court of Justice, the main judicial organ
of the United Nations, on the timeliest possible issue,
climate change.
We all know that greenhouse-gas emissions have
continued to rise at an alarming rate. Extreme weather
events are becoming more frequent and intense, with
widespread adverse effects on all countries, especially
the least developed countries and small island
developing States. The International Court of Justice,
in its advisory capacity, will provide the international
community with an authoritative statement of the law
as regards the obligations of the Member States of our
Organization, based on international agreements in
force and general international law, on the complicated
and multifaceted issue of climate change and its adverse
effects. The importance of the issue is highlighted
by the fact that a request for an advisory opinion has
also been submitted to the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea by the Commission of Small Island
States on Climate Change and International Law
regarding the obligations of States parties to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to preserve
and protect the marine environment in relation to the
effects of climate change. In addition, the International
Court of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the
Organization and a court of law of general jurisdiction,
is well placed to pronounce in a comprehensive way on
international law obligations related to climate change.
In conclusion, Greece strongly believes that the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
should provide authoritative normative guidance
to States on important questions of law as regards
climate change.
Mr. Kenneally (Ireland): Ireland fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States (see A/77/PV.64),
and I have the honour to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Ireland is a strong supporter of this initiative,
and we extend our deep appreciation to Vanuatu
and the members of the core group of States for the
leadership that has led to the adoption by consensus of
resolution 77/276, of which we are pleased to have been
a sponsor.
The evidence is clear. Climate change is one of
the defining challenges of our time. Its catastrophic
consequences will be disproportionately felt by people
in low-lying coastal areas and developing countries,

A/77/PV.65

particularly small island developing States (SIDS).
In that regard, we recognize the need to address the
specific vulnerabilities of SIDS, as was reflected in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and we want
to stress again the importance of activating all levers
of action and using all forums to address the urgent
challenges associated with climate change. We join others
in reiterating the primary role of the Paris Agreement
and the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and its Conferences in addressing those
challenges. We continue to advocate for the Security
Council to take action to address the climate-related
security risks that are affecting its work, and we urge the
Council to use the tools it has at its disposal to deliver on
its mandate.
This is a moment of inflection, an opportunity
to turn the tide. The Sustainable Development Goals
Summit will take place in September, and Ireland is
pleased to be co-facilitating the process to agree on a
concise, action-oriented and forward-looking political
declaration, which will continue to address the issues
outlined in this.
Mrs. Horváth (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union (see
A/77/PV.64) and would like to add the following remarks
in its national capacity.
We commend Vanuatu and other Member States
of the core group of States for their timely initiative.
Hungary was proud to sponsor resolution 77/276 and
looks forward to the International Court of Justice’s
legal assessment of climate change, one of the greatest
civilizational challenges of our time. Making hypothetical
or speculative declarations would fall outside the scope
of the Court’s judicial functions. However, humancaused climate change is already affecting many weather
and climate extremes across the globe, as confirmed by
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in its
most recent report.
These events by their nature affect the well-being of
present and future generations, and we must therefore
emphasize the importance of intergenerational
equity. Hungary was the first State that referred to
the interests of future generations before the Court
in the Gabčíkovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary/
Slovakia) case, and we welcome the appearance
of intergenerational equity in today’s resolution.
With the aim of enhancing the value of the advisory
opinion’s contribution to the efforts addressing
climate change, we would like to make three points.

23-089499/20

A/77/PV.65

First, we hope that the Court can be as specific as
possible in replying to the General Assembly’s request,
so that the advisory opinion does not suffer from the
burden of uncertainty. A reply that is too succinct or
vague might adversely affect the promotion of the
individual and collective action of States to prevent
climate change.
Secondly, the environment constitutes an
autonomous value to the international community. It
is worthy of protection in itself, not merely because
of economic interests related to the exploitation of
its resources, and the need to protect it has led to the
emergence of a number of general principles and rules.
However, the content of those principles and rules is
often unclear. As an example, clarification on the
duty of care towards the environment, coupled with
the procedural principle of due diligence, would be
especially helpful for States in identifying the contours
of their obligations.
Thirdly, there is a significant portion of customary
law that is not specific to the protection of the
environment but that is relevant to advancing that
purpose. As an example, the potential normative
content of the principle of common but differentiated
responsibility cannot be assessed in isolation or
taken out of the context of the general rules on State
responsibility, such as the rules on the breach of an
international obligation or the rules of causation.
Climate change is a global challenge, and no
country alone can provide a meaningful answer to it.
The advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice could greatly contribute to the collective effort
of States to combat that challenge and strengthen the
rules-based international order at the same time.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil welcomes
the adoption of this paradigmatic resolution
(resolution 77/276). The mandate that we, the General
Assembly, are giving to the International Court of
Justice comes at a critical time. Just last week, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
released the synthesis of its Sixth Assessment Report,
which confirms that the challenge ahead of humankind
is unprecedented in urgency and scale. Next December,
we will gather at the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to conclude the first
global stocktake of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. Deeply grounded in its two pillars of science
10/20

29/03/2023

and equity, the global stocktake will assess where we
were, where we are and where we must be in the fight
against climate change. Justice seems to be the missing
piece in that puzzle. Brazil has high expectations that
the International Court of Justice will help UNFCCC
member States to reconcile their differences and come
together in a mission-oriented united front to finally
unleash climate ambition.
Brazil supported resolution 77/276 because it offers
us an opportunity to unite developed and developing
countries on issues that have long kept us apart. Solving
climate change involves solving a collective trauma,
and we will not be able to move forward collectively
if we do not overcome those differences. Since the
UNFCCC was opened for signature in Rio in 1992,
we have suffered major trust drawbacks that risk
stalling future engagement by all countries, which is a
scenario that we cannot afford. We must leave no one
behind — no country, no individual. Everyone must
be protected from climate change; everyone must be
involved in climate action.
Warnings about the threats posed by climate change
are not new. The IPCC has been presenting us with the
best scientific evidence available on the gravity of the
problem for more than three decades, including with
regard to how developing countries will be the ones
that suffer the most from the adverse impacts of global
warming. The 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development introduced principles to guide our mission
to promote sustainable development as a solution to the
climate challenge. Recognizing historical emissions
and different capabilities, the UNFCCC enshrined in
a similar way the principles of equity and common but
differentiated responsibilities. Accordingly, it imposed
on developed countries the obligation to take the lead
in reducing their own emissions, while providing
finance, technology and capacity-building resources
for mitigation and adaptation actions in developing
countries. Five years later in 1997, as parties to the
UNFCCC, we all adopted specific quantified targets
for developed countries under the Kyoto Protocol,
including a collective commitment for them to reduce
their aggregate emissions by 5 per cent as compared
to 1990 levels by 2012. The parties that have signed
but not ratified the Kyoto Protocol need to abide by its
object and purpose, in line with international law.
The Kyoto target was never achieved by
developed countries in the aggregate. That failure has
fundamentally derailed our global response to climate
23-08949

29/03/2023

change from what our international community had
originally agreed. Ten years after the adoption of the
Kyoto Protocol, the IPCC 2007 fourth assessment report
issued clear scientific evidence calling on developed
countries to reduce their emissions by 10 to 40 per cent
compared to 1990 levels by 2020. Once again, that call
was never implemented. In 2010, under the Cancun
Agreements adopted by the sixteenth Conference of
the Parties to the UNFCCC, the developed countries
committed to jointly mobilizing $100 billion per year
by 2020 to address the needs of developing countries.
Almost 15 years have passed — and yet again, the
obligations of developed countries were never fulfilled.
Warnings by science have moved from the urgency
around mitigation to that around adaptation, and now
to that around loss and damage. We must interrupt
our path-dependency of inaction and burden-shifting
from the developed to the developing countries. After
all, historical emissions have also been those that have
fuelled the lingering structural inequalities within and
among countries, a hateful legacy from colonialism and
imperialism. Looking at our traumatic past as a means
to catapult us to a promising future, Brazil regards as
a necessary implication of resolution 77/276 that the
material scope of the Court’s advisory opinion will
indeed encompass the responsibilities for historical
emissions, the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and all the unfulfilled obligations of
developed countries under relevant international law,
in particular the UNFCCC, its Kyoto Protocol and
the Paris Agreement. Failing to address those issues
and their unmistakable implications for the current
obligations and responsibilities of developed countries
would both detach the advisory opinion from the
broader normative and political context upon which
the request is based and deprive it of a comprehensive
outlook of the sources of international law applicable
to the matter.
Once we have in hand the legal clarifications
provided by the International Court of Justice, we must
use them not to point fingers but rather as a symbol
of reconciliation to help us move on by bridging our
differences. The confrontational attitude that is still
pervasive in our climate-related debates is extremely
worrisome in the context of the dangers to which science
has alerted us. Our common fight against climate
change must not be about being right or having the
moral high ground, it is about cooperating and sharing
resources. Together, we must advance towards a model

A/77/PV.65

of leadership that is collective and based on mutual
empowerment instead of self-empowerment. To face
humankind’s greatest challenge ever, we must strive for
a new paradigm for our human family that leverages
the very best of what it means to be human: empathy,
solidarity and trust — trust in one another, trust in our
multilateral institutions and trust in our species.
Mr. Gutiérrez Plata (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): The Colombian delegation would like to
begin by expressing its sincere appreciation to the
core group of States for their efforts as coordinators of
resolution 77/276 just adopted, and for their leadership.
Colombia participated in those deliberations
with its characteristic constructive spirit, based on
its strong interest in the continuous development of
international environmental law, the need to limit the
adverse effects of climate change and the importance
of protecting the oceans and biodiversity, issues that
are of the highest priority for Colombian foreign policy.
With those objectives in mind, Colombia has actively
participated in international arenas when those issues
have been discussed and believes in the important work
that international tribunals do in helping to interpret
international law. With those interests as a guide, our
country has already submitted two requests for advisory
opinions to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
The first request concerns the State obligations with
respect to the protection of the environment that arise
from the American Convention on Human Rights, in
response to which the Inter-American Court was the
first to state that the right to a healthy environment is
a fundamental human right. The second request was
submitted together with Chile and it is our hope that
the Court can clarify the scope of State obligations to
respond to the climate emergency within the framework
of international human rights law. The Inter-American
Court has just begun proceedings on the second one,
and in Colombia’s opinion, that request for an advisory
opinion is a perfect complement to the resolution that
we have just adopted today and of which Colombia is a
proud co-sponsor.
The constructive spirit that guides our country
with regard to environmental issues and the law of
the sea is based on the firm belief that all nations
have a commitment and a responsibility to protect
the environment, combat climate change and care for
the health of the oceans, both for other States and for
present and future generations. Colombia is also of the
view that State obligations in this matter should be

23-0894911/20

A/77/PV.65

understood not only as guarantees but as obligations to
respect and adopt positive and progressive measures.
However, our country is certain that those obligations
must be differentiated in view of States’ individual
national circumstances and the difference in the degree
to which they contribute to the problems affecting
the environment, the climate system and the oceans
today. We therefore believe that the legal consequences
of failing to comply with those obligations should be
specified and we trust that the International Court of
Justice can provide greater clarity in this regard in the
light of the various international instruments applicable
to the matter.
Considering the most recent findings of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a real
and determined commitment to limiting the increase in
global average temperature to 1.5°C is imperative. We
must also recognize that each incremental increase in
temperature generates increasingly large impacts and
possible points of no return, and that loss and damage
related to climate change will be ever more difficult
for developing countries to handle. In that context,
we urgently need to see an increase in support for all
developing countries that responds to the scale of their
needs. In the light of all of this, Colombia welcomes the
adoption of this important resolution and will continue
to participate in the proceedings before the International
Court of Justice. In turn, my country will continue to
lead the proceedings before the Inter-American Court
and seek coordination with the International Court
of Justice.
Finally, Colombia will continue to work alongside
other nations to tackle the challenges posed by climate
change, especially the human right to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): I want to start by
thanking the Government of Vanuatu, the Pacific Small
Island Developing States, and the core group of States
for initiating resolution 77/276. Indonesia is pleased to
be a supporter and sponsor of the text.
The scientific evidence is clear. Climate change
continues to take place at an alarming rate. The extent
and magnitude of its effects are beyond imagination.
As an archipelagic State with more than 17,000 small
islands, we fully relate to the concerns of small island
States. We fully understand how climate change poses
an existential threat to many small islands and coastal
communities. Yet despite the fact that this is a global
12/20

29/03/2023

issue that requires genuine partnership, action on
climate, which is mandated by the principle of common
but differentiated responsibility and respective
capabilities based on different national circumstances,
continues to be side-stepped by prolonged talks in a
debate marked by burden-shifting rather than burdensharing. It is time to take concrete global action, lead
by example and go beyond rhetoric. I would like to
make three points in that regard.
First, today’s resolution presents a new avenue for
progress. It amplifies the voices of the vulnerable by
inviting the attention of the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations to the issue at hand. The Court’s
advisory opinion will provide us with a much-needed
moral compass on addressing climate change and will
clarify the obligations of States under international law
with respect to addressing climate change.
Secondly, expectations are high that the Court’s
advisory opinion will lead to better compliance,
transparency and international cooperation. We have
every confidence that the Court will look into this
thoroughly by taking into account the well-established
principle of common but differentiated responsibility
and respective capabilities, ensuring the balance
between mitigation and adaptation and acknowledging
the crucial importance of global partnership, including
the fulfilment of climate financing commitments.
Lastly, we no longer have the luxury of time. The
world is watching attentively. The Court’s advisory
opinion must contribute to a renewal of States’ trust
and their commitments to addressing climate change
by promoting climate solidarity in which developed and
developing countries unite around a common strategy
and combine capacities for the benefit of all humankind.
It is time for us to take action and work together towards
a sustainable future, one in which every State has the
opportunity to thrive and sustainably develop and
where the natural world can flourish.
Mr. Falefou (Tuvalu): I make this statement
on behalf of my country, Tuvalu, and I would also
like to align myself with the statements made by the
representatives of the Federated States of Micronesia,
on behalf of the Pacific Small Island Developing States,
and Tonga, on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum
(see A/77/PV.64).
Today marks an extraordinary achievement in
our joint efforts to address climate change, which is
undoubtedly the most challenging issue of our time. We
23-08949

29/03/2023

highly commend Vanuatu for its outstanding leadership
and the core group of States for their constructive
engagement in getting a momentous resolution adopted
today (resolution 77/276). Acquiring legal means to
address climate change through an advisory opinion by
the International Court of Justice provides the moral
punch we need to establish international consensus and
responsibility by upholding the rule of international
law and the obligation to respect human rights.
The adoption of resolution 77/276 could not come
at a better time. The synthesis of the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, released last week, is crystal clear. The climate
crisis is here. Widespread loss and damage are a reality
today. Ensuring that global emissions peak in the next
two years is essential if we are to limit warming to
1.5°C. It is therefore critical that we do the right thing
by assisting the International Court of Justice with the
information it needs in order to provide the optimal
advisory opinion on State obligations to address climate
change. With confidence and unbounded determination,
Tuvalu calls on all States to take the steps necessary to
address the threat of climate change and work to build a
sustainable future for all. Let us not only mark this day
as a positive step forward but also commit ourselves
to leaving a positive legacy for future generations and
working to ensure that no nation, no matter how small
or vulnerable, is left behind.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): At the outset, allow me
to commend Vanuatu for its strong leadership. My
delegation also commends the core group of States as
a whole for leading the initiative and bringing to the
attention of the General Assembly the importance of
the obligations of States in respect of climate change.
Slovenia is deeply concerned about the growing
threat of climate change and its impact on the
environment, the economy and society. The effects
of climate change, such as rising temperatures, more
frequent and severe natural disasters and sea-level rise,
to which small island developing States are particularly
vulnerable, have already had devastating consequences
for many countries around the globe. Slovenia is fully
aware that the seriousness of that problem urgently
needs our collective and concerted response. For
those reasons, Slovenia believes that the International
Court of Justice, as the principle judicial organ of the
United Nations, is well positioned to provide clarity to
all States with regard to the legal obligations already
agreed under international law. The Court’s advisory

A/77/PV.65

opinion, even though of a non-binding character, could
encourage the continued pursuit of the international
instruments to tackle climate change that are being
negotiated, and also encourage States to revise, enhance
and strengthen their domestic environmental laws and
policies, all of which may together yield greater action
and accelerated progress in addressing the climate
crisis by the global community.
In conclusion, Slovenia is of the view that the Court’s
advisory opinion would be a valuable contribution to
the ongoing efforts to address the adverse effects of
climate change and promote sustainable development
for all nations and people. For those reasons, Slovenia
supported resolution 77/276 as a co-sponsor.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of my island
nation of Antigua and Barbuda, which aligns itself with
the statement made this morning by the distinguished
and honourable Prime Minister of Vanuatu on behalf
of the core group of countries that, together with
Vanuatu, took the lead on this very important initiative
(see A/77/PV.64).
Antigua and Barbuda, like many other small island
developing States, has had a particularly difficult time
coping with the onslaught of the negative impacts
associated with climate change. The island nation
faces the extreme events of intensifying hurricanes
and cyclones, longer-lasting and more intense
droughts, floods and weather systems that fall outside
the traditional patterns of our seasonal weather.
Furthermore, we are facing increasingly difficult
and dangerous times as we face ocean acidification,
sea-level rise and saltwater intrusion into the little
freshwater that we currently possess. While Antigua
and Barbuda remains committed to tackling the
issues created by climate change through the different
international forums that have been established by the
international community, we fully support the stance
taken by Vanuatu to explore and initiate additional
avenues for the international investigation of the issue
of climate change, which the international community
faces. We support Vanuatu’s initiative to seek an
advisory opinion, which we believe is pivotal at this
particular time to provide guidance on how States can
address international climate change issues that may
have ramifications for multiple treaty regimes that are
governed by different international forums.

23-0894913/20

A/77/PV.65

The adoption of resolution 77/276 today will give a
mandate to the International Court of Justice to provide
an advisory opinion that addresses the climate change
issue and its interplay with many other fronts. Advisory
opinions from the International Court of Justice
command tremendous legal and political authority.
Given that the ramifications of climate change affect
so many aspects of human life, especially for persons
living within small island developing States, Antigua
and Barbuda — and I dare say all countries of the
world — would greatly benefit from authoritative
advice on the legal implications of climate change
that will be scrutinized by the International Court of
Justice. We have a treaty regime for the climate, we
have a treaty regime for the law of the sea and we have
a treaty regime for human rights, yet we rarely examine
how the obligations and rights of States and individuals
are interlinked and build on one another across those
different silos. Therefore, Antigua and Barbuda sees
resolution 77/276 as important, since it references
several areas of international law that complement
one another and overlap in their effect on people and
the environment in the States in which we live. The
recognition of those interlinkages by the International
Court of Justice and the acknowledgement of how those
obligations across the ecosystem of international law
support one another will no doubt help the cause of
nations facing the adverse effects of climate change.
This initiative is complementary to the current
international legal regimes that are already in existence
and will help to move all climate ambition in the
right direction. Antigua and Barbuda stands shoulder
to shoulder with Vanuatu, the core group and the
significant number of other countries — more than
130 —that joined us today in this historic initiative. We
believe there is a moment in time when this issue must
be dealt with. We believe that time is now.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
As we all know, climate change is an unprecedented
challenge to our civilization, in the face of which it
is imperative that our common action be guided by
international law. The proposal to request an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on
the obligations of States in respect of climate change
therefore reflects a legitimate desire on the part of all
of us to clarify the specific responsibilities of States
in the fight against climate change. Switzerland has
long been committed to strengthening international
law in the area of climate change. The adoption of
14/20

29/03/2023

the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in 2015
marks in that regard a success for multilateralism. Its
implementation is crucial. We welcome the initiative
that brings us together today, and we thank Vanuatu
for bringing it forward with the support of civil society.
We welcome the fact that resolution 77/276 applies to
all States, both the most vulnerable and those that can
contribute most to the fight against climate change. We
also welcome the inclusion of the issue of human rights
in the resolution and the explicit reference to the right
to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment. It is
indeed essential that actions against climate change
be based on human rights. Based on its determination
to support the strengthening of the legal framework
to address climate change, Switzerland co-sponsored
resolution 77/276.
However, we would like to clarify our
understanding of a number of key elements of the
text. As a central pillar in the fight against climate
change, the Paris Agreement specifies, among other
things, the obligations of States parties to communicate
ambitious targets and implement domestic emissions
reduction policies. Those obligations should have been
highlighted in the resolution. In Switzerland’s view, it is
clear that a key consequence for States, as described in
the operative paragraph of the resolution, should be to
strengthen their climate targets and domestic emissions
reduction measures. The text of the resolution seems to
suggest that the International Court of Justice should
only consider the legal consequences of past actions and
omissions that have caused significant damage to the
climate system and the environment. However, current
and future actions and omissions will have additional
consequences for the climate system and will cause
additional damage. It is therefore important that the
Court also consider the legal consequences of current
and future actions and omissions. Under the Paris
Agreement, States are obliged to announce emissions
reduction targets. Consequently, there are projections
of future emissions reductions. That would provide a
sufficient set of data for the Court to consider.
Finally, while the chapeau of the question contained
in the operative paragraph refers to the principle of
prevention of significant harm to the environment,
Switzerland wishes to emphasize that customary
international law creates an obligation to prevent
significant harm to the environment.
23-08949

29/03/2023

Switzerland is convinced that resolution 77/276, by
specifying the obligations of States, will contribute to
strengthening the climate governance framework.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
thanks Vanuatu and the members of the core group of
countries for this initiative.
Climate change is indeed an unprecedented
challenge of civilizational proportions. Climate
change is a threat to human well-being and planetary
health, as highlighted in the recent report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which
also warned that there is a rapidly closing window of
opportunity to secure a liveable and sustainable future
for all. The overwhelming support for resolution 77/276
is recognition of that urgent, existential challenge. We
are honoured to be among the many co-sponsors of the
resolution. In every region across the globe, humancaused climate change is effecting a number of weather
and climate extremes, which have led to widespread
adverse impacts and related losses and damage for
nature and people. Vulnerable communities that have
historically contributed the least to current climate
change are disproportionately affected, as cited in
the report.
The Philippines is among the countries most
vulnerable to climate change. In recognition of the
vulnerability of the Philippine archipelago and its local
communities, in particular the poor and women and
children, to the consequences of climate change, it is
our State policy to cooperate with the global community
in the resolution of climate change issues.
At the general debate of the General Assembly held
last September, President Ferdinand Romualdez Marcos
said that the first challenge of our continued survival as
a global community is climate change. He said:
“The time for talk about if and when has
long since passed — it is here and now. Climate
change is the greatest threat affecting our nations
and peoples. There is no other problem so global
in nature that it requires a united effort led by the
United Nations.
“The effects of climate change are uneven and
reflect a historical injustice whereby those who are
least responsible suffer the most. […] This injustice
must be corrected and those who need to do more
must act now.” (A/77/PV.5, pp. 3-4)

A/77/PV.65

We therefore welcome the historic adoption by
consensus of resolution 77/276, which stems from the
initiative of young people from our part of the world
as a concrete act to advance climate justice. Our
support for resolution 77/276 reflects the fundamental
principles and positions to which the Philippines
adheres: the recognition of a rules-based international
order that is governed by international law and
informed by the principles of equity and of justice;
the principle of protecting the climate system for the
benefit of humankind, on the basis of climate justice
or common but differentiated responsibilities; and the
precautionary principle to guide decision-making in
climate risk management. That is consistent with our
view on the urgency of scaling up action and support,
including in the areas of finance, capacity-building
and technology transfer, in order to enhance capacities
to respond to the adverse effects of climate change
in developing countries, and to avert, minimize and
address the loss and damage associated with those
effects, as well as the recognition that the current
provisions for adaptation to climate change remain
insufficient to respond to the worsening climate change
impacts in developing countries.
We hope that the request to the International Court
of Justice for an advisory opinion can be prioritized and
will yield clarity and provide guidance with respect to
the questions on, first, the obligations of States under
international law to ensure the protection of the climate
system and other parts of the environment from the
anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases for States
and for current and future generations; and secondly, the
legal consequences under those obligations for States
when they, by their acts and omissions, have caused
significant harm to the climate system and other parts
of the environment, with respect to, among others, the
vulnerable and specially affected States, peoples and
individuals of current and future generations.
A clear statement from the International
Court of Justice could assist States in their efforts
to establish a climate-resilient development that
integrates adaptation and mitigation in order to
advance sustainable development for all, and could
enable increased international cooperation, including
improved access to adequate financial resources, in
particular for vulnerable regions, sectors and groups,
as well as inclusive governance and coordinated
policies. International cooperation is a critical enabler
for achieving ambitious climate change mitigation.

23-0894915/20

A/77/PV.65

Support for the request for an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice is consistent with
the spirit of the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, which encourages
resorting to advisory proceedings, highlights the role
of the International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations and encourages
resorting to the International Court of Justice for the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Mr. Leonidchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
been in favour of resolving the global problem of
climate change. We assume that the work of the
primary judicial body of the United Nations will be
carried out in strict compliance with its mandate. In
particular, we expect that the International Court of
Justice will focus on clarifying the applicable norms
of international law. We are confident that its advisory
opinion on this question cannot and should not lead to
a revision of climate instruments, such as the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, as well as the outcomes of the sessions of the
Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC. At the same
time, the Russian delegation is of the opinion that the
issue of climate change as a whole requires a broader
comprehensive approach and should not be reduced
purely to the issue of anthropogenic greenhouse-gas
emissions. To preserve the climate system and other
components of the environment, it is necessary to adopt
a varied set of measures. In that regard, the issue of
the obligations of States in the area of climate change
should be considered, taking into account the entire
range of socioeconomic problems, including adaptation
measures, financing, technology transfer and the
elimination of loss and damage.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow us
to thank the delegation of the Republic of Vanuatu for
introducing resolution 77/276 and to acknowledge its
leadership throughout the process of consultations on the
resolution. As a responsible member of the international
community that is aware of the challenges that climate
change represents for a significant number of States, as
well as of the existential threat it poses to current and
future generations, and that remains firmly committed
to the full and effective implementation of international
agreements addressing the current climate catastrophe,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joined the
16/20

29/03/2023

consensus on the adoption of resolution 77/276, entitled
“Request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the obligations of States in respect
of climate change”.
However, we are of the view that although the General
Assembly has the power to turn to the International
Court of Justice in search of legal clarity, by virtue of
the provisions of Article 96 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the solution to the current climate emergency
must come not only from respect for and adherence to
the obligations arising from the relevant treaties and
commitments but also from the acceptance, once and for
all, that the system — not the climate — must change.
We must understand that it is the current predatory
model and its unsustainable patterns of consumption
and production that have for years deepened the current
climate crisis. Its effects are increasingly clear, especially
in the more vulnerable countries.
That is why we take the opportunity today to assert
the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and to demand that developed countries, urgently and
with a sense of priority, comply with their commitments
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, in line with a vision of equity, including in
terms of reducing greenhouse-gas emissions and in
terms of financing for the implementation of resilience,
mitigation and adaptation efforts, as well as for the
operationalization of the historical loss and damage
fund. Inaction only translates into destroyed ecosystems,
extinct species, deteriorating planetary living conditions
and the impossibility of making the human right to a
clean, healthy and sustainable environment a reality for
everyone, among many other adverse effects resulting
from the current climate crisis. The time has therefore
come for radical change.
Finally, our delegation would like to put on record its
reservation regarding those references in the text of the
recently adopted resolution to international instruments
to which the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not
party. We wish to stress that our joining the consensus
on resolution 77/276 cannot in any way be interpreted as
a change in the traditional position of Venezuela on the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the
norms of which, including those that could be considered
customary law, are not applicable to the Venezuelan State,
except for those that may have been expressly recognized.
23-08949

29/03/2023

Mr. Li Kai (China) (spoke in Chinese): Climate
change is a global problem that requires the joint
response of all countries. For more than three decades,
the international community has found consensus amid
heated debates. Moreover, with respect to the historical
responsibility of developed countries, the sustainable
development and poverty reduction needs of developing
countries and the different national conditions of
various countries, the international community has
created a well-developed international legal system
and global cooperation system, with the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
as the main channel.
While significant gaps remain, we have many
achievements. We concluded the landmark Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, which establishes
a bottom-up model of nationally determined
contributions. To date, 194 States parties have submitted
their nationally determined contributions, accounting
for 98 per cent of global gross domestic product and
population and 95 per cent of global emissions. The
global trend towards a green and low-carbon transition
is irreversible. That is ample proof that this path works
and works well. The international community should
remain confident and continue to strengthen the
relevant implementation mechanisms of the UNFCCC
to promote synergy among and implementation of the
principles and objectives of the Convention and the Paris
Agreement with a view to advancing global climate
governance in a more profound and effective manner.
In order to call on the international community to
join hands in strengthening climate actions and respond
to the legitimate demands of developing countries,
China supports the adoption of resolution 77/276.
However, with regard to the text itself, China has
one reservation: the principles of equity, common
but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities, which are important principles in
addressing the climate issue, are not reflected in the
operative paragraph of the resolution. China believes
that the International Court of Justice, when discussing
the issue of climate change, should respect the status
of the Convention as the main channel, safeguard the
principles and institutional arrangements established by
the Convention and the Paris Agreement, and assist in
advancing the implementation of the Convention rather
than interfering with the global climate governance
process. In particular, it is important to respect the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,

A/77/PV.65

highlight the historic responsibility of developed
countries and require them to earnestly fulfil their
commitments by helping developing countries to meet
the climate challenges while further reducing their
own emissions. The main cause of climate change is
the uncontrolled emissions of greenhouse gases by
developed countries since the industrial revolution. The
challenges we face now, to put it more bluntly, are the
result of the huge gap between the commitments and
actions of developed countries in terms of spearheading
emissions reduction and providing financial, technical
and capacity-building support to developing countries.
On the issue of tackling climate change, China has
always been action-oriented and has made tangible
contributions to global climate governance. China is
actively and steadily working towards carbon peak and
carbon neutrality, while also pursuing a development
path that prioritizes eco-conservation, energy saving
and a green and low-carbon transition. China has also
been an advocate and practitioner of South-South
cooperation on climate change, providing support to
other developing countries, including small island
developing States, within its capacity. China will
continue to work with all parties to actively participate
in global climate governance and jointly care for planet
Earth, our only home.
Mr. Cappon (Israel): Israel is proud to be among the
co-sponsors of resolution 77/276. We wish to extend our
gratitude to and congratulate the Permanent Mission of
Vanuatu and the core group of States for spearheading
this important effort to address the adverse effects of
climate change. Israel would like to express its full
commitment to minimizing the worst effects of climate
change, particularly with regard to the most vulnerable
States. We wish also to note that paragraph 5 of the
annex to resolution 52/250, entitled “Participation
of Palestine in the work of the United Nations”, of
7 July 1998, determined that the Palestinians have
the right to co-sponsor draft resolutions and decisions
on Palestinian and Middle East issues. It is clear, and
should be reflected in this meeting’s record, that the
subject matter of resolution 77/276 does not fall within
the parameters set out in the annex to resolution 52/250.
Mr. Bastaki (United Arab Emirates): The United
Arab Emirates welcomes the General Assembly’s
adoption by consensus of resolution 77/276, which
requests an advisory opinion on climate change from
the International Court of Justice. Climate change is the
defining threat of the twenty-first century. We therefore

23-0894917/20

A/77/PV.65

believe that the international community can benefit
from the guidance of the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations with respect to the questions posed in
the resolution. We hope that the request for an advisory
opinion on climate change will help spur ambition and
reignite momentum for climate progress during this
crucial decade of action.
The sixth assessment synthesis report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change makes
absolutely clear the importance of ambitious and
transformative action to put the world back on track to
achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, including by keeping alive the goal of limiting
global warming to 1.5°C. While doing so, we must
ensure that the most vulnerable, who have done the
least to cause climate change, be protected against its
increasingly severe impacts. As the incoming President
and host of the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP) this year, the United Arab
Emirates will work with partners and all stakeholders
to ensure an ambitious, transparent and inclusive COP.
In line with the principle of State sovereignty,
the position of the United Arab Emirates in support
of resolution 77/276 recognizes that the obligations
of States rest in applicable international law and vary
based on the instruments in respect of which they have
consented to be bound. In addition, the United Arab
Emirates hopes and expects that the principle of equity
and common but differentiated responsibilities, as
well as the special needs and special circumstances of
developing countries, will be fully taken into account
by the Court when it considers its response to the
questions posed.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates encourages
the Court to consider the particular impact of climate
change on women and children in the context of
responding to those questions.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the adoption of resolution 77/276, because it
highlights the urgency of addressing the global climate
change crisis and sends a strong message that all States
are required to act to address that collective threat.
We would have preferred that the guiding questions
to the International Court of Justice recognize that the
starting point to any discussion on State liability is the
historical responsibility for causing climate change and
that climate action be in accordance with the guiding
18/20

29/03/2023

principles of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) of equity, common
but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities, in the light of national circumstances.
We are determined to continue contributing our
best efforts to address climate change and to fully
implement our highly ambitious nationally determined
contributions to the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. We base our climate actions on the agreed
multilateral outcomes under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and its
Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement, which contain
clear and specific legal obligations that are directed
in particular at the developed parties. As developing
countries, we undertake our climate actions in the
context of sustainable development, the inalienable right
to development enshrined under international law and
just transitions. We recognize that the social, economic
and environmental pillars of sustainable development
need to be addressed in a holistic, integrated and
balanced manner, while leaving no one behind.
We share the sense of frustration when our
developed partners are still not honouring their legal
commitments, including their pre-2020 commitments,
or delivering on their voluntary undertakings. It is a
reality that developing countries will be unable to
fully achieve their climate goals without enabling
means of implementation support in the form of
financing, technology transfer and capacity-building.
We further note that the issue of who is responsible for
climate change is already well known and supported
by scientific findings, such as those contained in
the International Panel on Climate Change’s sixth
assessment report and the Working Group III reports.
That situation unfortunately inevitably opens the
door to litigation and seeking legal remedies, but we
should also note that the structures and processes
already exist under the UNFCCC to raise collective
ambition, accelerate action and address deficiencies
in a non-punitive, non-prescriptive and facilitative
manner, such as through the global stocktake and
the Implementation and Compliance Committee. As
always, South Africa stands in full solidarity with small
island developing States, which are correctly identified
in resolution 77/276 as being particularly vulnerable to
climate change.
Ms. Chand (Fiji): I have the honour to deliver this
statement in my national capacity.
23-08949

29/03/2023

Fiji aligns this statement with the earlier remarks
delivered by the representative of the Federated States
of Micronesia on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States and by the representative of Tonga
on behalf of the Pacific Island Forum (see A/77/PV.64).
At the outset, we would like to acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Alatoi Ishmael Kalsakau, Prime
Minister of Vanuatu. The delegation of Fiji would also
like to extend its warm appreciation to the delegation of
Vanuatu for its excellent leadership in the facilitation
of resolution 77/276, which enabled its adoption in
the General Assembly today. Fiji would also like to
acknowledge the members of the core group of States,
many of which are from outside of the Pacific region
but have nonetheless demonstrated excellent leadership
in facilitating the consultations on the resolution and
answering the clarion call of the Pacific’s young people
and civil society organizations that continue to demand
a response and a commitment to climate change.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 77/276 by
consensus. That historic adoption will pave the way
for the General Assembly to finally seek an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on the
obligations of States in respect of climate change — an
existential threat and indeed an unprecedented challenge
of civilizational proportions. We are honoured to be a
co-sponsor of the resolution and acknowledge its 105
co-sponsors, along with the additional co-sponsors
that lent their valuable support to the resolution. Not
only have they shown their support for the resolution,
but they have also demonstrated their commitment to
addressing climate change in the interest of current and
future generations and their very survival. This day
will be etched in history and remembered by future
generations as we mark a small victory in the battle
against climate change. Climate change is the defining
crisis of our time — with worsening climatic conditions,
frequent category-5 level cyclones, hurricanes and
super-storms, flash floods, rising sea levels and ocean
acidification, which are devasting infrastructure,
forcing the relocation of communities, causing internal
displacement and migration and generally impeding
the national development, economic prosperity and
progress of all small island developing States.
We agreed at the United Nations last year that, as
human beings, we have a right to a clean, healthy and
sustainable environment (resolution 76/300), while also
recognizing the interlinkage between human rights and
climate change. We must take bold steps that will allow us

A/77/PV.65

to reduce, if not eliminate, our carbon footprint. At the same
time, our development aspirations must be sustainable
so that we collectively meet our goals related to limiting
global warming to 1.5°C. Fiji reaffirms its commitment to
achieving net zero greenhouse-gas emissions by 2050. The
Fijian Parliament has already passed the Climate Change
Act of 2021, which provides the legal basis to support our
sustainable development objectives, long-term climate
ambitions, net-zero emissions target and commitment
to protect Fiji’s environment. The Earth’s resources are
widely acknowledged as a global commons. It is now time
that we adopt a similar approach towards the planet that is
our common home.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): As we speak, parts of
humankind’s immediate survival are in jeopardy due
to climate change. Those nations and their peoples are
watching as the sea and the ocean that were their blessing
become an existential threat due to climate change. They
endure desertification and droughts, which are bringing
famine and death upon their peoples. Most of those
countries have zero carbon emissions. They are victims
of climate change, while bearing no responsibility in
it. Today Vanuatu, the victim of climate change, is also
Vanuatu the leader on addressing climate change, and we
commend them, as we commend all other countries faced
with that existential threat that turned to the multilateral
system and the international-law-based order for answers.
We also commend all those who stood by them to push the
initiative forward, notably the core group of States, the
co-sponsors of resolution 77/276, of which we are proud
to be one, and the members of the General Assembly that
supported making the request to the International Court of
Justice. We also commend the young people concerned for
their inspirational role and dedication to climate justice.
The future is no longer uncertain; on the contrary,
it is known. What those countries at the forefront of the
consequences of climate change are experiencing today,
humankind as a whole will experience tomorrow if it does
not make the indispensable decisions necessary for its own
survival. We will be responsible for our own extinction and
for the extinction of all life on our planet if we do not act
decisively based on our obligations and the commitments
we undertook. Today’s adoption of the historic resolution
77/276 embodies our conviction that humankind will rise
to the challenge by clarifying the obligations incumbent
upon us today and by ensuring that we uphold them
starting from today. International law was designed to
protect us all, starting with the most vulnerable among us.

23-0894919/20

A/77/PV.65

The General Assembly has upheld that spirit today. The
State of Palestine is proud to be among the co-sponsors
of the resolution requesting an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice on the obligation of States in
respect of climate change. We are committed to the fight
against climate change. We are committed to a multilateral
system rooted in collective solidarity. We stand with
our brothers and sisters, whose noble cause deserves
the support of all, and are confident that the initiative
to request the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice will put climate where it belongs: at
the centre of our agenda as a matter of human survival.
It is time for the world’s Court to clarify the
obligations of States, informed by the rules of
international law, the instruments developed over decades
and the relevant principles, notably the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities. We reiterate
that the International Court of Justice, through its
advisory function, determines the law, with authority
and credibility, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. Adherence to the Court’s findings will
be necessary both to ensure a multilateral and collective
response to climate change and to further our multilateral
system and the international-law-based order on that vital
matter and on all other issues of concern for humankind.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Union for the Conservation
of Nature.
Mr. O’Connor (International Union for
Conservation of Nature): The International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) would like to express
its sincere appreciation to the Republic of Vanuatu for
its leadership and to the core group of States, as well as
to all the Member States here today.
The IUCN is very pleased to endorse resolution 77/276.
We strongly support the request to the International Court
of Justice to render an advisory opinion on the obligations
of States under international law in order to ensure the
protection of the climate system and other parts of the
environment from anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse
gases for States and for current and future generations.
We also support the request for the clarification of legal
consequences where significant harm has been caused to
the climate system and other parts of the environment, in
particular with respect to small Island developing States,
as well as for current and future generations.
Science — as assessed by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) and the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
20/20

29/03/2023

Services — provides ever-stronger evidence of the
adverse impacts of climate change on people, natural
systems and biodiversity, as well as on other conditions
for human well-being such as adequate water and food
availability. Legal obligations of States with respect
to protecting the climate system and other parts of
the environment are central to global environmental
governance. Many of those obligations are already
included in multilateral environmental agreements,
such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the Convention on Biological Diversity
and the newly adopted treaty on the conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction. The IUCN works on a portfolio to support
the effective and timely implementation of those — and
more — environmental treaties. Yet many open questions
of international law remain on specific obligations — for
example, with respect to the rights of future generations
or the protection of particularly vulnerable States, peoples
and communities in the context of climate and nature harm.
In that context, an advisory opinion by the International
Court of Justice would provide welcome guidance for
States in the context of global climate and nature justice.
That important role of the International Court of Justice
was already recognized by the members of the IUCN,
including States, State entities and non-governmental
organizations, which, through the Members Assembly
during the World Conservation Congress held in Hawaii
in September 2016, voted in support of a resolution that
“calls upon the General Assembly of the United
Nations (UNGA) to request an advisory opinion from
the ICJ on the legal status and content of the principle
of sustainable development taking the needs of future
generations into particular account”.
The IUCN looks forward to the acceptance by the
International Court of Justice of the request made by the
General Assembly in resolution 77/276, adopted today by
consensus, and stands ready to engage in the proceedings
of the Court through further submissions and statements.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 70?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.
23-08949
