A/RES/74/216

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2020

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 19 (a)
Sustainable development: implementation of Agenda 21,
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda
21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 19 December 2019
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/74/381/Add.1)]

74/216.

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1 Agenda 21, 2
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation) 5
and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”, 6 as well as all relevant resolutions on
the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,

__________________

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Jan eiro,
3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Resolution 66/288, annex.
1

19-22485 (E)

280120

*1922485*

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development

A/RES/74/216

Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to wo rking tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable devel opment, its
commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon
the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking to address their
unfinished business,
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development and the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
and the resulting processes for the elaboration of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and for the realization of sustainable development, and further
recognizing the uneven progress in the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals and all other internationally agreed development goals and commitments
necessary to achieve sustainable development,
Reaffirming the need to further mainstream sustainable development at all
levels, integrating economic, social and environmental aspects and recognizing their
interlinkages, so as to achieve sustainable development in all its dimensions, and
reiterating that sustainable development is a key element of the overarching
framework for United Nations activities,
Welcoming the convening of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development under the auspices of the General Assembly (Sustainable Development
Goals Summit) on 24 and 25 September 2019, and the adoption of its political
declaration, 7 and taking note of the 2019 Global Sustainable Development Report as
an important input to the high-level political forum under the auspices of the General
Assembly,
Recognizing that digital technologies and the unprecedented scale, spread and
speed of change brought about by them can be harnessed to support the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Stressing the need, in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, to benefit from and build on experiences, success stories, best
practices, challenges and the lessons learned from the previous agreements on
sustainable development,
Stressing also the importance of overcoming silos and seeking innovative and
coordinated approaches in integrating the three dimensions of sustainable
development, and in this regard taking note of the actions and initiatives implemented
by the United Nations system entities,
Stressing further the need to determine gaps, obstacles, synergies and challenges
in the implementation of commitments and instruments in the sustainable
development field, in a coherent and integrated manner, and with a view to pursuing
and achieving policy coherence as well as identifying new opportunities and emerging
challenges for international cooperation on the path towards sustainable development,

__________________
7

2/5

Resolution 74/4, annex.
19-22485

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development

A/RES/74/216

Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, 8
the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, 9 the New Urban Agenda 10 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 11 as well as major outcome documents in relation to
countries in special situations,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development; 12
2.
Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
mainstreaming of the three dimensions of sustainable development throughout the
United Nations system; 13
3.
Reaffirms the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,
entitled “The future we want”, 6 and also reaffirms, as set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, 14 all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development; 1
4.
Recognizes that the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development constituted a milestone that ushered in major international instruments
and commitments that guide progress in closing development gaps within and among
developed and developing countries, including the Convention on Biological
Diversity, 15 the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 16 and the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa (the Rio
conventions) 17 as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
5.
Urges the full and effective implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals and all other internationally agreed development goals and
commitments in the economic, social and environmental fields, including the
Millennium Development Goals and those under the three Rio conventions, building
on their contributions, best practices, challenges and lessons learned, in order to
support the full and effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
6.
Recognizes that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development builds on
issues included in Agenda 21, and encourages further efforts aimed at strengthening
international cooperation to address gaps in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda;
7.
Acknowledges, in this regard, that sustainable consumption and production
practices can be cost-efficient and effective ways to achieve economic development,
reduce environmental impacts and advance human well-being, and urges the need to
__________________

Resolution 69/313, annex.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
10
Resolution 71/256, annex.
11
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
12
A/74/204.
13
A/74/72-E/2019/13.
14
Resolution 70/1.
15
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
16
Ibid., vol. 1771, No. 30822.
17
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.
8
9

19-22485

3/5

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development

A/RES/74/216

further Sustainable Development Goal 12, in order to contribute to the achievement
of all Goals;
8.
Recognizes that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development adopted, among other commitments on sustainable consumption and
production, the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and
Production Patterns, 18 and that both the Framework and its multi-partner trust fund
are tools for action on sustainable consumption and production, and notes the launch
of the “One Plan for One Planet” strategy 2018–2022, and in this regard reiterates the
need for such initiatives to continue sharing best practices and providing other forms
of technical assistance in the shift towards sustainable consumption and production
patterns, including by providing tools and solutions for policy design and
implementation;
9.
Also recognizes the importance of new and ongoing efforts to develop
policies, frameworks, partnerships and instruments that improve resource efficiency,
reduce waste and mainstream sustainability practices across all sectors of the
economy, and enable consumers to make sustainable consumption choices;
10. Further recognizes the important role of the private sector in utilizing
sustainable practices, including for multinational corporations and micro -, small and
medium-sized enterprises which may face greater challenges in enhancing resource
efficiency;
11. Acknowledges the link between plastic waste and sustainable consumption
and production patterns, and encourages further efforts at all levels to reduce, reuse
and recycle plastics and to address through innovative approaches different types of
plastic waste, including marine plastic litter;
12. Urges the international community to continue supporting developing
countries in strengthening their scientific and technological capacity to move to wards
more sustainable patterns of consumption and production;
13. Encourages the further strengthening of the science-policy interface and
of the means of implementation from all sources and at all levels, including a
revitalized and enhanced Global Partnership, as well as by supporting innovative
approaches to sustainability science and emphasizing cross-disciplinary partnerships;
14. Requests the United Nations system to further mainstream and integrate
the three dimensions of sustainable development throughout its work, and to continue
to exchange experiences and lessons learned in this regard and to step up its efforts
at all levels in continued support of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
15. Encourages regional and subregional organizations to continue to promote
sustainable development in their respective regions by, inter alia, promoting peer
learning and cooperation, including South-South and triangular cooperation, as well
as effective linkages among global, regional, subregional and national processes, as
appropriate, to advance sustainable development;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, w ith a
particular focus on the state of play with regard to sustainable consumption and

__________________
18

4/5

A/CONF.216/5, annex.
19-22485

Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development

A/RES/74/216

production and the application and promotion thereof, and to recommend concrete
actions to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in this regard;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled, “Towards the
achievement of sustainable development: implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including through sustainable consumption and
production, building on Agenda 21”.
52nd plenary meeting
19 December 2019

19-22485

5/5
