S/PV.9385

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9385th meeting

Wednesday, 26 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Hamamoto
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Ms. Saha

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21940 (E)
*2321940*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor on a point of order.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Before we begin our work, I would like to take
this opportunity to voice our principled disagreement
with the presidency’s approach to inviting briefers to
today’s meeting under rule 39.
Russia requested today’s meeting — and did so on
16 July — to discuss a very important and sensitive
issue, which is the Kyiv regime’s attacks targeting
Orthodox Christianity in Ukraine. Based on the need for
comprehensive consideration of the issue, we proposed
three briefers. They were a representative of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, Archbishop Gideon,
of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, and the Ukrainian
writer, publicist and civil activist Yan Taksyur,
speaking on behalf of civil society. The latter two
have been prosecuted in Ukraine for their political and
religious views and their efforts to protect the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church. They are willing to share first-hand
information with the members of the Security Council
based on their own experience.
We gave preliminary consent to the holding of
two meetings on 26 July, one after the other, on the
understanding that our briefers would be able to speak
in full. However, the British presidency made the
unilateral decision that there was no room for one of
those briefers at a Security Council meeting, citing time
constraints. I want to emphasize that this is completely
artificially induced, since it was the British presidency’s
own decision to hold the meetings consecutively rather
than moving the second to another time.
On that false pretext, the British presidency’s
censorship steamrolled an Orthodox cleric, Archbishop
Gideon, who was similarly persecuted after he spoke
before Council members the previous time. He was
banned from entering the countries of the European
Union, which incidentally proclaims itself to be a
champion of freedom of speech and belief. And now
attempts are being made to prevent the Archbishop from
participating in discussions in the Council altogether.
That is despite the fact that at the beginning of its watch
2/16

26/07/2023

the British presidency announced its commitment to
protecting representatives of civil society as a vital
aspect of its working methods. The British delegation
must be aware that earlier in July we sent a letter to
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council detailing the problems that Archbishop Gideon
encountered as a result of his previous briefing to
the Security Council. So where is the presidency’s
commitment to protecting briefers now? Or does it
extend only to the representatives of biased pro-Western
non-governmental organizations?
I have a question for you, Mr. President. Why
are you insisting on not having an Orthodox priest
participate in today’s meeting on the Orthodox Church?
What does London have against representatives of that
faith? If representatives of, say, the Catholic or Islamic
faiths are invited to participate next time, will you also
refuse them on a pretext of time constraints? Please
respond and then I will continue.
The President: I note the statement by the
representative of the Russian delegation on a point of
order and will respond to his comments.
As part of our functions in the presidency, we
consulted Council members on Russia’s proposed
briefers, mindful of the very tight timing of the Council
this morning and determined not to have to cancel any
subsidiary-body business by rescheduling. On that
basis, and based on the views of other Council members,
we made a reasonable compromise proposal. We did not
refuse either of Russia’s proposed non-United Nations
briefers. We offered the Russian delegation a choice of
which one it wanted to speak. And we made it clear
that it could send a written contribution from the other
in a letter to the Council if it wanted both of their
contributions to be considered.
The Russian delegation did not engage with the
presidency’s compromise proposal and continued to
insist on its preferred line-up in full. There is nothing in
the provisional rules of procedure that gives a Council
member the right to unilaterally demand that. As
with every presidency, we are balancing different and
competing pressures — the desire to bring civil-society
voices to the Council, alongside the need to maintain a
workable programme that allows Council members the
time for discussion.
Russia has proposed five non-United Nations
briefers this month already. That is five more than have
been proposed by the rest of the Council, not counting
23-21940

26/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

the presidency — five more put together than the
rest of the Council. We have accepted all of the rest
of them so far, but the presidency’s role is not to do
everything that one delegation demands while ignoring
the views of other Council members. To be clear, we
are not objecting to a specific briefer. We simply asked
that Russia limit itself to one briefer, not two, and send
in a written contribution from the second. That is not
unreasonable, and it is important that we maintain the
policy of the presidency on the matter.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor again on a point of order.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I do not recall hearing that some kind of quota
had been established for invitations to civil-society
representatives. Once again, I repeat, we are acting fully
in line with your presidency’s programme, which was
proposed to us all, to which we all agreed, and which
was to facilitate the greatest possible participation of
representatives of civil society. Furthermore, I can
remember many situations where a number of civilsociety representatives participated in briefings, but
not a single situation in which the presidency proposed
some sort of choice as to which briefer should be
nominated, as if we were haggling in a bazaar or a store.
Before our very eyes we are seeing an egregious
situation in which the United Kingdom, in the chair of
the President of the Security Council, is obstructing the
participation in its discussions of a representative of
one of the key world religions.
We cannot accept that. We request that the invitation
to Bishop Gedeon be put to a procedural vote, and we
ask that members vote in favour.
Furthermore, in protest against the attempts by the
United Kingdom to prevent our guest from speaking
at this briefing, despite the fact that he fully meets
the criteria set out in rule 39 of the Council’s rules of
procedure, meaning that he is competent to talk about
today’s agenda item, we will not speak at the meeting
to be held following this one. I request that the Security
Council Affairs Division make the relevant changes to
the list of speakers for that meeting.
The President: In view of the comments made
by Council members, I propose to put to the vote
the proposal by the Russian Federation, to extend
an invitation to Bishop Gedeon, under rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, to provide a
briefing to the Security Council under the agenda item

S/PV.9385

“Threats to international peace and security”. Just to be
clear, if Council members vote “yes”, they are voting
for the participation of Bishop Gedeon in this meeting.
The presidency’s recommendation is that we adhere to
the presidency’s proposal.
I shall now put the proposal to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Brazil, China, Russian Federation
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana, Japan,
Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, United Arab Emirates
The President: The proposal received 3 votes in
favour, none against and 12 abstentions. Having failed
to obtain the required number of votes, the proposal to
invite Bishop Gedeon to participate in the meeting has
been rejected.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Today is a historic and extremely
unfortunate day for the Security Council and the entire
international community. We have seen the blocking of
the participation of a representative of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church at this meeting. Western delegations
have therefore effectively openly demonstrated
solidarity with the repressive policy of the Kyiv regime
targeting canonical Orthodoxy, which is a blatant
example of egregious double standards undermining
freedom of expression, freedom of opinion, freedom of
faith and all the ideals that they proclaim to uphold.
We call for the presidency of the United Kingdom to be
judged in terms of its hypocrisy as one of the sponsors
of the resolution on human fraternity and religious
tolerance (resolution 2686 (2023)). Its decision to block
our proposal through the prerogative of the Security
Council presidency and to prevent the participation of
an Orthodox priest is a blatant example of precisely
how London really views all those lofty ideals and how
easily it is ready to abandon them to advance petty
parochial attempts to spite the Russian Federation. We
recall the English saying, “practice what you preach”.

23-219403/16

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

We have lost count of the many times that London has
failed to adhere to it.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Nihal Saad,
Director of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations;
and Mr. Yan Taksyur, author.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Saad.
Ms. Saad: I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for the opportunity to brief the
Council on this issue on behalf of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations.
I will focus my briefing on the freedom of religion
and belief dimension and the protection of religious
sites within the context of the war in Ukraine.
In the case of wars and intercommunal conflicts,
saving lives and protecting human welfare is,
understandably, often, if not always, a priority, while
protecting places of worship, safeguarding religious
sites and preserving cultural heritage sites take a
second, distant place. History reminds us that war,
religion and politics are intertwined in many ways.
Therefore, it is important to factor in, and understand
the complexity of, the role that religion plays in some
of those conflicts. The ongoing and relentless war in
Ukraine is a case in point. In addressing the situation
holistically, we should right-size the religious dimension
in that particular crisis, which we have at hand as the
result of the Russian Federation’s armed attack on
Ukraine. The division among Ukraine’s Orthodox
bodies is not new. It has existed for decades, but has
been exacerbated within Ukraine and reverberated
worldwide, as Orthodox churches have struggled with
how and whether to take sides.
Last Sunday, we woke up here to the heartbreaking
images of a severely damaged historic cathedral, the
largest Orthodox church in Odesa. A Russian missile
hit the Transfiguration Cathedral and other historic
buildings that lie in the historic heritage centre of
Odesa. At the same time, it was heartening to see
that, hours later, parishioners and volunteers donning
hard hats, with shovels and brooms, began removing
4/16

26/07/2023

rubble and tried to salvage any artefacts they could.
The Cathedral in Odesa is not the only religious site
that has been damaged in the war. According to a
preliminary assessment undertaken by UNESCO, 116
religious sites have been damaged since 24 February
2022. The United Nations condemned the attack. The
Secretary-General strongly condemned the Russian
missile attack on Odesa and noted that the attack on
an area protected under the World Heritage Convention
is in violation of the Hague Convention of 1954 for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict. The Director-General of UNESCO strongly
condemned the attack and considered it an escalation in
violence against the cultural heritage of Ukraine. The
High Representative for the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations condemned the attack on the Cathedral and
deplored the fact that the ongoing war in Ukraine has
led to the destruction or pillaging of places of worship
and religious heritage sites, which has further fuelled
hatred, stoked mistrust and exacerbated the hostilities.
That brings me to the United Nations Plan of Action
to Safeguard Religious Sites in unity and solidarity for
safe worship, developed by the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations and launched by the Secretary-General
in 2019. The Plan of Action is rooted in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and grounded in the core
understanding that religious sites are powerful symbols
of our collective consciousness. The Plan advocates the
sanctity of religious sites and the safety of worshippers
and stresses the right of all believers to access their
holy sites and to practice their religious rituals and
traditions freely, peacefully and safely, without fear
or intimidation. The Russian Federation was among
a core group of Member States and other relevant
stakeholders that informed the Plan of Action in its
consultative phase.
The United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
promotes the universality of religious sites emanating
from our conviction that places of worship and sacred
religious sites are representative of the history, identity
and traditions of people in every country and community
and must be fully respected and protected. An attack on
places of worship strikes the very core of communities’
sense of identity and belonging. Therefore, religious
sites should be places of worship, not places of war.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, Member
States pledge their commitment to promoting and
encouraging universal respect for and observance of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms without
23-21940

26/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

distinction, including freedom of religion or belief.
A number of multilateral instruments recognize that
discrimination against persons on a basis of religion
or belief constitutes an affront to human dignity and
undermines the fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and enunciated
in detail in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. It is therefore the obligation of Member
States to prohibit discrimination and violence on a
basis of religion or belief and to implement measures
to guarantee equal and effective protection under the
law. In that context, the politicization of religion in
the context of the war in Ukraine fuels intercommunal
tensions, stokes fear and triggers violence.
Restrictions on freedom of religion and the safety
of members of religious communities across Ukraine,
both in territory controlled by the Government
and territory controlled by the occupying Russian
Federation, are matters of grave concern. According to
the updated report for the period between 1 February
and 30 April of the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, based on the work
of the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, the number of incidents of violence
against members and supporters of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church increased in the reporting period.
In particular, authorities searched places of worship
and other facilities of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church,
issued notices of suspicions about clergymen and
placed several of them, including one of the Church’s
main hierarchs, under house arrest, based on little or
no evidence.
In addition, a rental agreement of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church of the State-owned Kyiv-Pechersk
Lavra with the Ministry of Culture was terminated
early. However, following advocacy by the United
Nations, authorities refrained from taking actions that
risked violence and did not forcibly evict the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church from the Lavra on 29 March, the stated
deadline for leaving the premises. Besides that, several
city and regional councils banned the activities of the
Church during April. Many local councils also sought
to terminate municipal property rental agreements
with the Church. We are therefore concerned about the
possibility that the cumulative impact of Government
actions targeting the Ukrainian Orthodox Church could
be discriminatory.
Another worrisome sign is the surge in hate speech
and several incidents of violence against Ukrainian

S/PV.9385

Orthodox Church members in April. According to the
report, public officials, bloggers and opinion leaders
used discriminatory and inflammatory rhetoric and
openly incited violence against clergy and supporters
of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. The Government
and law-enforcement authorities did not address
the incidents of hate speech during the reporting
period effectively.
In territories occupied by the Russian Federation,
there is grave concern about reports by the Human
Rights Monitoring Mission during the period from
1 August 2022 to 31 January 2023, documenting
actions perpetrated by the Russian armed forces
against religious communities, including enforced
disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture or other
ill treatment and unlawful deportations, carried out
against clergy and members of Ukrainian Greek
Catholic and evangelical Christian communities.
Moreover, the Russian occupation authorities raided,
ransacked and closed three places of worship belonging
to the Baptist community in Melitopol, reportedly on
the grounds of the community’s purported links with
foreign intelligence services, with little or no evidence
of such links.
To conclude, I want to reiterate that when people
are attacked because of their religion or belief, we
are all diminished. Targeting religious actors and
faith communities across Ukraine is short-sighted,
miscalculated and counterproductive. The role of
religious leaders in maintaining solidarity across
ecumenical lines is crucial to preserving the social
fabric of a unified Ukraine and will be a key factor
in peacebuilding, if and when the war comes to an
end. The United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
emphasizes the importance of respecting religious
and cultural diversity, advancing intercultural and
interreligious dialogue and promoting mutual respect
and understanding among individuals, societies and
nations. Both parties are urged to respect and uphold
fundamental human rights, including freedom of
religion or belief and the right to manifest and practice
one’s religion freely and safely. We also emphasize
the importance of respecting freedom of opinion
and expression, peaceful assembly and association
without discrimination.
The President: I thank Ms. Saad for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Taksyur.

23-219405/16

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

26/07/2023

Mr. Taksyur (spoke in Russian): My name is Yan
Taksyur. I am a writer and a television programme host
and a citizen of Ukraine. On 10 March 2022, I was
arrested by the Security Service of Ukraine (SBU) and
sent first to an SBU prison and then to a Kyiv pre-trial
facility. At the end of May of this year, a court in Kyiv
sentenced me to 12 years’ imprisonment. However,
after an exchange of Russian prisoners of war, I was
given the opportunity and the honour to speak here
before you today. Why has Ukrainian justice treated
me — a 70-year-old person with cancer — so harshly?
There is only one real reason, which is that I defended
the canonical Ukrainian Orthodox Church in my show,
poems and articles, and spoke about the repression
of the Church by the Ukrainian Government and its
security organs.

protect their churches, metal rods have been driven into
skulls, the blood of the priesthood and the laity shed.

I want to emphasize that my personal history is
only a small part of the persecution and the terror that
have been unleashed against the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church and its adherents in the past few years. I
would like to remind the Council that the Orthodox
Church in the land of Ukraine was created in the
tenth century, and the current Ukrainian Orthodox
Church is its direct successor. However, in 2018, a
number of politicians — the then President of Ukraine
Petro Poroshenko, the then United States Secretary
of State Mike Pompeo and Patriarch Bartholomew I
of Constantinople — in violation of church laws and
the Ukrainian Constitution, created a new religious
organization in the country, the Orthodox Church of
Ukraine. They then began to demand of the ancient
canonical Church that it change to a new structure.

The world-famous holy monastery of the KyivPechersk Lavra, on the site of which there is now a prison,
is also being subjected to sophisticated repression these
days. The main temples of the Lavra — the Dormition
Cathedral and the Refectory Church — have already
been seized and handed to the Orthodox Church of
Ukraine. The Lavra’s brethren and monks have been
expelled from the monastery, some of the most valuable
icons and items of worship have been seized illegally
and worshippers are not being granted access into the
Lavra — all because they did not give into the demand
to move to another religious jurisdiction.

Immediately, violent actions began targeting the
believers and priesthood of the canonical Ukrainian
Orthodox Church, including the seizure of churches,
their illegal re-registration and threats of legal and
physical reprisals. I felt compelled to speak and write
openly about the situation, which constituted a violation
of article 35 of the Ukrainian Constitution, according to
which the State has no right to interfere in church affairs.
The new wave of persecution targeting the canonical
Church arose under the current President of Ukraine,
Volodymyr Zelenskyy. It intensified and escalated in
particular early this year and is still going on. Hundreds
of Ukrainian Orthodox churches and monasteries have
been seized and violently and illegally transferred to
the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. Ordinary worshipers
have had their fingers cut off as they attempted to
6/16

Besides that, there has been an unprecedented
campaign of lies launched by the media. Without any
proof, bishops and ordinary priests born in Ukraine
and who spent their entire lives there are being called
agents of the Kremlin and accused of harbouring arms
and banned literature, although there is absolutely no
evidence for any of that. Metropolitan Theodosy of
Cherkasy and Kanev is under house arrest. Today, in a
detention centre I know well — the former Lukianivska
Prison in Kyiv, located on the site of the Kyiv-Pechersk
Lavra — Metropolitan Pavel is languishing, as is my
friend Dmitry Skvortsov, a well-known Orthodox
publicist. The charges brought against them have no
legal basis whatsoever, which is another egregious fact.

In that regard, I draw the Security Council’s
attention to the fact that the Ukrainian authorities
are interfering in the realm of the sacrosanct — the
relationship between man and God — in which politics
and geopolitics have no place. Nevertheless, the
Security Service of Ukraine is still conducting, under
fabricated suspicions and pretexts, operations targeting
dozens, if not hundreds, of cathedrals and monasteries
in Ukraine in Zakarpattia, Chernivtsi, Rivne, Volyn,
Mykolayiv, Sumy, Lviv, Zhytomyr and Kherson
oblasts. Metropolitan Ionathan of Tulchyn and Bratslav
and Metropolitan Luke of Zaporizhzhya and Melitopol
have been subjected to searches and interrogations.
The victims of this moral terror include ordinary
priests. I had opportunity to get to know one of them,
Father Andrei Pavlenko. Under the false accusations of
collaboration with foreign intelligence, he, like me, was
sentenced to 12 years in prison, after being tortured.
Today, as I address the Council, the Holy
Intercession Cathedral in Khmelnytskyi has already
23-21940

26/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

been seized. And this is how it happened: it was stormed
in April by 500 people, including so-called activists of
the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, and with the support
of local authorities and police. In July, in the city of
Bila Tserkva, a group of people, who called themselves
priests of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, with the
support of special forces, blocked parishioners’ access
to the local cathedral and seized it by force. And believe
me, that sad list could go on. The scenario of lawlessness
taking place throughout the country is always the same,
and although those figures are hidden, it all boils down
to one thing: hundreds and thousands of parishes of the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church have either already been
forcibly transferred and placed under the jurisdiction
of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, or remain under
threat of being seized and transferred.
Moreover, in the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine,
there is a bill that would completely ban the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church — this is unprecedented in the history
of law — and the deputies of the Verkhovna Rada have
announced their willingness to vote in favour of it. That
means that the Ukrainian authorities are going to wipe
off the face of the earth the Church in which millions of
the country’s citizens were baptized, wed and paid last
respects. I think that such a situation is unacceptable.
It is illegal and criminal in the face of God and people.
I hope that the members of the Council, as people
who respect the sacrosanct, will not fail to give their
attention and protection to those who are suffering
injustice in Ukraine today.
The President: I thank Mr. Taksyur for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Nihal Saad and Mr. Yan
Taksyur for their briefings.
First of all, I would like to reiterate, as I have done
before, that the Ukrainian Orthodox Church did not ask
us to convene today’s meeting and did not authorize us
to speak on its behalf. Nor are we speaking on behalf of
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church or its specific priests
or parishioners. We are well aware of the conditions in
which our co-religionists are living in Ukraine, and we
know what kind of pressure the Zelenskyy regime is
exerting on them. And we have no illusions as to the true
worth of their assessments of our current efforts, which
we are likely to learn about today from social networks.

S/PV.9385

Russia already drew the Security Council’s
attention to Kyiv’s campaign to destroy canonical
Orthodoxy in Ukraine during our meeting on 17 January
(see S/PV.9245), at a time when the effective seizure
of churches of the Ukraine Orthodox Church and the
persecution and beating of priests — which had been
under way since the bloody coup d’état in Kyiv in
2014 — had reached a new level, a legislative one. As
Mr. Taksyur already mentioned today, on 19 January,
draft law no. 8371 was introduced into Ukraine’s
Parliament, essentially providing for the banning
of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and the seizure
of its churches. As far as we understand, as early as
tomorrow, on 27 July, it may be put to a vote. I will
set aside for now the fact that the draft law egregiously
violates at least 10 articles of the Constitution of
Ukraine that regulate the freedom of speech and, above
all, civil liberties. It ignores the fact that the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church is an independent church with its
own governing bodies operating under Ukrainian laws,
and that it is not governed from Russia. It also ignores
the fact that there have been no judicial proceedings
against the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and that its
alleged violations of Ukrainian law have not been
established in a legal procedure. There is simply no
point in talking about all this, because Ukraine ceased
to be a State governed by the rule of law since at least
2014. And the Kyiv regime does what it wants without
regard for the law.
I urge Council members to simply think about the
blatant lawlessness and violations of basic religious
freedoms that is taking place before their eyes. They
merely need to consider the fact that the Parliament in
Kyiv is considering a legislative ban on and the seizure
of property of a canonical church with a centuries-old
history, to which the majority of believers in Ukraine
belong. Such a cynical act is unparalleled in modern
history. For example, how would our host country react
if the President of the United States were to propose
to Congress to ban the Catholic Church and to seize
St. Patrick’s Cathedral in New York on the grounds
that Catholics are subordinate to Pope Francis? What
if the President of the United States were to arrest one
of the cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church in the
United States? And what if the United Kingdom, for
example, were to arrest one of the leaders of the Muslim
community, or if the British Parliament was debating
a bill to ban that religion in the country under the
pretext that the Islamic holy sites are located in Mecca
and Medina?

23-219407/16

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

Is it hard for the Council to imagine such a
situation? It is hard for us as well. It seems more like the
plot of a fantasy movie. But unfortunately in Ukraine,
this horror movie, with the collusion of the Western
sponsors of the Kyiv regime, is becoming a reality
before our very eyes. The Zelenskyy regime has been
consistently pursuing a State policy of the destruction
of canonical orthodoxy in Ukraine. The arsenal of
the measures taken includes legal bans, systematic
searches, the raiding of churches, the interrogation of
parishioners and clergy, their arrests, physical violence
and vandalism. State and pro-Government media outlets
systematically publish false information discrediting
the Church and its hierarchs. The Kyiv regime, without
waiting for pseudo-legislative measures, decided to
seize from the Ukrainian Orthodox Church the KyivPechersk Lavra, the holy site of canonical orthodoxy.
The vicegerent of the Lavra, Metropolitan Pavel of
Vyshhorod and Chornobyl, was placed under house
arrest on false charges. On 14 July 14, after aroundthe-clock house arrest, he was placed in a detention
centre. There is a video of him that shows the tragic
picture of an elderly man — a highly respected bishop
of a church — being forced to remove his panagia prior
to his imprisonment in a detention centre, which shook
the Orthodox world. For the first time in modern history,
a high-ranking bishop of a church was persecuted by a
State and sent to prison for his faith. With their unique
brand of cynicism, the Kyiv authorities set his bail at
33 million hryvnia, which is approximately $1,000,000.
For comparison, I will mention another judicial
decision of the Kyiv authorities. Denis Vorody, a former
child educator from Chynadiiovo in Kyiv’s Zakarpattia
oblast, who tried to export and sell an 11-month-old
baby boy for $25,000 on the territory of a European
Union country, was released on bail earlier this week,
with his bail set at $27,000. The bail was posted, so this
person who caught red-handed trafficking in humans
is now roaming free, and the spiritual leader of millions
of believers, an elderly and ill person who needs daily
care, is languishing in prison. We turn to the entire
international community and all faith leaders with a
call to stand up in defence of Metropolitan Pavel.
The magnitude of the persecution by the Kyiv
regime of the clergy of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church,
who are now being accused of crimes against the State
and public security, is reminiscent of the most tragic
totalitarian episodes in world history. According to a
report of the Security Service of Ukraine published
8/16

26/07/2023

in early April 2023, since 2022 the Service carried
out more than 40 so-called “comprehensive counterintelligence measures”. From October 2022 to May
2023 alone, the Service conducted approximately 100
searches in monasteries, churches and administrative
buildings of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church dioceses
throughout Ukraine. Nearly 250 clerics of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church were banned from entering the
country; they turned out to be outcasts in their native
land. With regard to clergy, including 14 bishops, there
were 61 criminal cases lodged on charges of treason
and inciting religious hatred, and 19 metropolitans
were deprived of Ukrainian citizenship under various
pretexts. In February of this year, at the proposal of
the Kyiv regime, the court sentenced to seven years in
prison on charges of anti-Ukrainian activities a priest
of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, who was captured
by the Kyiv security forces in the Krasno-Limansky
area of the Donetsk People’s Republic temporarily
controlled by the regime. A total of seven clergymen
were sentenced.
Here is an excerpt from the statement of Father
Gedeon, to whom British censorship did not give the
floor today:
“Recently, I met with clergy who arrived from
Ukraine. I cannot provide details owing to safety
and security concerns. They described a terrible
incident in early May in eastern Ukraine. Ukrainian
military personnel drove four clergymen into icy
waters in an attempt to force them to renounce
their faith and to declare ‘Glory to Ukraine’.
None of those saints of God, may they be blessed,
renounced their faith. Three drowned, and one lost
consciousness and was carried away by the current.
The Ukrainian military decided that he was dead
and did not pull him out, but he survived and told
me this story.”
This brutal targeting of Metropolitan Pavel is an
attempt by Kyiv to use force to break the resistance of
Orthodox Christians who are fighting for their canonical
church and, above all, to break the resistance of monks
of the main Orthodox sanctuary in Ukraine — the
Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra — whom the Kyiv authorities
have forced to vacate the premises.
On 6 June 2023, the Minister of Culture and
Information Policy of Ukraine, Oleksandr Tkachenko,
demanded that the monks leave the premises within
three days. They refused to comply with that criminal
23-21940

26/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

order and to receive a document for the transfer of
property. On 13 June, the Kyiv court cynically rejected
the claim of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church against
the museum-sanctuary to ensure that the monastery
community was not prevented from worshiping.
On 30 June, the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine and
the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra National Reserve demanded
that the monks of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church leave
the premises by 4 July. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church
refused to comply with that illegitimate demand. There
is no court decision in that regard and such instructions
from the authorities were appealed at the judicial level.
Nevertheless, on 4 July, a specialized commission
of the Ministry of Culture and Information Policy of
Ukraine began work to seal the area, that is, to seize the
buildings of the monastery from the monks.
On 6 July, lawyer-protopriest Chekman, speaking
in the interests of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church,
stated that representatives of the sanctuary, with the
assistance of the police, broke the locks and infiltrated
section 70 of the monastery. He also published
photographs showing police officers at the premises,
including special forces personnel, who cordoned off
the premises.
As at 14 July, at least eight buildings located on
the territory of the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra are known to
have been closed. Worshippers who are gathering to
support the monks are being forcefully dispersed by
the police. That has created unbearable conditions for
the monks residing in the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra. With
the assistance of the security forces, actions are being
taken to forcibly drive them out of the monastery.
At the same time, media outlets are publishing
information that the leader of the Kyiv regime
is discussing with Patriarch Bartholomew I of
Constantinople the transfer of the entire Kyiv-Pechersk
Lavra complex to the so-called Orthodox Church of
Ukraine, a puppet structure that was created on the
initiative of former President Poroshenko of Ukraine.
As we have already heard today, this is a purely
political, schismatic project that has been rejected by
the majority of Orthodox followers in Ukraine.
Another rhetorical question arises — can a New
York court seize a Catholic or Orthodox cathedral and
transfer it, for example, to the Baptists? If not, then
why is it that our American colleagues, who pose as
universal human rights defenders, are completely silent

S/PV.9385

and unable to utter even a word with respect to the
atrocities being perpetrated in Ukraine?
At the same time, we are seeing the looting of the
cultural, spiritual and historic values belonging to
the Ukrainian people. On 28 June, the press service
of the Louvre, in Paris, announced that the museum
for temporary storage and exhibit received valuable
artifacts from the Kyiv Bohdan and Varvara Khanenko
National Museum of Arts, including four icons of the
Byzantine period. Moreover, open sources contain
information about the export of treasures of the KyivPechersk Lavra abroad.
The tragedy of the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra is just the
tip of the iceberg. Throughout Ukraine war is being
waged against canonical orthodoxy. At the regional
level, primarily in western Ukraine, a campaign has
already been launched to ban the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church. The relevant decisions were made in April
and May 2023 in Volyn, Ivano-Frankivsk, Zhytomyr,
Lviv, Rivne, Chernivtsi and Khmelnytskyi oblasts. The
councils of the Lviv, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kirovohrad,
Chernivtsi, Ternopil and Rivne oblasts called on the
Verkhovna Rada to ban the Ukrainian Orthodox Church
throughout the country. The city councils of Brovar,
Kamianets-Podilskyi, Sumy, and Chernivtsi adopted
resolutions to confiscate the land of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church.
Today the Russian Foreign Ministry website has
made available a detailed report on the illegal actions
of the Kyiv regime against the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church, its clergy and parishioners. We will make
sure to circulate the content of that report in the
Security Council.
The repression of the Kyiv regime also affected
another holy site — the Pochaiv Lavra, in Ternopil
oblast. On 5 April, the website of the Verkhovna
Rada, published a draft appeal to the Government
demanding the termination of the lease agreement for
the monastery.
On 10 July, schismatics from the Orthodox Church
of Ukraine forced their way into the grounds of the
Transfiguration Cathedral in Bila Tserkva in Kyiv oblast.
They cut the locks, broke down the doors, blocked the
gates and prevented worshippers from entering. Those
who attempted to get in for the church service were
dispersed with pepper spray; some fire extinguishers
were even used. The intruders were supported by the
local authorities and the police. Worshippers have been

23-219409/16

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

fighting them for months, trying to retain access to the
Transfiguration Cathedral.
To conclude, I wish to stress that no accusations
against Russia and no fabrications about the canonical
Ukrainian Orthodox Church grant Kyiv permission
to destroy canonical orthodoxy or imprison respected
and elderly clergymen whose only fault is that they are
defending their faith. What right does the Zelenskyy
regime have to expel monks from the Kyiv Pechersk
Lavra, one of the holiest sites of canonical orthodoxy?
Can the parliament of any other State, at the suggestion
of the President of the country, adopt a law banning
a church whose worshippers represent the majority
of people in that country? Why is it that when this
happens in Ukraine today, our Western colleagues, who
have influence over the Kyiv regime, either shamefully
or deliberately turn a blind eye to this act? Where are
their much-vaunted values? Or are they so completely
blinded by Russophobia that they willingly bless
any and every crime committed by the Kyiv regime,
including crimes against the freedom of religion? We
hope their societies will judge this situation as it is, as
their leaders themselves seem to be afraid to do so.
Ms. Saha (United States of America): I thank
Director Saad for her briefing today. I will be brief,
given the number of times this year Russia has already
convened us to discuss this issue.
The United States takes allegations of violations of
human rights, including freedom of religion or belief,
seriously. We expect all governments to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms. However, what we
see in today’s meeting is Russia cynically complaining
of mistreatment of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church
while it engages in systematic religious oppression in
territories under its occupation.
Russia continues to mistreat members of religious
minority groups in areas of Ukraine that it has occupied
during its illegal war. Russia’s calling for this meeting
after its destruction of Odessa’s historic Transfiguration
Cathedral, which belongs to the very Ukrainian
Orthodox Church the Russian Government claims to
be defending today, is appalling. Russia’s damage to
religious sites and places of worship in Ukraine is well
documented. Ukraine’s Institute for Religious Freedom
has reported that, in Russia’s unconscionable war,
494 sites in Ukraine have been destroyed, damaged
or looted.
10/16

26/07/2023

We urge the Kremlin to cease its senseless war
and respect the human rights of all and the safety of
Ukraine’s civilian population, including members of all
religious communities.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): I thank the briefers for
their briefings.
Freedom of religion or belief is an indispensable and
universal principle shared across the global community.
In the international community, we have witnessed
countless human rights violations that undermine the
foundation of peoples’ lives and societies as a whole.
We stand ready to discuss human rights issues affecting
international peace and security.
Russia is attempting to employ narratives to paint
itself as a guardian of religious freedom. However,
when it comes to attacks on religious facilities, Russia
has inflicted tremendous damage on Ukraine.
We strongly condemn Russia’s recent missile
attacks on Odesa that resulted in civilian casualties
and damaged the UNESCO-protected cathedral. After
all, the absence of peace and stability undermines the
freedom of religion.
Let me repeat in the strongest possible terms that
Russia must withdraw all of its troops and military
equipment from Ukraine and respect Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the briefers
for their briefings.
Brazil attaches great importance to the freedom of
religion or belief without discrimination. We believe in
the potential of religious practice to advance the human
spirit, bring peoples and cultures together, build trust
and contribute to the peaceful resolution of disputes.
We regret that the conflict has also contaminated
ties between orthodox communities in Russia and
Ukraine. We take note of the recent detention of clerics
of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. Brazil reaffirms its
confidence in the full application of the rule of law and
in the discernment of the judicial authorities to ensure
the rights of the detainees, including respect for their
religious freedom.
Brazil’s position on this issue remains unchanged. I
would like to reiterate three points.
23-21940

26/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

First, freedom of religion is a fundamental human
right enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief, adopted by the General Assembly
in 1981 (General Assembly resolution 36/55). It is also
a fundamental tenet of our own Constitution and of our
way of life as a pluralistic and multi-ethnic society.
Secondly, we encourage initiatives to promote
an environment of tolerance and respect for religious
diversity. Under no circumstances should religious
practice be used to foment tensions between
communities and States.
Thirdly, we are aware that Russia and Ukraine
share the Orthodox faith as a common element of their
national identities. The basis of a common religious
practice can serve as a platform for dialogue, creating
the conditions for peaceful coexistence in a future that
we want to be close and lastly.
Brazil reiterates its call for the de-escalation of
hostilities and the resumption of dialogue between
Russia and Ukraine. We understand the hesitations
on both sides. However, we recall the obligation of
all Member States under Article 33 of the United
Nations Charter to seek the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means. We reiterate our commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and to
the recognition of the legitimate security concerns of
everyone in the region.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I wish to thank all
briefers for their insights.
Mozambique continues to be deeply concerned
over the continued escalation of the Russian-Ukrainian
conflict. The current divisions are pushing the
possibility of peaceful coexistence between Ukrainian
and Russian worshippers of the Orthodox faith even
further away. We should reject any use of religion or the
defence of one’s faith as a pretext for inciting violence
or hatred.
Mozambique wishes to remind all parties that
infringing upon basic freedoms, including the freedom
of religion or belief, goes against key principles of
international law, including paragraph 3 of Article
1 of the United Nations Charter and Article 18 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Drawing
from Mozambique’s own experience, we attest to

S/PV.9385

the importance of faith and spirituality, which are
essential pillars for promoting reconciliation within
and between communities.
In times of conflict, religious leaders and sites can
provide a safe space for those seeking refuge, and that
space must be preserved and protected at all times.
Ideally, our religious leaders should preach and teach
peace and ensure that empathy prevails despite the
heavy toll of the conflict. We must ensure that the most
fundamental human needs — safety, health, freedom
and respect — are provided for. Ultimately, that will be
instrumental in achieving lasting peace in a conflictprone world. Indeed, by their very nature religion and
faith can be potent drivers for healing after conflict
and can promote social cohesion, weaving a tapestry of
unity from the threads of discord.
History is full of instances where religion has been
used as a tool to indoctrinate generations with lasting
hatred. The damaging effects of religious schisms and
prejudices can last well beyond the end of a conflict,
leading to cycles of retribution through generations.
Mozambique strongly urges all the parties to avoid using
language that might incite violence, discrimination or
hostility towards individuals or groups. Weaponizing
this highly sensitive issue will only undermine efforts
to achieve future reconciliation.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all the
parties to immediately cease fighting, and we appeal
to all involved to uphold a culture of tolerance, respect
and understanding and to resume negotiations in line
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
thank the briefers for their insights.
While the international community continues to
appeal wholeheartedly for a swift end to the war in
Ukraine, clashes on various fronts continue to escalate.
One of the most profound and significant of them is
the Orthodox Church, which has continued to pay a
heavy price. In the now all-out war being waged by
the parties to the conflict, the clergy are also being
affected, with churches faced with choices that go
beyond religion and belief. More and more civilian
infrastructure continues to be ruined — the number
of places of worship destroyed now stands at well over
100 — and religious representatives are no longer safe.
It is the responsibility of all parties to the conflict to
refrain from turning places of worship into battlefields.
The Church must remain faithful to its vocation and

23-2194011/16

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

its message must remain one of unity and love for all
peoples and all nations.
Gabon would like to recall that freedom of religion
or belief is guaranteed by the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, as well as by the Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief. The
parties are obliged to respect the relevant provisions of
international instruments. The international community
must do its utmost to ensure that the Orthodox Church
retains its universal role and sacred character. It must
not be the object of threats or reprisals, let alone
targeted attacks.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I listened attentively to the statements made by
today’s briefers.
Religion is an important part of human civilization
and a vital embodiment of cultures. Peace, solidarity,
harmony and cordiality are the shared objectives and
principles generally upheld by religions across the
world. Nevertheless, throughout history, wars and
conflicts caused by reasons related to religion have
forced humankind to learn painful lessons. Religious
issues are often complex and delicate. When handled
inappropriately, they will likely aggravate tensions,
fuel animosity and even lead to confrontation. China
has consistently maintained that different religions and
denominations should respect one another, enhance
exchanges and promote harmony. It is important to
advocate a culture of peace and inject positive energy
aimed at increasing mutual trust, defusing tensions and
preserving peace.
The ongoing crisis in Ukraine is producing ever
more spillover effects, with the resulting ramifications
continuing to make themselves felt. The fundamental
way out lies in the achievement of a political settlement
of the Ukrainian issue. Military means are not an
alternative to dialogue and negotiation, which are
the right choice. China hopes that the parties will
remain rational, exercise restraint and relaunch peace
talks as soon as possible. We call on the international
community to create a positive atmosphere and
establish the necessary conditions to that end. China
will continue to stand on the side of peace and dialogue
and work untiringly with the international community
to achieve a political settlement of the Ukrainian issue.
12/16

26/07/2023

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates):
Throughout the more than 500 days since the outbreak of
the war in Ukraine, this Chamber has heard discussions
on obstructions to humanitarian access, violations of
international humanitarian law and the reality of the
conflict for civilians and communities.
Intolerance is one of the more intangible aspects
of the war. It seeps into the social fabric of everyday
life, fuelling the conflict. The United Arab Emirates
condemns all forms of intolerance. In our own region
we have seen the detrimental consequences of the
politicization of religion and of unchecked incitement
to violence masquerading as religious faith. The
significant role played by tolerance and peaceful
coexistence when it comes to peace and security was
acknowledged just weeks ago by the Council when
it unanimously adopted resolution 2686 (2023) (see
S/PV.9347). The Member States sitting around this
table were united in their support of the tenets that
the resolution upholds. We recognize that intolerance
could contribute to driving the outbreak, escalation and
recurrence of conflict. At the same time, we recognize
the importance of interreligious dialogue and the role
of religious leaders in promoting peaceful coexistence
that supports peacebuilding efforts.
Cultural heritage and religious sites are physical
manifestations of belief. As such, they are often put at
risk when intolerance, hatred and extremism spread.
Since the beginning of the war, UNESCO has verified
damage to 270 cultural sites in Ukraine, including
116 religious sites. We have both a legal and a moral
imperative to ensure the protection of cultural heritage.
Resolution 2347 (2017) affirms that directing unlawful
attacks on cultural heritage sites may constitute a war
crime in certain circumstances. Cultural heritage is
also a prism through which we can view our common
humanity. As we have seen in other contexts, places
of worship, as focal points for communities of faith,
can serve as important platforms for post-war healing
and peacebuilding.
Every act of religious intolerance or destruction to
sites serves only to escalate and prolong the conflict.
We reiterate our position that there can be no military
solution to the war, as well as our commitment to
supporting all efforts aimed at bringing it to a peaceful,
just and lasting resolution in line with the Charter of
the United Nations. We also stress that the parties must
uphold their responsibilities under international law
and avoid committing any acts of hostility directed at
23-21940

26/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

cultural objects and places of worship, which constitute
the cultural and spiritual heritage of peoples. Protecting
cultural heritage is a key part of making and sustaining
peace after conflict.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank the briefers
for their perspectives on developments relating to the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
More than 500 days after the Russian Federation
first invaded Ukraine, the prospect of peace is still a
distant one. The mistrust that the war in Ukraine has
created among its country’s nationals is painful to see,
but it is even more painful to see that religion, which
is universally acknowledged as a rallying platform for
peace, has been dragged into the ongoing conflict. We
urge that religion not be politicized and that people of
different faiths be encouraged to live together.
During the 17 January meeting of the Council on
the subject (see S/PV.9245), we expressed the hope that
the regulations deemed necessary by the authorities
of Ukraine to combat alleged acts of subversion by
some members of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church
would be temporary and related only to the efforts to
ensure public order during the war. We are, however,
worried about ongoing reports of persisting restrictions
on some religious sects, which have an impact on the
rights of some segments of the Ukrainian population.
Freedom of religion is a right intended to enhance the
stability and cohesion of societies, and its curtailment
could lead to an opposite outcome. We therefore urge
for the respect of the rights of all nationals of Ukraine,
throughout all parts of the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine, without discrimination.
We also note with concern reports by UNESCO
of approximately 110 religious sites that have been
damaged as a result of the war. We recall that such
attacks or destruction of religious places, sites and
shrines violates international law, in particular
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as they have more than material
significance for the dignity and lives of persons holding
spiritual or religious beliefs.
We underscore the importance of promoting
tolerance and respect for religious and cultural diversity
and the universal promotion and protection of human
rights. Additionally, we encourage the resolution
of systematic violations of human rights through
appropriate human rights instruments, such as the

S/PV.9385

Human Rights Council and the Council of the Europe,
and not through other means.
As history has shown, some of the heinous
crimes committed against humanity were premised
on religion, especially in instances in which the lines
between religion and politics seemed to be clouded. It
is for that reason that we appeal to all actors to exercise
tolerance of and mutual respect for other faiths, beliefs
or religious preferences in order to harness the positive
dividends of religion, including the hope and peace it
brings to our world.
We believe that a speedy resolution of the war
remains critical in tackling the religious divisions
that the war in Ukraine has generated and call on the
Council and the international community to support
such a goal by finding our common purpose. We must
find a pragmatic way to assist the parties in agreeing to
a cessation of hostilities and in committing to dialogue
that must lead to a just and sustainable solution to
the conflict.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): We are used to the practice
of what has proved to be “meetings of opportunity”
that Russia has been calling regularly on Ukraine. Most
of the time they fail to bring forward an issue worth
the discussion and the attention of the Council, since
the intention is to divert the attention away from the
real issues — the Russian war of aggression against
Ukraine and its disastrous consequences. Today’s
meeting about the Ukrainian Orthodox Church falls
into the same category.
Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights is clear — everyone has the right to freedom
of thought, conscience and religion. Albania fully
supports freedom of religion and belief anywhere,
including in Ukraine. But the real problem in Ukraine
today is not freedom of religion. It is just freedom — a
fundamental right that Russia is trying to steal through
sheer violence. Everything else is only a consequence
of that brutal use of force.
We believe that religious leaders anywhere
should work for peace, social cohesion and peaceful
coexistence. It is their commitment and their duty. We
expect them to be a strong voice of reason and humanity
and not become an extension and instrument of the
State and its action. And, as we have seen to our regret,
that is not done by blessing Russian tanks on their way
to kill innocent people in Ukraine. They would better

23-2194013/16

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

off trying to stop them in the name of the humanity for
which they pretend to work.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank the briefers for
their statements.
Only last week, the Council heard Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo echoing the words of the SecretaryGeneral, describing life in Ukraine as a living hell, as
a result of Russia’s aggression, adding that nowhere is
safe in the country (see S/PV.9380). Emergency Relief
Coordinator Griffiths reminded us that the war had a
significant humanitarian impact far beyond Ukraine’s
borders at a time when the world was already reeling
from various shocks.
The Russian Federation’s response to those
unequivocal statements was to call for today’s meeting
to try to justify its crimes, violations and human rights
abuses. That approach is not new and has been used
by Russia several times since the beginning of its
aggression. What is even more disconcerting this time
around is that today’s meeting comes just a couple of
days after Russia’s barbaric attack in Odesa severely
damaged the Transfiguration Cathedral, the largest
Orthodox church in the city. We strongly condemn that
attack against culture heritage and call on the Russian
Federation to take meaningful action to comply with its
obligations under international law. That includes the
1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and the 1972
World Heritage Convention.
As we have previously pointed out, Malta considers
allegations of human rights violations, including
those related to freedom of religion or belief, with
utmost seriousness. On multiple occasions, we have
consistently condemned ideologies and hate speech that
promote racism, discrimination, xenophobia and other
manifestations of intolerance. We have consistently
engaged in a constructive manner to discuss those
issues and treat them with the respect they deserve.
Today’s meeting does not do anything of the sort. It
does not seek dialogue. It does not seek understanding.
It does not seek solutions. It seeks to appropriate and
distort a sensitive subject to distract the international
community. It seeks to deviate our focus from the
appalling situation in Ukraine resulting from Russia’s
actions in violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we once again urge the Russian
Federation to immediately cease all hostilities and
14/16

26/07/2023

unconditionally and completely withdraw all its forces
and military equipment from the entire territory of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders.
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): With regard to the subject of today’s meeting,
I listened closely to the statements made by the briefers.
I would like to reiterate Ecuador’s recognition
of freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
in accordance with article 18 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and article 18 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Ecuador
is therefore concerned about the use of religion to
exacerbate conflict or violence, or even to justify it.
We condemn the fact that five days after the Russian
Federation requested today’s meeting, its air strikes
on Odesa resulted in the destruction of the historic
Orthodox Transfiguration Cathedral.
Just yesterday, the General Assembly adopted,
once again, a resolution on promoting interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering
hate speech and promoting an end to violence (General
Assembly resolution 77/318). We reiterated this
principle in the Council debate held on 14 June (see
S/PV.9347). But what greater act of violence is there
than to invade and militarily attack a neighbouring
country? I therefore reiterate my country’s strong call
for a definitive end to the military aggression.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland condemns the recent Russian strikes
against Odesa and other regions. We will address that
subject in greater detail in the next meeting. The serious
damage suffered by the Transfiguration Cathedral in
Odesa on Sunday gives today’s meeting a sad sense
of urgency.
Switzerland remains deeply concerned about the
violations of international humanitarian law and the
grave human rights violations resulting from the Russian
military aggression. We join High Commissioner
Volker Türk in condemning the appalling price of war.
Concerning freedom of religion and belief, I recall
the obligations under international human rights law,
including those set out in the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. Everyone must be able
to exercise their right to freedom of opinion and
expression, peaceful assembly and association, and
religion without discrimination. Freedom of religion
and belief protects the individual, not religions or
23-21940

26/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9385

religious communities. Any measure restricting
the right to manifest one’s religion or belief must be
prescribed by law, serve a legitimate public interest and
be necessary and proportionate.

of the International Court of Justice of 16 March 2022
ordering the Russian army to return to Russia.

I also reiterate Switzerland’s opposition to the
spread of hate speech and to any form of defamation or
discrimination based on religion. We call on religious
institutions and leaders to commit to a rhetoric of
peace and reconciliation. Switzerland calls for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations in particular. We once again call on
Russia to cease its combat operations and to withdraw
its troops from Ukrainian territory without delay.

The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring
that everyone, everywhere, can enjoy the human right
to freedom of religion or belief — a commitment we
share with Ukraine, which has been fighting to protect
democracy, plurality and human rights in Ukraine from
Russian assault for decades. The Head of the Russian
Orthodox Church, Patriarch Kirill, has expressed open
support for Putin’s illegal invasion, which has brought
so much suffering upon Ukraine. As Ms. Saad said
earlier, that suffering includes the recent destruction of
the Cathedral in Odesa. And to think that Russia has
the audacity to lecture us about religious freedom.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): This
meeting is yet another diversionary exercise orchestrated
by Russia as part of its disinformation campaign. I will
therefore limit my remarks to the essential.
To date, it is Russia’s actions in its war of aggression
against Ukraine that have violated human rights.
Numerous United Nations reports have already shown
that they include intentional abuse, the bombing of
civilian infrastructure and even the forced displacement
of children. By asking for this meeting to be called,
Russia is once again pursuing its propaganda agenda.
Let us get the facts straight. It is Russia that is
targeting religious sites, as we have seen in its strike
on the Cathedral of the Transfiguration in Odesa. In the
Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine, the situation
of members of the independent Orthodox Church of
Ukraine, Jehovah’s Witnesses, Crimean Tatars and
Protestants has continued to deteriorate. A number
of cases of persecution and discrimination have been
recorded against Tatars in Crimea.
Documenting the facts and combating impunity
for the perpetrators of such abuses is therefore
crucial. That is why France welcomes the work of the
Ukrainian justice system, international justice and the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine of the Human Rights Council. This meeting
is nothing but a pretext to force us to look away from
the atrocities that Russia is committing in Ukraine. We
condemn Russia’s choice to once again exploit the issue
of human rights and fundamental freedoms for the
purpose of disinformation. We will support Ukraine
and the Ukrainian people for as long as it takes. And
we demand once again that Russia respect the ruling

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

It is entirely understandable that Ukraine wants to
protect its national security in the face of those attacks,
and it has every right to do so. If Russia is serious about
ensuring freedom of religion and belief in Ukraine,
instead of using spurious Security Council meetings to
advance the kind of disinformation that we have heard
today — and that I fear has not finished — it should end
this senseless war and withdraw its forces.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will not hide our extreme disappointment
and bewilderment about the attempts by a number of
Western delegations to capitalize on the huge tragedy that
took place this week, the considerable damage inflicted
on the Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Saviour
in the city of Odesa, and to attribute responsibility for
it to Russia. If their capitals had any respect at all for
the truth, they would refrain from such insinuations.
After all, if a Russian missile had actually struck the
Cathedral, as the Zelenskyy regime was quick to claim,
there would have been nothing left of it. However, it
was damaged, but not completely destroyed. The nature
of the damage within the structure clearly points to
the Kyiv regime and unmistakably indicates that the
Cathedral was hit by a Ukrainian anti-aircraft missile.
As we know, air-defence missiles are filled with
thousands of pieces of shrapnel, which when they
explode in the air, are supposed to disperse as widely

23-2194015/16

S/PV.9385

Threats to international peace and security

as possible and to destroy aircraft. That was what
we saw huge amounts of embedded in the walls of
the Cathedral, photos of which were posted on social
networks by Ukrainian users. Attack missiles do not
contain that shrapnel, and their impact is significantly
greater. Moreover, the same people on social media
posted numerous videos on the Internet of a missile that
was launched and failed to gain altitude. It then fell right
away and exploded. In the flash of the explosion, the
spire of the bell tower of the Cathedral, which is located
right in the explosion epicentre, is clearly visible.
As we have said repeatedly at previous meetings,
the main and essentially only threat to civilians in
Ukrainian cities during Russia’s precision strikes on
the infrastructure facilities related to the Kyiv regime’s
military capabilities lies in that country’s air-defence
forces, which continue to be deployed in residential
areas and city centres, in violation of the basic norms
of international humanitarian law. We can find dozens
of similar images from Odesa on social networks,
captured the day before the anti-aircraft missile hit
the Cathedral. If the air-defence facilities had been
located outside residential neighbourhoods, the tragedy
would not have happened, just as with the many others
in which civilians have been killed. We do not target
peaceful civilian objects with our attacks. Incidentally,
in the same video clips we can see the explosions caused
by ammunition and equipment at what Ukraine claims
are grain storage and port facilities, which, as has now
become clear, it has been using for military purposes
under the cover of and in violation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative.
It is remarkable that, instead of correcting the
problems caused by its air-defence systems, the
Zelenskyy regime has decided that people posting
such truthful evidence that compromises the Ukrainian
authorities will be punished even more severely. We
understand that the Ukrainian Parliament has hastily
introduced a draft bill proposing three-year prison
sentences for the people who post such things. Council
members can draw their own conclusions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I will not read my full
statement at this meeting for the sake of brevity. We
will make the full version available.

16/16

26/07/2023

We regret that Russia persists in misusing the
platform of the Security Council in its attempts
to substantiate its propaganda narratives aimed
at legitimizing the invasion of Ukraine. I will not
dignify the humbug of the Russian representative
by commenting on it. What I would like to do is cite
Metropolitan Agafangel of the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church, which has been referred to so often in the
Chamber today. He is the Head of the diocese of Odesa.
He wrote in a letter following the attack,
“On the orders of the leadership of the Russian
Federation, a Russian missile hit the spiritual heart
of the peace-loving city of Odesa, its Cathedral of
the Transfiguration. Since 24 February 2022, Russia
has launched a large-scale military aggression
against our native Ukraine.” People are dying,
human blood is being shed, cities and villages,
churches and monasteries are being destroyed.
Whatever the goal of the shameful so-called
special military operation, it cannot justify killing
and violence, destruction and forced displacement.
We still do not understand. What do they want to
liberate us from? Life? It is a true genocide of the
Ukrainian people. A country that considers itself
Orthodox cannot pay lip service to God’s law and
at the same time do evil and bring darkness.”
What is important is that those are questions asked by
a person whom Moscow itself had seemed to trust and
listen to, based on the fact that Putin himself awarded
Metropolitan Agafangel the Order of Honour and the
Order of Friendship some years ago. He is not our
briefer, not a person in our pocket or our witness, but a
person whom Putin himself awarded multiple medals.
We are all interested in getting an answer to the question
posed by Metropolitan Agafangel, a question that the
Russian delegation has not yet been able to provide
answers to. Instead, it persists in mocking the mandate
and procedures of this United Nations organ.
Let me conclude by repeating the question asked by
Metropolitan Agafangel. What do they want to liberate
us from? Why are they committing a genocide of the
Ukrainian people? When will their Government stop
paying lip service to God’s law and doing evil and
bringing darkness?
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

23-21940
