S/PV.8116

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8116th meeting

Tuesday, 28 November 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Foreign terrorist fighters

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40042 (E)
*1740042*

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Foreign terrorist fighters
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; and
Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Mr. Voronkov, Ms. Coninsx and
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan, in his capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov
Mr. Voronkov: Let me thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
this very complex and evolving issue. I grateful to take
part in the discussion together with my colleague and
friend Ms. Coninsx, Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Allow me to start by remembering the tens of
thousands of victims of terrorism around the world. I
particularly express my solidarity with the Governments
and the peoples of Egypt, Mali and Nigeria, who most
recently suffered horrific terrorist attacks. My thoughts
and prayers are also with our colleagues from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, who are bravely defending the United
Nations principles and values at the cost of their lives.
The threat from foreign terrorist fighters affects
all Member States, even those far away from the
conflict zones. Recent reports suggest that at one
stage over 40,000 foreign terrorist fighters from more
than 110 countries may have travelled to join terrorist
2/23

28/11/2017

groups in the Syrian Arab Republic and in Iraq. They
have prolonged and complicated the conflicts in both
countries, and they have increased the brutality of the
fighting and the frequency of human rights violations,
including against women and girls.
As the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has
suffered a series of major military defeats and Member
States have implemented better measures to prevent
travel, the flow of fighters to the region has significantly
decreased. A significant number of terrorists have
tried to relocate to countries such as Libya, Yemen
and Afghanistan, which has fuelled existing conflicts
and further destabilized fragile regions. Those and
other affected countries need significant assistance and
support from the international community to tackle
that threat.
There are at least 5,600 fighters from 33 countries
who have returned home. Many returnees are very
well trained and equipped to carry out attacks in their
own countries. Others hope to radicalize and recruit
new followers to their cause. There are a number who
have rejected terrorist ideologies and pose no threat
to society.
This is a truly global challenge that demands an
urgent and concerted multilateral response. Member
States need to enhance their cooperation and exchange
information, develop effective border controls and
strengthen their criminal justice systems, in accordance
with the rule of law and human rights standards.
Following the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
in September 2014, the Security Council issued
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/11 in May 2015,
which mandated the Office of Counter-Terrorism to
develop a capacity-building implementation plan for
countering the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
Security Council strongly recommended that we set out
a list of priorities of capacity-building and technical
assistance projects as part of that plan. Taking an all-ofUnited Nations approach, we developed a comprehensive
capacity-building implementation plan for countering
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters by mobilizing and
coordinating the efforts of 38 United Nations entities,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the ISIL/Al-Qaida Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
As the threat from foreign terrorist fighters has
evolved, the implementation plan has also evolved. The
plan now addresses the full cycle of foreign terrorist
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

fighters, including a number of projects related to
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration to support
Member States in their efforts to address the issue
of returnees. New projects that specifically address
women and children have also been added. The latest
version, based on the all-of-United Nations approach,
includes 50 capacity-building projects submitted
by 13 United Nations entities, with a total budget of
$107 million over five years.
The Office of Counter-Terrorism is collaborating
with INTERPOL to enhance Member State information­
sharing on foreign terrorist fighters and to build the
capacity of Member States to use their social media
engagements to gather vital information. The Office
has also worked closely with a range of United Nations
entities to deliver a project on advance passenger
information for 43 Member States that are most
affected by the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon.
Many of those Member States are now implementing
national advance passenger information systems that
are fully compatible with their border management
infrastructure as well as international standards
and obligations.
The Office of Counter-Terrorism is working with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to assist Member States in complying with
international rights standards in their border security
and management. The Office has also engaged with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
support Member States in the management of violent
extremist prisoners and the prevention of radicalization
in prisons. The Office will also shortly begin a project
to assist Member States in developing comprehensive
policies to support child returnees through a humanrights-based and gender-sensitive approach. I want to
thank those Member States that have supported projects
and urge others to follow their lead.
In order start several projects under the plan,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism provided a total of
9 per cent of the funding for the implementation plan
through catalytic seed funding. However, together with
contributions from Member States — and this is very
important — the implementation plan is still only 41 per
cent funded. However, the list of projects is very long:
there are 50 projects. That means that many crucial and
urgent projects have not yet been implemented. There is
much more that the United Nations can and wants to do

S/PV. 8116

to build the capacities of Member States to counter the
threat from foreign terrorist fighters.
Returning foreign terrorist fighters pose an
enormous challenge, with no easy solution. A tempting
response, and certainly the easiest one, would be to
throw all returnees into prison, or even do what can
be done to stop them coming home at all. But full
compliance with international law is vital to combat the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters. As the SecretaryGeneral said in his speech in London earlier this month:
“Terrorism is fundamentally the denial and
destruction of human rights, and the fight against
terrorism will never succeed by perpetuating the
same denial and destruction.”
There are also obvious benefits to developing
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, alongside
prosecution efforts, for returning foreign terrorist
fighters. Such programmes can be integrated at various
stages of the criminal justice process, thereby helping
to reduce prison-based recruitment and complement
comprehensive strategies to counter violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. Ultimately, addressing the
threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters requires
addressing the underlying conditions that are conducive
to young men and women being lured by violent
extremism. I therefore welcome the growing emphasis
by Member States on drivers of violent extremism
at the global, regional, national and local levels to
prevent radicalization.
We also need to ensure that our counter-terrorism
efforts are based on solid evidence and lessons learned
from around the world. That is why my Office published
a report in July entitled Enhancing the understanding
of the Foreign Terrorist Fighters Phenomenon in Syria,
which was based on interviews with 43 individuals in
detention between August 2015 and November 2016,
representing 12 nationalities. The report provides
Member States with a strong knowledge base from
which to understand the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, assess the risks they pose and develop effective
responses. The report confirmed that there is no single
foreign terrorist fighter profile. Those interviewed
left their countries of residence for different reasons.
Unresolved conflicts that include intercommunal
violence was one of the strongest factors. A sense of
shared identify with — and a desire to help — those from
the same religion who were perceived as victimized was
also common. The foreign terrorist fighters interviewed

17-400423/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

were motivated to leave the Syrian Arab Republic
either by their genuine disappointment in the terrorist
organization they joined, or were disillusioned by their
hosts’ lack of welcome, be it the Syrian people or the
terrorist group itself. While social networks played a
key role in motivating individuals to go to the Syrian
Arab Republic, their influence on the decision to return
was less evident. Instead, it was the family network,
particularly mothers, that exerted the most influential
pressure on foreign terrorist fighters to return home.
With the support of United Nations entities,
Member States are increasingly strengthening their
legal frameworks and criminal justice systems and
enhancing their collaboration to prevent and respond
to the threat from foreign terrorist fighters. During his
recent speech in London, the Secretary-General listed
stronger international cooperation on counter-terrorism
as one of his key priorities. There is an urgent need
for Governments and security agencies to collaborate
far more effectively in fighting terrorism, while
respecting human rights. That is why the SecretaryGeneral will convene the first-ever United Nations
summit of heads of counter-terrorism agencies in June
2018. That will be an excellent opportunity to enhance
cooperation, exchange information and to develop new
and innovative ways to tackle terrorism and address the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters. The United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism stands ready to further
support Member States to protect its citizens against
this threat.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.
Ms. Coninsx: I thank the Italian presidency for
supporting the inclusion of this topic on the Security
Council’s agenda and for inviting the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to
address the Council. I am very honoured to address the
Council for the first time on such an urgent threat to
international peace and security.
I would like to begin by joining the Council and
the Secretary-General in condemning, in the strongest
terms, the heinous and cowardly terrorist attack carried
out just a few days ago against a mosque in northern
Egypt, which resulted in the loss of more than 300
lives. On behalf of CTED, I wish to express my deepest
condolences to the families of the victims, not only
of the Egypt attack but also of the many other attacks
4/23

28/11/2017

carried out in recent days, weeks and months in many
parts of the world.
As affirmed by the Council on numerous occasions,
all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation. There can be no impunity
for such acts. In other words, impunity is not an option.
It is impossible to express the deep sorrow that
all of us at CTED feel at the continued senseless loss
of life caused by such acts. Despite recent successes,
including in the conflict zones of the Middle East, the
international community continues to face significant
challenges in its efforts to counter the global terrorist
threat. Perhaps nowhere is that more clearly illustrated
than in Member States’ efforts to prevent and counter
the activities of foreign terrorist fighters, in accordance
with resolution 2178 (2014).
Over the past two years, the rate at which foreign
terrorist fighters have returned to their States of origin
or residence, or relocated to third States accelerated as
a consequence of the losses of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq, Syria and Libya. Over
roughly the same period, the percentage of terrorist plots
resulting in fatalities increased significantly, owing in
part to the activities of returnees, but also to terrorists’
evolving methods, including the ways in which they
use information and communications technologies. Of
particular concern is the increasing trend of attacks
carried out by lone terrorists, who are often guided by
handlers located in other parts of the world.
Attacks by individuals inspired by ISIL and other
terrorist groups often require few resources, but can
have devastating consequences. Many recent attacks
that appear to have been inspired by ISIL, conducted
in its name or claimed by it were initially reported as
lone actor attacks. However, subsequent investigations
showed that those individuals received support or
resources from elsewhere, often via the Internet or
social media. Terrorists are also increasingly using new
technologies to transfer funds to such individuals.
Since its adoption in 2014, resolution 2178 (2014)
has been fundamental to the efforts of Members States
to address the foreign terrorist fighters threat. Member
States have made progress in many areas, but major
challenges remain. In other words, a great deal has been
done but we are not there yet. For example, fewer than
60 States have so far introduced measures requiring
airlines to provide advance passenger information.
That means that it remains very difficult for more
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

than 100 Member States to check for the possible
presence of foreign terrorist fighters on board aircraft
flying into, out of or transiting through their airports.
Many States require assistance in establishing the
necessary connectivity between national databases and
border posts.
States also continue to face legal challenges
relating to the transfer of data, the protection of data
privacy and the establishment of the necessary legal
and administrative frameworks. The creation of
an adequate legal and administrative framework is
indeed a precondition for the establishment of such
programmes, and many States will continue to require
guidance in that area. International cooperation
continues to be undermined by practical and political
challenges, as well as by inconsistent compliance with
human rights obligations.
States should also do more to upgrade and share
intelligence on foreign terrorist fighters and those who
return to their countries of origin or relocate to third
countries. Efforts to bring suspected foreign terrorist
fighters to justice continue to be undermined by the
difficulty of collecting sufficient admissible evidence
from conflict zones. Our assessment and analysis
show that very few States are able to do so effectively.
Member States also continue to face challenges
in implementing effective strategies to disrupt the
financing of returnees and small cells. Some have not
yet designated foreign terrorist fighters in their national
asset-freezing mechanisms. Many States will continue
to require assistance in the development of effective
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies,
as well as tailored approaches to deal with women and
children. We must therefore continue to work tirelessly
to build on the progress achieved since the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014).
CTED’s assessments and analysis show that
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) has nonetheless
mobilized the international community. Member
States have introduced measures to strengthen their
border-screening processes for identifying foreign
terrorist fighters. The information gathered has placed
Governments in a better position to track the return of
nationals who have travelled to fight in conflict zones.
Many States have criminalized foreign terrorist fighter
travel, as well as the organization and financing of
terrorist groups and improved domestic inter-agency
information-sharing. Progress has also been made
in strengthening international judicial and law

S/PV. 8116

enforcement cooperation. Central authorities for mutual
legal assistance and extradition have been established,
and 24/7 focal points on foreign terrorist fighter issues
have been appointed. Resolution 2178 (2014) also
underscores the need to engage local communities and
non-governmental actors in developing strategies to
counter violent extremism. It also encourages States to
address the conditions conducive to the spread of violent
extremism, including by empowering civil society.
CTED is engaged in a number of initiatives aimed at
strengthening Member States’ efforts to counter violent
extremism, pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014) and other
relevant Council resolutions. Since the adoption of the
resolution, CTED has conducted 45 assessment visits,
the majority of them to States most affected by the
foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon. CTED has also
facilitated a number of hands-on activities to advance
the resolution’s implementation and to identify common
challenges and gaps, emerging trends and appropriate
responses and solutions.
Pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014), CTED drafted
three analytical reports identifying gaps in Member
States’ legal frameworks and institutional and operational
structures and proposing a set of recommendations on
ways to address those gaps. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee, with the support of CTED, has also approved
a set of guiding principles — the so-called Madrid
principles — which offer a holistic, forward-looking
approach to the implementation of flexible prosecution
strategies, combined with appropriate alternatives to
prosecution, including administrative measures and/or
reintegration and rehabilitation programmes, used in a
manner compliant with international human rights law
and national legislation and subject to effective review.
The principles also serve as a guide to the formulation
of national counter-terrorism policies and strategies.
CTED has also continued to work closely with its
partners to identify the core elements of an effective
approach to implementing resolution 2178 (2014),
as well as good practices. Those elements and good
practices have been incorporated into CTED’s updated
technical guide to the implementation of that resolution
and other relevant resolutions.
Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
CTED has also facilitated and engaged in numerous
activities with its implementing partners to tackle
specific challenges associated with foreign terrorist
fighters. Those activities include the facilitation

17-400425/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of assistance delivery to highly affected countries
following visits by the Committee, as well as a number
of regional or global activities. They include a regional
programme with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) for the Maghreb countries; a
global programme with UNODC and the International
Association of Prosecutors on gathering digital
evidence; and a joint CTED/UNODC initiative aimed
at assisting Member States of the Lake Chad basin with
developing approaches to prosecuting, rehabilitating
and reintegrating persons associated with Boko Haram.
CTED has also continued to strengthen its
cooperation with INTERPOL, including on the use
of biometric data and the implementation of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
traveller identification programme strategy, which
addresses biometric verification processes, quality
control, management of errors and exceptions, and
effective reading of biometric travel documents at
borders. CTED has also worked closely with ICAO to
develop an international standard requiring all ICAO
members to implement advance passagner information
systems and conducted deep-dive missions to highpriority States funded by the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, to advise their Governments on
the development of such systems. The effective
development and use of biometrics, advance passanger
information systems and passenger name records
systems remain key to the detection of foreign terrorist
fighters and returnees.
If we are to continue making progress in promoting
and implementing the provisions of the resolutions, we
must continue to strengthen partnerships between and
among Member States, United Nations agencies and
partner organizations. Or, to put it another way — it
takes networks to beat networks.
As the Secretary-General noted earlier this month
in his London statement, to which Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov referred, there is an urgent need for
Governments and security agencies to collaborate far
more effectively in fighting terrorism while respecting
human rights. I wish to assure the Council that CTED
will continue to give its full support to the efforts of
the Council and the Committee in assisting Member
States to prevent and counter the activities of foreign
terrorist fighters and other terrorists, as well as bring
the perpetrators of terrorist acts to justice.
The President: I thank Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
6/23

28/11/2017

I now give the floor to Ambassador Umarov.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): In my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/
Da’esh, Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, I am pleased to report to the
Council on the overall activities of the Committee since
the previous briefing, on 11 May (see S/PV.7936). I will
focus my remarks on four main elements: the evolving
threat to international peace and security posed by
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and affiliates; foreign terrorist
fighters; the Committee’s actions; and the Committee’s
engagement with Member States.
First, the threat emanating from ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and affiliates has further evolved. The
Monitoring Team reported that ISIL core members in
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic continue to adapt to
the sustained military pressure levied upon it, including
delegating decision-making responsibility downwards
to local commanders and switching to encrypted
communication. ISIL continues to emphasize external
attacks perpetrated by its members and sympathizers as
part of its response. Those individuals may act alone or in
small groups, using simple methods and equipment that
are difficult to trace. Increasingly, ISIL is transforming
from a territorially grounded organization into a terror
network of cells around the globe.
Despite military pressure and decreasing revenues,
ISIL core members continue to send funds to its
affiliates worldwide, using a combination of money or
value-transfer services and the transport of bulk cash
via money couriers. However, the movement of those
funds are dependent upon transit routes, and many
of those routes are now being cut off. Against that
backdrop, ISIL core members have increasingly urged
its affiliates to become more financially self-sufficient.
While ISIL is being weakened in the physical world,
its presence in the virtual world is entrenched and
increasingly poses a serious threat to international peace
and security. ISIL continues circulating propaganda
on the Internet for the radicalization and recruitment
of fighters and sympathizers through sophisticated
manipulation and brain-washing techniques.
Secondly, the Monitoring Team further reported
that the overall flow of foreign terrorist fighters to
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic appeared to have
slowed as a result of military pressure and measures
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

put in place by Member States, ranging from increased
information sharing to improved border control. The
regional analysis that follows is based on the reports
and assessment of the Monitoring Team.
Military and financial pressure on ISIL compels
foreign terrorist fighters to return home or transfer
to third countries and other conflict zones. Returnees
and relocating fighters present a growing challenge
to international security, as they have the potential to
re-energize pre-existing terrorist networks, as well as
spur the growth of new ones, presenting a resurgent
threat in various regions. ISIL is also reportedly
sending money to regions where it currently does not
have a presence, in an apparent attempt to build up its
network. Returnees and relocators who hold multiple
nationalities remain an issue of particular concern. The
Monitoring Team highlighted the constant need for
enhanced information sharing among Member States
in that regard.
In Europe, Member States have significantly
increased the exchange of information on foreign
terrorist fighters through the European Union Agency
for Law Enforcement Cooperation and/or INTERPOL.
However, the continuing efforts of ISIL followers in
Europe to conduct attacks demonstrate the potential
for ISIL to recruit and motivate its followers. Member
States also report that European foreign terrorist
fighters present an income stream for ISIL.
In Central Asia, according to Member States, the
flow of new fighters to the conflict zones has been slowed
owing to disruptive operations by law enforcement
agencies and measures to counter radicalization and
recruitment. However, Member States are concerned
that returning foreign terrorist fighters from Central
Asia might bring terror home and to other countries.
Some relocators originating from Central Asia have
already been involved in terrorist attacks in Turkey and
European countries.
South-East Asia continues attracting foreign terrorist
fighters. According to Member State information, in
addition to Malaysians and Indonesians, fighters
from North Africa, the Middle East, the north
Caucasus region of the Russian Federation and even
Central America have died in fighting in the southern
Philippines. Once fighters arrive in one of the countries
of South-East Asia, the porous nature of the maritime
borders in the region allows movement between the
Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia without detection.

S/PV. 8116

In North Africa, Foreign Terrorist Fighters continue
to pose a threat, in particular in Libya and Tunisia. The
Tunisian region of Kasserine and the Libyan-Tunisian
border area continue to be destinations for both
returnees and relocators. In the Arabian peninsula,
Member States are monitoring the return and relocation
of foreign terrorist fighters to Yemen and other places
in the region, and they believe that there is an ongoing
risk of a clandestine infiltration of fighters along the
coast of the Arabian peninsula.
Afghan authorities assess the total number of foreign
terrorist fighters in that country at several thousand.
According to official Afghan sources, ISIL, despite
pressure from the Afghan army and security services,
has recovered quickly and currently numbers around
2,500 fighters and supporters, of which 80 per cent are
foreigners. Reports are coming in on the deployment of
ISIL from the eastern parts of Afghanistan to northern
regions closer to the borders with Central Asia.
On the subject of the Committee’s actions to
enhance the full and effective implementation of the
sanctions, the Chair has undertaken visits to selected
countries. In that context, I visited Malaysia and
Singapore from 28 to 31 August and Afghanistan from
28 to 31 October. I also visited Krasnodar in the Russia
Federation to participate in the sixteenth Meeting
of Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies
and Law-Enforcement Organizations, and Tashkent,
Uzbekistan, to attend the fifth meeting of the scientific
and practical conference of the regional anti-terrorist
entity of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. That
meeting was held under the them “Fighting terrorism:
cooperation without borders”. Such visits help the
Committee to obtain first-hand accounts regarding
the implementation and effectiveness of our sanctions
measures and to promote enhanced dialogue with and
engagement of national authorities with the Committee.
The Committee strives to ensure that its sanctions
list is as updated and accurate as possible in order to
facilitate the implementation of the sanctions measures.
As of today, there are 256 individuals and 80 entities
on the ISIL, Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Since
the beginning of 2017, the Committee approved the
delisting of 12 individuals, the listing of 12 individuals
and 5 entities, and the amendment of 19 entries on
the list, including 17 individuals and 2 entities. In
addition, the recommendation of the Ombudsperson
to remove one individual from the sanctions list is
under consideration by the Committee, and the Office

17-400427/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of the Ombudsperson currently has one case in its
information-gathering phase.
With respect to the Committee’s engagement with
Member States, on 17 October I held an open briefing,
as the Chair, on the overall work of the Committee
for all Member States. I plan to continue to hold
such open briefings regularly. I encourage Member
States to share any queries and concerns with the
Committee and the Monitoring Team. I would like to
take this opportunity to call upon Member States to
continue their engagement with the Committee and the
Monitoring Team, as that is essential for maintaining
an updated and dynamic sanctions list and fundamental
for the effective operation of the sanctions regime. I
encourage all Member States to continue to actively
propose individuals and entities for listing under the
ISIL, Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime, including
foreign terrorist fighters, so as to ensure that the
sanctions list adequately reflects the current threat and
is therefore fit for purpose. Only if the list includes the
relevant individuals and entities can it fulfil its full
potential as an operative instrument in the global fight
against terrorism emanating from ISIL and Al-Qaida.
In that regard, I would like to note that the Committee
is in the process of concluding its current annual review
for 2016, which evaluates whether names on the list,
especially those not reviewed for three years, remain
pertinent. We are addressing cases where sufficient
identifiers do not exist, individuals are deceased or
entities are defunct. I thank the Member States that have
provided information, as it has proven challenging to
obtain responses from all relevant Member States. We
urge all Member States to engage with the Committee
in a timely manner during the next annual review in
order to support that key due-process function.
In addition to the regular reviews, the Monitoring
Team updates entries on the list based on information
provided by Member States. We encourage Member
States to keep the Team informed. I also urge those
Member States that have not done so to submit their
implementation reports mandated under the relevant
resolutions. I would like to reiterate my gratitude
to all Member States for their cooperation with the
Committee, its Monitoring Team and the Office of
the Ombudsperson.
The President: I thank Ambassador Umarov for
his briefing.
8/23

28/11/2017

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate Coninsx, and the Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, Ambassador Umarov,
for their briefings today on foreign terrorist fighters.
We have come a long way since 2014 when foreign
fighters were traveling en masse to join Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). At that time, ISIL was
spreading like a pandemic across the region. That fall,
the Council took urgent action to stem the flow of those
fighters. Meeting at the Heads of State level, the Council
adopted resolution 2178 (2014) to establish a new legal
and policy framework to counter the threat posed by
those fighters. Since then, international partners and
the coalition to defeat ISIL have made extraordinary
progress in rolling back the gains made by ISIL, which
has now lost approximately 95 per cent of the territory
it once controlled in Iraq and Syria. Raqqa, the selfproclaimed capital of ISIL, has fallen to coalition
forces. Men, women and children who have suffered for
years under the brutality of ISIL have been liberated.
As part of the campaign, resolution 2178 (2014)
has facilitated unprecedented international cooperation
aimed at identifying, stopping and prosecuting foreign
terrorist fighters. That resolution obligates countries
to take concrete and tangible steps to stem the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters to conflict zones. It has also
spurred new efforts to address the underlying factors
that are conducive for the rise of terrorism and violent
extremism and allow them to take root in our societies
in the first place.
Regrettably, many Member States have yet to fully
implement resolution 2178 (2014), including adopting
the necessary domestic laws to provide the ability
to criminalize the travel, financing and recruitment
of foreign terrorist fighters. That gap leaves us all
vulnerable, and we must therefore recommit ourselves
to the full and complete implementation of that
critical resolution.
Yet three years later, despite progress against ISIL,
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters persists
and has evolved to now include the need to address
the challenge of returning foreign terrorist fighters.
As the territory of ISIL shrinks, some of its supporters
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

are on the move, with some returning home and others
going to other countries. We will see more and more
battle-hardened terrorists travelling around the world
to carry out deadly attacks in the name of ISIL.
Additionally, ISIL has even called on its supporters,
who may have never been to the conflict zone, to launch
attacks wherever they are present. One such supporter
carried out an attack in New York City just last month.
We should not fool ourselves into thinking that as we
defeat ISIL on the battlefield, the terrorist ideology
and narratives that underpin the group will just fade
away. That is why the Council and the international
community must address the evolving challenge now.
We must shatter the ISIL narrative of invincibility.
We must help demonstrate to the world, especially
to individuals who are vulnerable to radicalization,
violence and terrorism, that there is more to live for
than supporting ISIL.
The United States therefore proposes that the
Council adopt a new resolution to confront that evolving
threat. We must now grapple with an increasingly
decentralized ISIL threat, with new flows of fighters
and their accompanying families. We propose that the
Council’s action stress three priorities.
First, we need to continue to improve border and
aviation security. To do so, we must do more to create
and implement standards aimed at developing and
sharing biographic data and biometric data, advanced
passenger information and passenger name records,
which are three essential tools needed to detect foreign
terrorist fighter travel. It is essential that all countries
collect and use passenger name record data to spot
potential terrorists crossing their borders. The Security
Council should recognize passenger name records
as a foundation of our efforts to secure our borders
and aviation.
Secondly, we need to strengthen efforts to address
and improve the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters. Since the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), we have applauded
countries’ efforts to implement legislation that allows
authorities to prosecute various acts committed by
foreign terrorist fighters. However, because of the
way some laws are written and because it is hard to
collect evidence in a conflict zone, it can sometimes
be difficult to obtain convictions. We must do a better
job of bringing those fighters to justice, including by
sharing, whenever possible, the evidence needed to do

S/PV. 8116

so. However, we cannot ignore that the family members
of foreign terrorist fighters are also returning home,
some of whom have committed crimes and others who
have themselves been victims of ISIL. The Security
Council should therefore recognize the need to approach
their prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration in a
tailored and nuanced way. That will also require the
involvement of civil society, including faith leaders and
youth — a true whole-of-society approach.
We should not rely too heavily on fighting terrorism
through security measures alone. History shows that
the false narratives and justifications of terrorism can
live on no matter how many terrorists we put in jail
or kill on the battlefield. That is why we also need to
commit ourselves to the prevention of terrorism.
Thirdly and finally, we need the United Nations to
be more coordinated in its efforts to address the foreign
terrorist fighter threat. Various bodies of the United
Nations have vital roles to play. We look to the Office
of Counter-Terrorism to support capacity-building, and
we look to the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
to monitor gaps in the implementation of Security
Council resolutions. The Security Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee and the various sanctions
committees established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) must also contribute. Those entities will
need to harmonize efforts, with each focusing on its
comparative advantages.
If there is one thing that we should all take away
from this meeting, it is the need to do more than simply
remain vigilant against an ever-adaptive ISIL and
an Al-Qaida on the rebound. We must also take the
necessary steps to update our toolkit so as to be able to
confront an increasingly decentralized enemy. We look
forward to working with Security Council members on
an upcoming resolution to adapt to new challenges.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for the
briefings presented today by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, and the Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, Ms. Michèle Coninsx. We are also grateful
for the activity report presented by the representative
of Kazakhstan, Ambassador Kairat Umarov, in his
capacity as Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant

17-400429/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.
The scenarios in which terrorism operates today
have surpassed local and regional dimensions to
become a global problem. The threat of terrorism
and violent extremism constitutes one of the greatest
challenges facing the international community,
particularly because terrorist groups and organizations
have developed capacities for long-distance recruitment
through various methods and narratives.
In that context, the emergence of foreign terrorist
fighters has taken on particular significance, given that
those individuals travel to a State different from their
country of residence or nationality with the purpose
of committing, planning, preparing or participating
in terrorist acts and providing or receiving training to
commit such acts, including by taking part in various
internal conflicts. That phenomenon proves that
terrorism and violent extremism are not tied to any
specific nationality, religion, civilization or ethnic
group, and that any measures intended to confront
or prevent that phenomenon should not be based on
such criteria under any pretext. On that understanding
and in the face of such a serious transnational threat,
we believe that the response of the international
community must be global and must make effective use
of all of the means provided for by the Charter of the
United Nations.
It is important to make it very clear that foreign
terrorist fighters did not emerge suddenly. Rather,
they are the product of a process of ideological
radicalization, and once on the ground, of military
training. That terrible situation was made possible
by vacuums in Governments, the weakening of law
and order and of security forces, and the absence of
border controls, which were fostered to a large extent
by the implementation of regime-change policies,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
of other States.
More than three years following the unanimous
approval of resolution 2178 (2014), which proposes
parameters to confront the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters, we must question what progress and results have
been attained in tackling that problem. Undoubtedly,
the use of new communication technologies, such as the
Internet, has been one of the platforms through which
terrorist groups and organizations have managed to
disseminate their radical ideology and misinformation
10/23

28/11/2017

in order to recruit fighters, in addition to generating
economic resources through smuggling and the illegal
sale of cultural and historical objects, among others,
the profits of which are legitimized through moneylaundering and the use of tax havens, which reduce or
eliminate controls, especially in the investment and
service sectors.
According to the study published in July by the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, entitled Enhancing
the Understanding of the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Phenomenon in Syria, the factors that have had the
greatest influence on people when they were recruited
are linked to their socioeconomic situation and their
vulnerability when exposed to promises of material and
personal benefits, as well as to ideological or religious
convictions. Those factors have motivated more than
30,000 fighters from more than 100 countries to move
to conflict zones since 2011, mainly in Syria and Iraq.
However, according to the twentieth report, submitted
in August by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, the flow of foreign terrorist fighters into
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic has been decreasing,
while the number of people returning to their countries
of origin or moving from conflict zones to third
countries has increased.
In dealing with that situation, the international
community should orient its efforts towards a smooth
and effective exchange of information on those
individuals. That should involve both States and
international organizations, such as INTERPOL,
as no country or region is exempt from the potential
arrival of those individuals. By the same token, the
coordination of the work of the various Committees
and subsidiary organs of the Security Council
with that of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism is a fundamental task needed to prevent the
emergence of further threats to international peace and
security in the world. In the same vein, the effective
implementation of resolutions — such as resolution
2354 (2017) on narratives and methods to combat
terrorism — constitutes a useful tool for preventing and
combating extremist rhetoric.
We believe that the countries of origin of foreign
terrorist fighters should implement integration policies
aimed at avoiding situations in which social and
political isolation and precarious economic situations
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

generate the space for extremist ideologies to spread
and flourish. In that sense, all the efforts made by
regional and international organizations should focus
on a perspective of inclusion.
At the same time, all the efforts made by the Security
Council and our Organization aimed at eliminating
terrorism should count on the maximum support of all
Member States and must seek to bring to justice those
responsible for terrorist acts, so that they can be duly
investigated, prosecuted and punished. Finally, Bolivia
expresses its greatest support for the transparent and
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and we call on all States to
commit to the fight against that scourge.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the briefings presented in their
respective capacities by Ms. Coninsx, Mr. Voronkov
and Ambassador Umarov.
The evolution of the terrorist phenomenon—
and especially the growing role of foreign terrorist
fighters — causes us deep concern. In recent times,
indiscriminate terrorist attacks have been increasing,
committed by individuals who use vehicles, knives
or homemade explosives against innocent civilians,
resulting in tragic deaths and injuries. When we witness
such atrocities, we are seized with a mixture of feelings
of consternation, defencelessness and incomprehension:
consternation at the pain caused by the loss of so many
innocent lives; defencelessness as we see the cruel
truth that no one is safe from the risk of terrorism; and
incomprehension, as it is difficult to understand how,
despite the many efforts and actions taken to combat
terrorist groups, their members and followers manage
so often to carry out such acts of destruction.
We welcome the dedicated work of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the CounterTerrorism Committee of the Security Council and its
Executive Directorate in helping States fight against
terrorism. During our membership in the Security
Council, we have had the opportunity to appreciate
at first hand the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate, and we value
their expertise reflected in numerous areas of thematic
analysis. Its recommendations and identification of
good practices are highly useful, and the Committee’s
role in facilitating technical assistance is of crucial to
States that need and request such assistance.

S/PV. 8116

We have also appreciated the dedicated efforts of
the sanctions committees — especially the important
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL, Al-Qaida, and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
concerning the Taliban — on the listing and delisting
of persons or entities. Furthermore, the reports and
recommendations prepared by the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team of those Committees
have become an important and very useful source
of information for States. All of those actions have
helped raise awareness of the threat of terrorism,
which is growing thanks largely to its geographic
mobility and its ability to adapt its modus operandi to
new circumstances.
Mention has been made of terrorists increasingly
using the Internet and turning to the so-called dark web
to carry out transnational criminal activities, including
trafficking in arms, false identity documents, money
and drugs. Passenger and border controls and the
implementation of systems such as Advance Passenger
Information and Passenger Name Records remain
important to that end. We recognize the importance of
those instruments, as well as the need for checks at all
borders. Uruguay is therefore devoting its utmost efforts
to making the technical adaptations required to meet to
the current demands of the international context.
Facts show, however, that adopting security
measures has proven insufficient to the challenge of
preventing acts of terrorism. We can take steps to stem
the flow of recruitment, prevent travel or cut off financial
support, but all of that, it seems, is not enough. Recent
attacks have revealed that many of the individuals
involved have no criminal background and, as citizens
or legal residents of the countries they attack, they can
carry out their acts with little in the way of resources and
preparation. Against that backdrop, we underscore the
importance of designing and implementing prevention
strategies aimed at stopping the propagation of violent
extremism and avoiding radicalization.
The preamble of the UNESCO Constitution
proclaims that “since wars begin in the minds of men,
it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed”. That task takes on all the more
importance in the light of the recent announcement
by recognized experts that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant has undergone a transformation from

17-4004211/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a geographically-based terrorist group into a global
terrorist ideology.
We understand that beyond all of the international
cooperation and United Nations assistance, it is States
that bear the primary responsibility for preventing the
emergence of extremist ideologies that may lead to the
fomenting or commission of acts of terrorism, and for
combating domestic complicity with terrorist groups,
wherever it may exist. Religious leaders also have an
important role to play in that regard: they have the
knowledge and the ability to ensure that faith is not
exploited for spurious ends. Strengthening democracy
and the institutions of States, reinforcing the rule of
law, respecting human rights, promoting religious
tolerance and peaceful coexistence, maintaining open
dialogue with civil society and prioritizing education
are further key elements for ending intolerance and
violent extremism.
Fighting global terrorism calls for sincere
commitment on the part of all members of the
international community, without ambiguities. Only in
that way, in solidarity and with full respect for the rule
of law, international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, will we be able to better navigate the multiple
challenges that the threat of terrorism poses every day.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank all our briefers today for their insightful remarks
on the threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters. I
extend a particularly warm welcome to Ms. Michèle
Coninsx on her debut.
In recent weeks and months, we have seen the near
total military collapse of Da’esh in Iraq and Syria. The
permanent defeat of terrorism in Syria still requires a
long-term political settlement and a political transition
away from the Al-Assad regime, but it is clear that we are
now, thankfully and finally, witnessing the crumbling
of Da’esh’s so-called caliphate. That is prominently
thanks to the courage and resolve of the Iraqi security
forces, our partners in Syria and the 73 members of
the Global Coalition against Da’esh. Together, we have
shown that by working collectively with unflinching
commitment we can defeat that global plague.
However, with the defeat of Da’esh in Iraq and
Syria, the terrorist threat has evolved in such a way that
we now face new challenges. Foreign terrorist fighters
pose a particular risk, as we know that many members
of that dreadful organization remain committed to
Da’esh’s ideology and to exporting their fight to new
12/23

28/11/2017

locations beyond Iraq and Syria. Others are trying to
return home following Da’esh’s military defeat. Some
among those returnees will still be committed to Da’esh.
Others will be disillusioned. Our job is to help those
who are disillusioned to reintegrate into society and,
at the same time, to guard against the threat posed by
those who are still committed. On top of that growing
challenge, we need to carry on tackling some ongoing
challenges such as homegrown violent extremism and
the spread of terrorists’ poisonous messages online.
All of that means that our combined counterterrorism efforts and our commitment to cooperating
and working together cannot end as Da’esh crumbles in
Iraq and Syria. We must remain proactive, committed to
working together and ahead of the threat. That is why our
work here at the United Nations is so important. Three
years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 2178
(2014). An important pillar in the international counterterrorism framework, it established measures binding
on States aimed at preventing travel by and support
for foreign terrorist fighters associated with Al-Qaida
and other groups. Three years on, the United Kingdom
fully supports the United States initiative to work on a
new resolution that tackles the new challenge posed by
foreign terrorist fighters no longer traveling to Iraq and
Syria but relocating to new theatres or returning home.
The United Kingdom is already taking its own
action and is supporting others. We are helping our
partners identify and prevent the movement of foreign
terrorist fighters by strengthening their borders
through information-sharing and the creation of watch
lists and controls. We are helping partners prosecute
terrorist criminals by improving the use and handling
of evidence, particularly that retrieved from the
battlefield. We are working with partners to ensure that
countries have effective deradicalization programmes
for processing returning foreign fighters so that they
no longer pose a threat to their home communities.
We are enhancing intelligence collaboration and
military capacity-building to help States improve their
ability to disrupt terrorist attack planning. And we are
continuing to combat relentlessly the evil ideology of
terrorist groups. We will continue to do that and more,
working closely with our Security Council partners to
raise international standards and set out new measures
in those areas.
There are two other points I would like to address.
First, the United Kingdom will maintain its focus on
preventing the terrorist use of the Internet. There was
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a very useful event on this in the General Assembly
in September, co-hosted by Prime Minister Theresa
May, President Macron of France and Prime Minister
Gentiloni of Italy.
The planning and organization of many attacks can
be traced back to the Internet. Governments and private
companies must work in partnership and with civil
society to tackle the threat and protect those vulnerable
to radicalization.
Secondly, we cannot hope to eradicate the threat for
the long term without tackling the root causes. Terrorist
organizations flourish where there is instability. They
use instability to drive radicalization and to drive
recruitment. The best defence against this is a globally
unified rejection of extremism and support for the
international order based on unassailable human rights
and tolerance.
That is why we encourage the United Nations,
in particular the new Office of Counter-Terrorism,
headed by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, to put
prevention at the heart of our counter-terrorism support
to States. I agree with him that our efforts will be more
effective if we tackle the causes, not just the symptoms,
of the scourge of terrorism and extremism.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal welcomes the convening of this important
meeting on the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon.
I would like to thank our briefers — Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov, Head of the Office of CounterTerrorism; Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED); and Ambassador Umarov,
Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan and Chair of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities — for their high-quality presentations.
We note with genuine concern that three years
after the Council adopted resolution 2178 (2014), on
24 September 2014, not only has the threat to international
peace and security posed by the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters not diminished, but that the opposite
is true: it has become more dangerous. Foreign terrorist
fighters, who number 40,000, according to estimates,
and come from more than 120 countries, represent a
serious threat to transit and destination countries as

S/PV. 8116

well as to their countries of origin, as their return can
undermine peace, security and stability.
As early as 2013, the Council, in paragraph 5 of its
resolution 2129 (2013), directed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to identify emerging
issues, trends and developments in that respect. The
work carried out by CTED is outstanding and should
be commended, as the information contained in its
three reports has enabled us to better understand
the phenomenon. The implementation of the
recommendations formulated thereon must be followed
up regularly.
Terrorist groups are increasingly using the
Internet and social networks to incite to violence and
disseminate their strategy and bloodthirsty ideology,
which is based on an often incorrect interpretation
or instrumentalization of religion, as well as on the
improper use of religious terminology. Containing the
current flow of foreign terrorist fighters therefore must
be done through the strict joint implementation of the
relevant provisions contained in resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2253 (2015).
It is clear that in a globalized world no country
can alone counter this fresh threat to world peace
in the long term. We therefore need to devise an
appropriate, effective and comprehensive strategy that
is based on a holistic approach in order to eliminate
it. Such an approach must include measures aimed
at addressing both the structural and cyclical causes
of the phenomenon, such as marginalization and
discrimination, poor governance, lack of socioeconomic
prospects and latent conflicts.
We must also deconstruct the terrorist discourse
and develop initiatives and programmes that promote
tolerance, dialogue and understanding among
civilizations, cultures, peoples and religions. We must
also provide young people with reasons to stay with
their families and their countries rather than leave for
adventures of uncertain outcome that frequently come
to a tragic end. Senegal, while pursuing its strategy on
preventing violent extremism and terrorism, emphasizes
education, information and communication by focusing
on raising the awareness of the people and on dialogue
with opinion leaders, in particular religious leaders,
whose role is key in countering the extremist narrative.
Preventing or, at the very least, reducing the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters requires intensified
regional and international cooperation, in particular

17-4004213/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/11/2017

in the areas of information-sharing, border control,
passenger registration measures and other boarding
security controls. All of these measures are in keeping
with its road map, the Global Aviation Security Plan.
That is why, as it implements the relevant provisions of
resolution 2178 (2014), Senegal, with a view to increased
effectiveness, in June 2014 put together a general
delegation on national information so as to centralize
all of the intelligence services, which had been based in
various ministries. Furthermore, Senegal is now one of
the most advanced countries on the African continent
in terms of advance passenger information with the
adoption of aeronautical regulation 9/2016.

that is, the return of foreign terrorist fighters, which is
one of France’s major priorities. I shall make three key
points today.

Turning to the INTERPOL database, in particular
its I-24/7 network, it is important to provide assistance
to Member States, in particular those in West Africa
and the Sahel, in strengthening their capacity in this
area. However, we wish to ensure that our fight against
foreign terrorist fighters does not impede the free flow
of goods and services, as this is essential for the political
and economic integration of countries, in particular the
Economic Community of West African States in our
West African subregion.

However, we know that the fight against Da’esh is
not over. The fighters who a few years ago moved to
Iraq and Syria are now leaving the conflict zone either
to return to their countries of origin or to move to other
countries. In the case of France, there are currently
688 French nationals or residents in Syria and Iraq, of
whom 295 are women and 28 are minors over the age
of 15. In addition to those individuals, there are some
500 minors under the age of 15 who were taken to the
area by their parents or who were born locally; over
half of them are under five years old. With regard to
returnees, since 2013 244 adults and 59 minors have
returned to France.

The third CTED report on terrorism (S/2015/975)
states in its paragraph 5 that monitoring the return
of foreign terrorist fighters to their country of origin
or a third country remains one of the most urgent
challenges facing us. As noted in paragraph 8 of the
report, any policy in this respect must categorize
returning combatants and take account of the role
they played in the respective terrorist organization as
well as their reasons for leaving and returning. Their
effective rehabilitation and reintegration into society
will depend on how well we understand their motives.
The involvement and cooperation of their families are
also very helpful in this respect.
I wish to say by way of conclusion that the Senegalese
delegation invites the new Office of Counter-Terrorism
to further strengthen the coordination of United Nations
work in this area, in particular the assistance extended
to Member States in the framework of the plan to build
the capacity of the United Nations to counter flows of
foreign terrorist fighters, which was established by the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all warmly to thank Mr. Voronkov, Ms. Coninsx
and Ambassador Umarov for their very enlightening
presentations on the issue that brings us together today,
14/23

The first concerns the evolution of the terrorist
threat and the main challenges we face today.
The commitment of the international community,
particularly through the action of the coalition, has
made it possible to push back Da’esh and deprive it of
its main refuges in Iraq and Syria. The fall of Raqqa,
the city from which terrorist attacks against various
capitals were planned, including Paris, has a particular
symbolic value in that respect.

The diversity of profiles, especially the large
number of women and children, the highly variable level
of radicalization among those people and the continued
attraction of the barbaric ideology of Da’esh — still too
widely spread on the Internet — are all major challenges
that we must meet.
My second remark concerns France’s response
to the evolving threat of foreign terrorist fighters.
French legislation has been constantly updated since
2014, following the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
to strengthen our system with new security and
prevention measures, in accordance with international
law, human rights and fundamental freedoms. Since
2014, France has been developing an action plan against
radicalization and terrorism, which was updated for the
first time in May 2016 after the wave of attacks that we
experienced, and will be updated again soon. The plan
aims, among other things, to dismantle recruitment
channels, prevent displacement that could pose a
terrorist threat and cooperate more effectively at the
international level. It also contains a preventive and
family-support component.
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

With regard to the care and reintegration of minors
returning from Iraq and Syria, France created a
mechanism last March specifically to mobilize all State
services. It provides targeted support tailored to the age
and individual situation of each child, as well as medical
and psychological monitoring, and it raises awareness
of those specific problems among the professionals who
are responsible for monitoring such minors.
Finally, we believe that the United Nations has a
central role to play. In France’s opinion, the United
Nations has two particular essential missions to fulfil
regarding the issue that brings us together today.
The first mission is to oversee and strengthen
international cooperation in the face of the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. Three years ago, resolution
2178 (2014) laid the foundations for international
cooperation at a time when individuals were traveling
in droves to Iraq and Syria to fight alongside Da’esh.
That led many States, including France, to adapt their
laws and mechanisms. Today, faced with the evolution
of the threat and the risk posed by returnees, we need to
update that framework. France is ready to work with its
partners to develop a strong and united Security Council
response. Further efforts are needed, particularly in the
areas of information-sharing, including the need for a
better use of INTERPOL tools; border management;
cooperation with the private sector to prevent the use
of the Internet by terrorists; the prosecution of foreign
terrorist fighters, taking into account the central issue
of evidence gathering; and reintegration measures.
The second essential mission of the United Nations
is to support States in implementing their obligations
under the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy of the
General Assembly and relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that respect, close coordination between,
on the one hand, the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which are responsible for analysing the
threat and assessing the measures taken by States; and,
on the other, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which is
responsible for supporting States in implementing their
obligations, is absolutely essential. I am pleased that
the representatives of those three entities highlighted
that key coordination in their interventions.

S/PV. 8116

No State can act alone when faced with a threat of
this magnitude. Only close international cooperation,
within the United Nations and the relevant regional
organizations, that involves civil society, and in
particular major online players, will enable us to act
effectively. The Council can be assured of the continued
and resolute commitment of France in that regard.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to start by thanking
the Italian presidency for organizing this important
briefing on the issue of foreign terrorist fighters.
I would like to express our appreciation to UnderSecretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Assistant
Secretary-General Michèle Coninsx, and Ambassador
Kairat Umarov for their informative briefings.
As the reports of the Secretary-General and the
Monitoring Team have highlighted, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has remained under
continuous military pressure and experienced several
setbacks on the main battle grounds in Iraq and Syria.
The group continues to suffer a reversal of its fortune,
which has resulted in a significant decrease in the
number of its fighters and the decline of its propaganda,
perhaps because of a shortage of cash. However, the
group continues to enable and inspire a range of
attacks outside the conflict zone, as those same reports
have indicated.
What is more worrying is the fact that foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees from conflict zones
to other regions now present a considerable threat to
international peace and security. The concept note for
today’s briefing rightly states that foreign terrorist
fighters have fuelled conflict elsewhere, including in
the Horn of Africa, Afghanistan, Libya and Yemen.
We, in the Horn of Africa, have very much been
at the receiving end of that phenomenon for some
time — long before it began to draw wide international
attention. Now, of course, we are witnessing what is
happening every day in East, West and North Africa,
the Middle East and other regions. For us in the Horn
of Africa in particular, the growing threat posed by
ISIL (Da’esh) and the increasing number of fighters
infiltrating Somalia are indeed a source of great
concern. Therefore, the evolving threat of foreign
terrorist fighters, returnees and relocating fighters
deserve our utmost attention.
We recognize what has been done so far since the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), which established a
comprehensive international framework to address the

17-4004215/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

threats of foreign terrorist fighters, including in some
cases to rehabilitate and reintegrate them. We also recall
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/11 of May 2015,
which stressed, among other things, the need to develop
the United Nations capacity-building implementation
plan to counter the flow of foreign terrorist fighters,
and we appreciate the briefing that we received today
on the progress made in that regard.
We note that the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
through its Executive Directorate (CTED), has
continuously included the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and returnees in its comprehensive visits to
Member States, and provided useful recommendations
to address the existing threat. In accordance with
these recommendations, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other United Nations
entities have provided technical assistance and
capacity-building to those States that are in need of
such assistance. Furthermore, reports of the SecretaryGeneral, the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and its Monitoring Team have
continuously addressed the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and returnees.
We also note the efforts being made by Member
States to stem the travel of foreign terrorist fighters,
inter alia, by sharing information, cooperating,
detecting and preventing foreign terrorist fighters from
travelling through a proper border-control mechanism,
creating laws to prosecute foreign terrorist fighters,
and working on the rehabilitation and reintegration of
returning foreign terrorist fighters and thereby breaking
the cycle of violence.
The assistance being given by the United Nations
system to Member States in addressing the challenges
that they face in dealing with foreign terrorist fighters
and returnees is important. A case in point is the
project of CTED, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and relevant entities to launch a regional
initiative for the Lake Chad basin States in order to
support the development of national approaches to
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, and to
strengthen regional cooperation. If this project succeeds
as planned, it will serve as a model for other regions.
No doubt the progress made and challenges
encountered in addressing the threats posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees vary from region to
16/23

28/11/2017

region. While some have done well, others continue to
face difficulties in addressing the required technical,
legal and other related capacities, of which there are too
many to recount here. That is why attempts to combat
the threat through a purely domestic approach cannot
be effective without forging the necessary regional and
international cooperation; hence the need to intensify
our individual and collective efforts in fighting the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism.
What recent events have shown us is that we should
not take comfort in the recent successes achieved on the
battlefield, and that we must continue to mobilize our
efforts with respect to ISIL, Da’esh and its affiliates,
wherever they may be. However, we need to have far
better cooperation and coordination than the terrorists
do, without which we wll not be able to achieve much.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov;
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate Michéle Coninsx;
and the Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities, Ambassador Kairat Umarov, for their
informative briefings.
While the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is experiencing significant military setbacks and losing
its strongholds in Iraq and Syria, the threat is spreading
globally. Foreign terrorist fighters are returning to
their countries of origin or relocating to other Member
States. For example, the threat level has intensified in
South-East Asia due to returnees and relocators to that
region. There is even a video in which ISIL fighters
urge viewers who cannot travel to the Middle East to go
instead to the Philippines.
Advance Passenger Information (API), Passenger
Name Record (PNR) systems and connection of access
to INTERPOL databases with airports and border
checkpoints are important to detect foreign terrorist
fighters, especially when they use broken travel. Japan
encourages Member countries that have not yet done
so to introduce API and PNR systems, as well as
connection of access to INTERPOL databases with
frontline officers as soon as possible, in accordance
with resolutions 2368 (2017) and 2322 (2016).
The use of biometric tools is becoming more
and more effective in stemming the flow of foreign
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorist fighters. Terrorists try to disguise themselves
and use forged travel documents when they cross
borders. They even undergo plastic surgery and change
their fingerprints. To detect these terrorists, Japan
has introduced fingerprint readers able to identify
altered fingerprints. We have also introduced identify
certificate passports with facial images in the identity
certificate chips. Last month, Japan started using facial
recognition gate machines at the Tokyo International
Airport to automatically match passengers’ faces with
the facial images in the identity certificate passports.
This system has been proven to be effective even when
facial features have been altered by surgery.
We are concerned by the evolving tactics of
terrorists. We must respond and proactively take
measures against them. For instance, at the Group of
Seven Ise-Shima Summit in May 2016, Japanese police
set up drone detectors, drone interceptors and netlaunchers around the conference sites to prepare for a
possible threat from drones. Some Japanese companies
have started producing or using state-of-the-art
techniques to develop security systems. For instance,
one famous Japanese manufacturer is producing hightech facial recognition cameras to automatically detect
blacklisted faces in a crowd in a moment. One security
company employs artificial intelligence to analyse
and extract suspicious patterns from big data through
security cameras, robots or drones.
In closing, I would like to stress the importance of
continuing to develop our counter-terrorism measures
as terrorists change and evolve their tactics. Japan is
ready to work closely with other countries to enhance
their capacities in this area. We must unite against
terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters, by
implementing Security Council resolutions faithfully.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would also like
to start by thanking today’s briefers for their
insightful presentations.
Three years ago, by adopting resolution 2178 (2014),
the Council responded to the evolving phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, whose participation on
the side of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
exacerbated conflicts in the Middle East. As a result,
around the world many foreign terrorist fighters have
been prevented from reaching Iraq and Syria, and
their recruitment and financing campaigns have been
revealed and disrupted. Yet, despite resolute measures,
many extremists have managed to infiltrate the region.

S/PV. 8116

Now, due to the constant military pressure exerted
by the international community, ISIL has suffered
significant losses and its so-called caliphate has
collapsed. Still, this fight is far from over. We have
repeatedly raised concerns about possible strategies
that this terrorist organization could choose to ensure
its survival. Sadly, they have all come true, as ISIL
has accelerated the transfer of human and financial
resources to its affiliates in other countries. Europe
and North Africa, as well as Central and South-East
Asia, have to face the inflow of returning or relocating
foreign terrorist fighters. The threat is more than real
as these former ISIL fighters are ready to merge with
any terrorist group, should the opportunity arise, and
put the lethal skills they have acquired in Iraq and Syria
to use. Their joining the fray of existing conflicts will
only exacerbate the latter, increasing their complexity
and duration.
Another side of this problem is the possible abuse
of asylum systems by terrorists at a time when huge
waves of migrants are arriving from conflict zones in
search of shelter. There is a growing concern over the
creation of small sleeping cells in different parts of the
world, as well as the potential preparation of signature
lone-wolf attacks. The terrorist strikes that have swept
through Europe are a clear reflection of this.
No country can be immune to this threat’s
manifestations. That is why Ukraine is also actively
working to ensure that all necessary measures are
taken domestically to counter this threat. In recent
years, Ukraine has also acquired bitter experience
in countering the terrorist threat fuelled by external
support for terrorist groups and organizations in the
east of the country. The operations conducted by the
security service of Ukraine from 2015 onwards have led
to the liquidation of logistical networks, with 23 transfer
points used for the facilitation of travel of foreign
terrorist fighters who were natives of the Caucasus,
Central Asia and Europe through Ukraine and Turkey
to the Syrian-Iraqi zone and back. Persons responsible
for creating and maintaining transfer points were
arrested and sentenced. Bearing in mind that a relevant
United Nations sanctions regime is a vital and effective
tool against terrorism, Ukraine has also submitted
respective listing requests to the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.

17-4004217/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

To address changes in terrorists’ modus operandi,
we might consider adopting revised sophisticated
measures to supplement resolution 2178 (2014). The
reviews of its implementation show that combating
potential threats posed by returning foreign terrorist
fighters and relocating them requires the following.
First, there is the matter of introducing advanced
technologies for identifying terrorists at border
crossing points, while conducting risk assessments
of the most vulnerable border segments to strengthen
their respective control. That cannot be accomplished
without expeditious information-sharing among States,
especially terrorists’ biometric data, as well as ensuring
a broader use of Advanced Passenger Information
(API) and INTERPOL databases. In that regard,
we welcome the decision of the International Civil
Aviation Organization to approve API as a universal
standard and call on it to help Member States in need
of its assistance to ensure its effective implementation.
Secondly, there is the issue of ensuring a more
universal criminalization of the actions of foreign
terrorist fighters and conducting proper investigations
of their crimes so that terrorists are apprehended and
do not escape justice. The support of affected countries
in collecting credible evidence, as well as that of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, and the recently
established United Nations investigative team for
Iraq, is vital to that end. Moreover, an appropriate
amount of caution is required in dealing with specific
categories of returnees, in particular minors, women,
family members and disillusioned returnees, who have
committed less serious offences. In cases in which it
is not appropriate to level terrorism-related charges,
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes should
be implemented.
Last but not the least, we must counter the threat
of radicalization posed by returnees. Some are coming
back battle-hardened, strongly indoctrinated and with
newly forged ties with extremist groups. Therefore,
States should focus on implementing nuanced measures
in line with the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism and resolution 2354 (2017),
on countering terrorist narratives.
18/23

28/11/2017

Implementing the corresponding measures
demands concerted and harmonized actions on the
part of the entire international community. That is
why international cooperation at the regional and
global levels between respective law-enforcement
and intelligence agencies is indispensable. Without it,
any kind of national effort will be futile. The further
development and dissemination of good practices in
preventing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters are
also crucial to dealing with that phenomenon. In that
regard, we support the work being done by the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, as well as that
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate in assisting and enabling Member States to
strengthen their respective capacities.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my thanks to the Italian
presidency for convening this important briefing.
I would also like to thank all the briefers for their
valuable presentations.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is one
of the most dangerous aspects of the unprecedented
terrorist threat facing our world today, and has
increased in scope over the past several years. The
ability and capability of such terrorists to spread in
Syria, Iraq and other countries and regions throughout
the world — whether in Africa, Asia or Europe — have
also increased, demonstrating that the phenomenon
is linked to many problems and factors that must be
addressed effectively if we seriously desire to halt it.
I will touch upon several specific points in connection
with those problems, while sharing our view on how we
believe that they should be addressed.
First, the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters has highlighted the success of terrorist
organizations — especially that of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida — in
recruiting many individuals, including men and women
of various age groups and social, educational and
professional backgrounds and countries, to join the
ranks of their terrorist groups. In that regard, we believe
it necessary to counter all political and socioeconomic
conditions that might lure such people to terrorism. In
addition, we must effectively combat terrorist ideologies
and messages whereby terrorists apply takfiri thought
and falsely interpret religions. Aware of that danger,
Egypt has adopted a comprehensive international
framework to counter the terrorist narrative, pursuant
to resolution 2354 (2017).
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Second, various reports have come to the firm
conclusion that the Internet and other social media
are among the most important tools used by terrorist
groups to recruit and direct foreign terrorist fighters.
Accordingly, although we have encountered difficulty
in reaching an international framework to ban the use
of the Internet and social media when they are used
for purposes of terrorism — owing to differences in
Constitutions and domestic laws in various countries — it
is nevertheless important to find common ground and
strengthen international cooperation to prevent the use
of the Internet and social media for terrorist ends. We
must also promote cooperation with the private sector
and relevant enterprises, as well as civil society.
Third, foreign terrorist fighters require financing
to travel and reside in their countries of destination.
Such financing might originate from individual
sources, terrorist organizations or certain States that
provide funding for political purposes. In that regard,
we reaffirm the need to block all forms of terrorist
financing in general, and that of foreign terrorist
fighters in particular. It is important to implement the
many relevant resolutions, especially resolution 2368
(2016), as well as other relevant international norms.
Fourth, it is vital to screen foreign terrorist fighters
who travel to Syria and Iraq and track their movement
towards other countries in Africa, Asia and Europe. It is
necessary to take all measures to stop them, given that
the status quo is a violation of resolution 2178 (2014),
which, simply put, means preventing foreign terrorist
fighters from reaching various countries throughout
the world.
Fifth, the effort to address the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters has revealed many legal gaps that
must be addressed. At the national level, countries must
criminalize the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon
and terrorists’ travel to conflict zones for the purposes
of terrorism. They must also criminalize any act that
supports or incites foreign terrorist fighters. At the
international level, we must consider how to legally deal
with foreign terrorist fighters leaving conflict zones
who, as yet, have not been served with arrest warrants
or who have become stateless. We believe that the bestcase scenario should end with either their prosecution
in the countries in which they were arrested or their
extradition to the countries of origin before they left
for the conflict zones in question. Furthermore, we do
not agree with the trend of refraining from prosecuting
foreign terrorist fighters and attempting instead only

S/PV. 8116

to rehabilitate them and reintegrate them into society.
Any person considered a foreign terrorist fighter must
be held accountable if we are to uphold the principles of
justice and accountability and ensure deterrence.
Sixth, it is crucial that we exchange information
on the issue. In that regard, we stress the importance
of making use of the INTERPOL database of foreign
terrorist fighters. We urge INTERPOL to scale up its
interaction with countries so that they are aware of
the potentially helpful data it has available. Where
application programming interfaces and similar
systems are concerned, we can see that the number of
countries that apply such systems is very limited. We
should therefore investigate the reasons why States
have reservations about implementing them and try to
address them.
Seventh, we emphasize how important it is to
promote international cooperation in law enforcement
and justice when addressing the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters, as well as to encourage mutual legal
assistance to promote international legal cooperation
and abide actively by the principles of extradition
and accountability.
Last but not least, the United Nations must play a
concrete role on the ground by helping States to build
their capabilities so that they can fulfil their obligation
to counter the problem of foreign terrorist fighters.
We expect the Office of Counter-Terrorism to play a
vital role in this area, taking into consideration the
priorities defined by the States concerned and the
recommendations of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
following the assessment visits conducted by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
In that regard, we emphasize the importance of ensuring
that States respect the relevant Council resolutions and
that the Security Council follows up the implementation
of its resolutions in earnest, without turning a blind eye
to any violation by any country, whether for political
reasons or other considerations. That lesson should
not be forgotten when we consider the draft resolution
renewing resolution 2178 (2014).
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The situation today makes it vital for us to
exchange opinions and assessments of the contemporary
threats posed by the activities of terrorist groups.
We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, and Ambassador Umarov, Chair of the

17-4004219/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, for their briefings. We also thank Ms. Coninsx,
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and congratulate her
on her maiden briefing to the Security Council.
An unprecedented number of radicals high
on terrorist ideology, including many residents of
extremely affluent States, have set out for the areas of
conflict in Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, Libya and other
parts of the world. They return home or relocate to
other countries in search of so-called safe havens on
the assumption that they will not be held accountable.
In that regard, it is essential that States fulfil their
obligations with regard to countering foreign terrorist
fighters strictly and rigorously. Three years ago, in
addition to its already extensive counter-terrorism
toolkit, the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2178 (2014) on this specific issue. The decision had
wide support from the States Members of the United
Nations. Nonetheless, when it came to implementing
it, it turned out that many States do not get around to
improving their counter-terrorism systems until there
is a flare-up on their own territory. A good example of
that has been the commitment to criminalizing various
aspects of foreign terrorist fighter activities laid out in
paragraph 6 of resolution 2178 (2014).
As the results of the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
monitoring have shown, in a number of cases neither
the process of formulating legal bans on travelling
abroad with the intention of committing an act of terror,
or on giving any kind of assistance to foreign terrorist
fighters, has even begun. Furthermore, terrorist crimes
as such have not actually been outlawed everywhere.
It would be naive to think that terrorists leaving Syria
and Iraq en masse have not noticed such loopholes.
There are also gaps in the area of international counterterrorism cooperation. The legal assistance and
extradition mechanisms effectively almost cease to
function, frequently becoming hostages to bureaucracy,
not to mention to attempts to politicize them. There are
also serious difficulties linked to tracking terrorists’
movements across borders, in many cases compounded
by the fact that the borders themselves are porous.
Besides that, the scope of the information about
foreign terrorist fighters that States exchange,
bilaterally and multilaterally, does not measure up to
20/23

28/11/2017

that of the current threat. That is not because the right
mechanisms do not exist. INTERPOL has advanced
systems. The International Counter-Terrorism Database,
founded in Russia, is gaining traction and provides
the greatest possible flexibility for posting and using
information. In such circumstances, it is becoming
increasingly obvious that the effectiveness of efforts in
this area depends first and foremost on whether there is
a genuine desire to cooperate.
We must maintain a comprehensive approach
to dealing with the issue of foreign terrorist fighters
returning from conflict zones. It is crucial to ensure
that they are held criminally responsible. The
principles whereby punishment will be assured and also
commensurate with the crime should be the foundation
of these efforts. We can and should use the reintegration
and rehabilitation of terrorists as tools in this, but
within the framework of the penal system. In our view,
it is pointless to see rehabilitation programmes as some
kind of alternative to criminal prosecution.
As for the practice of qualifying terrorists by
categorizing them as violent extremists, that could
lead to the possibility of terrorists generally, and
foreign terrorist fighters in particular, avoiding
criminal responsibility, among other things, and could
ultimately increase the terrorist threat. Right now, it is
also especially important to ensure that foreign terrorist
fighters come under the remit of the counter-terrorism
sanctions regime for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Al-Qaida. That raises questions about some
countries’ reluctance to agree to Russia’s request to
the Sanctions Committee for listing two individuals
who have participated in those terrorist organizations’
activities. That kind of apparently politicized approach
undermines the Committee’s effectiveness.
The fight against the terrorists who flocked to the
conflict zones in the Middle East and North Africa
is coming to an end, and it is the Russian aerospace
forces’ successful operation in Syria that has been the
key contribution to that effort. Nonetheless, we cannot
fight terrorism by military means alone. My country has
initiated more than 2,000 criminal proceedings related to
the issue of foreign terrorist fighters and has succeeded
in identifying 112 agents who purposely recruited new
members for terrorist organizations. We are taking
every possible step to ensure that the requirements of
resolution 2138 (2014) are fully implemented.
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

At the same time, the challenges of today mean that
we have to continually improve our anti-terrorism and
anti-extremism legislation. Recent updates of Russia’s
anti-terrorism laws have touched on issues related to
disseminating extremist materials and inciting people
to terrorism through the Internet, and committing
crimes in situations of armed conflict. In formulating
such changes to the law we analysed the most up-todate world practices.
One of our priorities is combating terrorist ideology,
and we are actively involved in producing anti-terrorist
propaganda. We distributed more than 79,000 messages
with counter-terrorism content in Russia in 2016 alone
and blocked more than 37,000 Internet sources that
contained terrorist or extremist materials. We believe
that it is essential to develop active cooperation in this
area based on the principle of the State and the private
sector’s mutual responsibility.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize
that, given our experience in counter-terrorism,
our delegation stands ready to continue working
substantively to improve the Security Council’s counterterrorism tools and the mechanisms for monitoring
their implementation.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin
by thanking the United States for initiating today’s
important briefing. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Coninsx and Ambassador Umarov for their
valuable contributions to our discussion.
The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
touches all countries and is constantly evolving. In
the case of Sweden, of the approximately 300 Swedish
citizens who have left the country to join terrorist groups
in Syria or Iraq, we estimate that, to date, half have
returned, 50 have died in conflict and 50 are still outside
Sweden. The profile of returnees is mixed — men,
women and children, some disillusioned, others still
ideologically committed.
It is the obligation of all Member States to
criminalize the travel, training and financing of foreign
terrorist fighters. In Sweden, we have amended the
existing criminal legislation on terrorism to address the
evolving threat and meet the penal law requirements
outlined in resolution 2178 (2014). The amendments
entered into force last year and contain new provisions
on terrorist travel, training and financing. Next
year, the legislation will be tightened even further,

S/PV. 8116

including through an expanded definition of terrorist
offences. Since 2015, we have tried and convicted seven
individuals for terrorism-related offences, including
crimes committed abroad. So far, one person has been
prosecuted under the new amended legislation on
terrorism travel.
We recognize the important work being done
by both United Nations actors and civil society in
trying to better address the root causes of violent
extremism. We were a sponsor of the groundbreaking
report of the United Nations Development Programme
entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa, launched in
September. The report concluded that the main reasons
underlying recruitment are not religion or ideology but
socioeconomic conditions and a breakdown in the rule
of law.
With that in mind, we have sought to address the
issue of foreign terrorist fighters through a whole-ofGovernment approach that involves, among other
elements, the police, social services and prison
and probation services at the municipal, regional
and national levels. As part of our strong focus on
prevention, we are putting in place mechanisms aimed
at safeguarding individuals and targeting, in particular,
those at risk of radicalization. A new national centre for
the prevention of violent extremism will be launched in
the new year. New guidelines are being issued by our
national board of health and welfare to municipalities
and practitioners that deal with returnees and defectors.
Resolution 2178 (2014) provides a robust policy
framework for addressing the challenges of foreign
terrorist fighters. We would, however, welcome a new
Security Council resolution to address the new trends
and challenges and look forward to engaging with other
Council members in the upcoming negotiations. In that
regard, the situation of children in terrorist-related
activities needs special attention. Children’s full
enjoyment of their human rights must be safeguarded.
Children returning from armed forces or groups must
be provided with proper community-based support in
order to avoid stigmatization and future radicalization.
Children should always be treated primarily as victims.
Several of the foreign terrorist fighters from
Sweden have been women. We would like to see an
integrated gender approach in the new draft resolution
that emphasizes the multiple roles played by women
in relation to terrorism, including as perpetrators,
supporters, facilitators, victims and preventers. The

17-4004221/23

S/PV.8116

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

global framework and programmes for preventing
violent extremism and countering terrorism should
reflect that reality.
As the Secretary-General
Assembly in September,

told

the

General

“As soon as we begin believing that violations
of human rights and democratic freedoms are
necessary to win the fight, we might as well have
lost the war” (A/72/PV.3, p. 2).
For that reason, States must comply with their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law, as well as
the principle of the rule of law, in all measures to
combat terrorism.
Collaboration among countries and with partners
across the globe will be central to defeating the
terrorist threat. Sweden remains fully committed and
will continue to play its part in that global effort.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting on combating foreign terrorist fighters.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Executive Director Coninsx and Ambassador Umarov
for their briefings.
Terrorism is a common enemy of humankind.
In the face of that joint challenge, the international
community must acknowledge that we are all part of
a community with a common destiny. Enhancing our
cooperation on terrorism therefore demands that we
make the most of the leading role in this area of the
United Nations and the Security Council, and respect
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of all States. We must follow a
uniform standard and reject the practice of associating
terrorism with any particular ethnicity or religion.
In order to respond to terrorism’s adaptive nature,
we must take comprehensive measures to eradicate
its root causes and breeding grounds. Terrorist forces
have carried out violent attacks around the world in
the past few years, while the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters has become more organized and their means of
attack more varied. In order to contain the cross-border
movement of foreign terrorist fighters, China would
like to propose the following steps.
22/23

28/11/2017

First, we must take effective measures to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters. Their outward and
return journeys severely jeopardize the security and
stability of countries of origin, transit and destination.
Member States, especially countries adjacent to conflict
zones, should strengthen border controls and lawenforcement cooperation and take specific measures
to prevent the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies and the
relevant international organizations should play their
designated role by establishing databases and fully
information-exchange platforms on the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters, sharing intelligence, helping to block
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and assisting
Member States in capacity-building based on respect
for their sovereignty.
Secondly, we must enhance efforts to combat
terrorist activities conducted through the Internet. In
the age of information and the Internet, organizing
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and of financing
for terrorism has become simpler, easier to hide and
more international. Terrorist organizations use the
Internet and social media to incite and recruit terrorist
fighters and to plan terrorist attacks. The international
community should make blocking the use of social
media for the propagation of extremist ideologies a
top priority, strengthen Internet oversight and prevent
terrorist organizations from using it for their expansion
and financing.
Thirdly, we must respect the diversity of civilizations
and eliminate the root causes of the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters: wars, conflicts, ethnic
hatred, poverty and backwardness. The international
community should remain committed to helping
Member States to alleviate poverty, strengthening the
political settlement of regional issues and promoting
inclusive, universal and balanced development. It
should create an environment conducive to dialogue on
an equal footing and to the peaceful and harmonious
coexistence of our different civilizations and religions.
Furthermore, it should establish a new order of
international relations and build a shared community
of the future.
China is firmly opposed to terrorism in all its forms.
As an important member of international counterterrorism efforts, China has actively participated in
multilateral cooperation mechanisms, such as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum. China is ready to join hands
17-40042

28/11/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

with other countries and international organizations to
jointly address the threats and challenges of terrorism
and maintain international peace and stability.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Executive Director Michèle
Coninsx for their briefings. I also wish to take the
opportunity to commend very much Ambassador
Umarov for his excellent leadership of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities and for his detailed presentation.
Three years ago resolution 2178 (2014) underscored
the urgent need to tackle the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters travelling to conflict zones to join
Da’esh. In that context, the Council required Member
States to ensure that their legal systems provided
for the prosecution, as serious a crime, of travel for
terrorism or related training, as well as of the financing
or facilitation of such activities.Subsequently, in 2015,
Italy amended its penal code to criminalize the conduct
of any individual organizing, financing or promoting
transnational travels aimed at committing terrorist acts.
Since its adoption, resolution 2178 (2014) has
been considered a comprehensive and central tool
aimed at enhancing Member States’ operational and
legal measures to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and implement capacity-building programmes.
Nonetheless, the global threat posed by terrorism
continues to evolve and diversify, as we have heard in
the briefings.
The sustained military pressure levied upon Da’esh,
as well as the deterioration of its financial conditions,
have not deprived the group of its capability to send
funds to its supporters outside the conflict zone and
to enable external attacks. ISIL has been continuing to
adapt to military pressure by changing its organization
from one that is State like to a network, reframing
narratives and making investments even in legitimate
businesses. The heinous attack perpetrated last Friday
in a Sufi mosque near Egypt’s Sinai coast clearly

S/PV. 8116

demonstrates the persistently very high level of the
terrorist threat.
While the flow of foreign terrorist fighters travelling
to the conflict zones has nearly stopped, Member States
continue to be confronted with the threat posed by
returnees and relocators. The international community
is still looking for an effective way to properly address
the challenge. Our commitment to counter-terrorism
must also be extended far and wide, including in the
Sahel, where instability contributes to the spread of
violence and terrorism.
The lack of adequate information-sharing
mechanisms further hinders countries’ efforts to assess
and mitigate the threat. In this regard, it remains crucial
for Member States to enhance their cooperation within
and between public sector agencies, both domestically
and internationally, and to empower financial
intelligence units, law enforcement and intelligence
services to improve the exchange of relevant information
in a timely manner.
Effective border police measures and enhancing
capacity-building on terrorist financing investigations
are particularly key in this regard. Italy already provides
advanced training to foreign officers dealing with
counter-terrorism and is also committed to providing
judicial and law enforcement international cooperation,
in the framework of transnational investigations.
We welcome the proposal of the United States for a
new draft resolution. In it, the Security Council should
address the threat posed by returnees and relocators
by considering the international best practices and
provide comprehensive strategies and guidelines to
help Member States understand how to reintegrate
returnees, especially women and children. Italy stands
ready to continue to work with Member States and
the United Nations as a whole to guarantee a timely
implementation of existing resolutions and studying new
recommendations in order to update and enhance the
response to terrorism by the international community.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

17-4004223/23
