43

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and essential for the universal protection and promotion
of human rights;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the text of the articles of the draft
International Covenants on Human Rights which were
adopted at the tenth to eighteenth sessions of the
General Assembly, together with the records of the
debates which took place in the Third Committee on
measures of implementation of the said drafts, the
explanatory paper prepared by the Secretary-General
and the observations received from Governments ;11
3. Invites Member States to consider the text of the
articles of the draft International Covenants on Human
Rights which have already been adopted by the Third
Committee and the measures of implementation and
the final clauses relating to the said Covenants elaborated by the Commission on Human Rights, in order
that they may be in a position to decide on the measures
of implementation and on the final clauses of the
Covenants;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, if observations
are sent by Member States before the opening of the
nineteenth session of the General Assembly, to transmit
them to the other Member States as soon as possible;
5. Decides to make a special effort to complete, at its
nineteenth session, the adoption of the entire text of the
draft Inter national Covenants on Human Rights.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.
1961 (XVIII). Designation of 1968 as International Year for Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Noting that the year 1968 will be the twentieth anniversary of the -adoption and proclamation by the General
Assembly of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,
Taking into account the fact that, since the adoption
of the Declaration, a substantial measure of progress
has been achieved in giving effect to human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recognizing that in spite of such progress the effective realization of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms proclaimed in the Declaration remains unsatisfactory in some parts of the world,
Believing that the cause of human rights will be well
served by an increasing awareness of the extent of the
progress made,
Convinced that an appropriate way of celebrating the
twentieth anniversary of the proclamation of the Declaration is to devote the year 1968 to intensified national
and international efforts and undertakings in the field
of human rights, and also to an international review
of the achievements in this field,
Confident that the designation of the year 1968 as
such a year of international review will encourage all
Member States and interested organizations to intensify
their efforts in the intervening years, so as to show the
maximum possible progress by that time,
1. Designates the year 1968 as International Year
for Human Rights;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights at its forth11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 48, documents A/5411 and Add.1
and 2.

coming sessions, with the assistance of the SecretaryGeneral:
(a) To prepare, for consideration by the General
Assembly, a programme of measures and activities
representing a lasting contribution to the cause of human
rights, to be undertaken by the United Nations, by
Member States and by the specialized agencies during
the year 1968, in celebration of the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and in furtherance of the objectives of the
present resolution;
( b) To prepare, for consideration by the General
Assembly, suggestions for a list of goals in the field
of human rights to be achieved by the United Nations
not later than the end of 1968;
(c) To submit the programme of measures and
activities and the suggestions for the list of goals in time
for their consideration by the General Assembly at its
twentieth session;
3. Invites the specialized agencies to render all assistance to the Commission on Human Rights in the
preparation of the programme of measures and activities
to be undertaken during the International Year for
Human Rights in celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration;
4. Invites all Member States to intensify their domestic efforts in the field oi human rights with the
assistance of their appropriate organizations, in order
that a fuller and more effective realization of these
rights and freedorr.s might be achieved and might be
reported at the proposed international review of such
achievements in 1968 and thereafter.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.
1965 (XVIII). Measures designed to promote
among youth the ideals of peace, mutual
respect and understanding between peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1572 (XV) of 18 December
1960 and 1842 (XVII) of 19 December 1962,
Recognizing the need to adopt a declaration on the
promotion among youth of the ideals of peace, mutual
respect and understanding between peoples,
Considering that praiseworthy efforts have been made
by various delegations to prepare a draft which would
adequately supplement the text of other declarations and
resolutions adopted in the past and constitute an appeal
that would arouse intense interest among the youth of
the world,
Considering the need for the widest possible participation by Governments and youth organizations with
respect to the declaration,
Considering also the lack of time during the eighteenth
session, which has made it impossible to complete the
definitive version of the said declaration,
C onvinccd that it must continue its efforts in favour of
mutual respect and understanding among the youth of
the peoples of the world.

I
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the draft Declaration on the Promotion
among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect

General ANembl:,-Efchteeath Se11ioa

and Understanding between Peoples11 and the amendments thereto, 18 as well as the relevant records of the
eighteenth session;
2. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral their views on the proposed Declaration, after
consultation, where necessary, with the most experienced
educators and leaders of youth activities ;
3. Invites the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to
transmit the relevant records of the eighteenth session
of the General Assembly to the national commissions,
to youth organizations and to the International Conference on Youth, so that they may make whatever comments they deem appropriate ;
4. Also invites the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to transmit those comments to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations as early as possible;

5. Decides to continue as a matter of priority the
examination and final elaboration of the Declaration at
its nineteentll session ;

II
1. Congratulates the United Nations Educational,

Scientific and Cultural Organization on organizing the
International Conference on Youth, to be held at
Grenoble in August 1964, and expresses its satisfaction
that the Conference will devote its attention to all measures designed to promote greater· understanding and
co-operation among young people;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to study the desirability of establishing
regional documentation and study institutions whose
purpose would be to train young people in a greater
understanding of their common ideals, upon the achievement of which the future of mankind depends.
1280th plenary meeting,
13 December 1963.

11 Jbid., agenda item 47, document A/5«,9, pa,ra. S.

1a Ibid., paras. 6 and 7.

*

*

*

Note
Draft Recommendation on Coment to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage
and Registration of Marriage■ (item 40)
Mea■ures

to accelerate the promotion of re■pect for human ripta and
fundamental freedom■ {item 41)

Manife■tation■ of

racial prejudice and national and religioua intolerance

(item 42)

Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Form■ of Religiom Intolerance
(item 44)
Draft Declaration on the Right of Aaylum {item 45)
Freedom of information: (a) Draft Convention on Freedom of Informs•
tion; (b) Draft Declaration on Freedom of Information (item 46)

Af its 1279th plenary meeting, on 12 December 1963, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Third Committee16 to postpone to the nineteenth session the consideration of items 40, 41, 42, 44, 45 and 46.
H Ibid., agenda items 40, 41, 42, 44, 45 and 46, document A/5667, para. 2.
