General Assembly-Thirty-seeond Session

80

regional and intergovernmental organizations and the
organizations of thc United Nations system;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b)
To ensure that adequate financia! and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of resources and to co-ordinate the international
programme of assistance to the Comoros;
(e) To arrange for a revicw of the economic situation in the Comoros in time for thc matter to be considcred by the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session;
( d) To keep the situation in the Comoros under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financia!
institutions, and to report on the question to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
1O1 st plenary meeting
13 Deccmber 1977

32/93.

Assistance to Djihouti

The General Assembly,
Having warmly welcomed the admission of the Republic of Djibouti to the United Nations, 28
Taking note of the statement made by the President
of the Republic of Djibouti in the General Assembly 29
on the economic difficulties confronting his country,
A ware of the fact that Djibouti has to tackle certain
specific tasks deriving from its reccnt accession to independencc,
Aware also of the need for the improvement and
enlargement of the social and economic infrastructure
of Djibouti,
Deeply concerned at the situation prevailing in the
country, aggravated by drought and other factors seriously affecting its economic and social life,
Recalling also the recent surveys carried out by the
United Nations with a vicw to assessing Djibouti's
short-term and long-term needs,
Further recalling its rcsolution 3421 (XXX) of 8
December 1975 on the implcmentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independencc to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies and other organizations within thc
United Nations systcm to extend-assistancc to the newly
independent and emerging States,
Recalling recommendation 99 (IV) of 31 May 1976
adopted by the United Nations Confcrencc on Tradc
and Development at its fourth session, 30 held at Nairobi
from 5 to 31 May 1976,
Noting that Djibouti is not included in the list of thc
28 Resolution 32/1.
29

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 3rd meeting, paras. 122-194.
30
See Proceedings of tlze United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publicatíon, Sales No. E.76.IT.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

least developed countries 81 or in the list of the most
seriously affected countries, 32
1. Strongly appeals to Member States and to the
international institutions concerned-in particular thc
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme-to give effective and
sustained assistance to the Government of Djibouti so
as to enable it to deal successfully with the critica!
situation arising from the drought and the economic
difficulties which that country is experiencing;
2. Requests the Sccretary-General to mobilize financia!, technical and economic assistancc from the
international community, particularly from the developed countries and compctent agencies of the United
Nations, in arder to mect the short-term and long-term
development necds of this newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning to treat as a priority matter at its fourteenth session
and to give favourable consideration to the inclusion
of Djibouti in thc list of the least developed countries
and to submit its conclusions to the Economic and
Social Council at its sixty-fifth session;
4. Invites in the meantime Member Statcs, particularly the developed countries, and United Nations
agencies to grant Djibouti, in view of its difficult cconomic situation, the same favourable treatmcnt as is
cnjoyed by the least dcvcloped among the developing
countries;

5. Strongly recommends that Djibouti should be
included in thc list of the most seriously affected countries;
6. Rcquests the Secretary-General to keep the question under revicw and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implemcntation of
t he present rcsolution.
1O1st plenary meeting
13 Deccmber 1977
32/94.

Assistancc to Ton~a

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Stratcgy for the Second Unitcd Nations Developmcnt Decade, and 2768 (XXVI) of 18 November 1971 on
the identification of thc Icast developed among the
dcveloping countries,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1726 (LIII) of 28 July 1972, in which the
Council, ínter afia, requcsted the Committce for Devclopment Planning to undertake an examination of
thc latest available statistical information on the relevant
cconomic, social and other variables in respect of the
dcvcloping countries, with a vicw to making recomrncndations to thc Council on any modification that
might appear necessary in the list of thc lcast developcd countries on the basis of the critcria uscd in
drawing up the list,
Bearing in mi11d its resolution 3487 (XXX) of 12
Deccmber 1975 by which certain countries were added
to the list of thl' least developed countries,
:n See n:solutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
2
:: Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Su¡,plemrnt No. 2 J (A/3 l /21), annex IV.
