102

Genera] Aaembly-Tblrty-fourtb Session

Bearing in mind the urgent need to intensify the activities of the Fund and noting that the Fund's approved
commitments nearly equal available resources,
Recalling Economic and Social Council decision
1978/53 of 2 August 1978, under which the review
specified in paragraphs 1 (m) and (p) of Council resolution 1762 (LIV) is to be carried out in 1981,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/65 of 3 August 1979, in accordance with
which a working group of governmental experts was established to review and analyse the activities of the Fund,
1. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
Natural Resources on its sixth session,4° especially the
deliberations on the United Nations Revolving Fund for
Natural Resources Exploration, the report of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme on the activities of the Fund in 1978 47 and the
observations, conclusions and recommendations contained therein, as well as the report of the SecretaryGeneral on multilateral development assistance for the
exploration of natural resources; 48
2. Invites the working group of governmental experts to examine ways and means of promoting the
Fund's effective operation, while carrying out a comprehensive review of the functions, institutional arrangements, funding and repayment system of the Fund;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the appropriate international organizations, in particular the
World Bank, to contribute to the successful deliberations of the working group by providing technical, financial and other information that would assist the experts to assess the needs of developing countries as well
as the available financial and technical resources of international organizations in the area of natural resources exploration;
4. Requests Member States to give serious consideration to the possibility of contributing substantially
to the Fund, thus enabling it to finance projects currently under consideration as well as the Fund's new activities in undertaking feasibility studies as authorized
by the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme;
5. Endorses decision 79 /26 of 29 June 1979 of the
Governing Coun~il of the United Nations Development
Programme, 49 by which the Fund was authorized to
undertake feasibility studies, and urges the Economic
and Social <;ounc~l and the Governing Council to give
~urther cons1deratron to the other proposals contained
m the report of the Administrator on the activities of the
Fund in 1978.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/110.

Report of the World Food Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
46

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council 1979
Supplement No. 9A (E/1979/69/Rev.l).
'
'
41 DP/368.
48 A/34/532.
49
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council 1979
Supplement No. JO (E/1979/40 and Corr.I), chap. XXI, ~ect. L'.

and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic cooperation, as well as the agreed conclusions of the
Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/ 174 on some aspects concerning
food and agriculture,""
Recalling also its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, by which it established the World Food
Council to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism to provide over-all integrated and continuing attention to the
successful co-ordination and follow-up of policies concerning food production, nutrition, food security, food
trade and food aid, as well as other related matters, by
all organizations of the United Nations system,
Recalling further the Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and Malnutrition, contained in the Manila
Communique of the World Food Council5 1 and adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 32/52 of 8 December 1977, as well as the Mexico Declaration of the
World Food Council,5° adopted by the Assembly in its
resolution 33/90 of 15 December 1978,
Bearing in mind the provisions of resolution 33/90
concerning the implementation of the decisions, resolutions and programmes regarding food adopted since the
World Food Conference in 1974,
Noting with regret the slow progress made in solving
the fundamental food problems facing the developing
countries, in particular food-priority countries and other
developing countries with large food deficits, whose food
situation is still deteriorating, and, in this context, noting
with deep concern that the target of an annual growth
rate of 4 per cent in the food and agriculture sector of
developing countries, established in the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade and endorsed by the World Food
Conference in 1974, has not been achieved,
. Noting with concern the strong impact of food-stuff
imports on the balance of payments of food-importing
developing countries, in particular the least developed
countnes,
Recognizing that the responsibility for the development of food and agricultural production lies primarily
with the developing countries themselves and that there
is an _increasing_ effort and growing commitment by developmg countnes to accelerate the development of their
food and agriculture sectors,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to overcoming
hunger and malnutrition everywhere and, in that context,
the need for greater international action to improve the
production and distribution of food,
Taking into account the relevant parts of the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and
Rural Development, 53
Expressing its deep concern at the fact that a substantial part of world resources, material as well as
human, continues to be diverted to armaments with
detrimental effect on international security and on efforts
to achieve the new international economic order, includ50 _Dfficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
f;~swn, Supplement No. 34 (A/34/34), part two, sect. II, para.
51
lbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/32/19),
pa rt one, para. l.
62
1bid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/33/19
and Corr.1), part one para. l.
53
See Report of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform
and Rural De_velopment, Rome, 12-20 July 1979 (WCARRD/
REP); transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by
a note of the Secretary-General (A/34/485).

V. Resolutiom adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ing the solution of food problems, and calling upon
Governments to take effective measures in the field of
real disarmament that would increase the possibilities
of allocation of the resources now being used for military
purposes to economic and social development, especially
development of developing countries, and to upgrading
their food conditions,
Having considered the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its fifth ministerial session, held
at Ottawa from 3 to 7 September 1979,54
l. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the Govd
th
ll
f T ·
ernment an d people of C ana a for e exce ent act ittes
rld
th
and generous hospitality provided for e Wo
Food
Council at its fifth ministerial session;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the agreed conclusions of the Committee of the Whole Established
under General Assembly Resolution 32/ 17 4 on some
aspects concerning food and agriculture, which constituted an important input for the work of the World Food
Council at its fifth ministerial session;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
World Food Council on the work of its fifth ministerial
session;
4. Takes note of the concept of food sector strategies
which emerged.from the World Food Council consultations, invites the Council to examine this matter further,
having due regard for the principle of full respect for the
development plans and priorities of developing countries,
with a view to enabling interested countries, particularly
food-deficit developing countries, to consider the advisability or otherwise of adopting food strategies within
the framework of their national development programmes, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session, and considers that development assistance agencies, whether national or international,
should not make the preparation of a national food
strategy a condition for development assistance;
5. Strongly urges developed countries, international
institutions and others able to provide development assistance to increase substantially their assistance on concessional terms to the food sector in order to facilitate
for developing countries the achievement of the agreed
target of an annual growth rate of 4 per cent in agricultural production, for which an estimated necessary element of external assistance is $8.3 billion with $6.5
billion on concessional terms, at 1975 prices, as indicated
in the Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and
Malnutrition contained in the Manila Communique of
the World Food Council;
6. Further urges that this target should be reached
if possible by the end of 1980, having regard to the deep
concern of the international community as a whole regarding its urgent nature;
7. Endorses the call of the World Food Council for
greater equity in food distribution through more direct
action by Governments and stresses the need for supportive action by all Governments, with due regard to
the policies followed and conditions prevailing in the
respective countries;
8. Calls upon Governments, all relevant organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system,
other international organizations and the international
community as a whole to give very high priority in their
policies, programmes and actions to the eradication of
hunger and malnutrition everywhere in the world;
54 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/34/19).

103

9. Urges all Governments that have not yet agreed
to the conclusion of a new food aid convention for securing the achievement of an absolute minimum flow of
assistance of at least 10 million tons, even in times of
high prices and food shortage, to reconsider their position and urges that every effort should be made to enlist
new contributors and to increase the commitments of
existing ones in order that a new food aid convention can
be concluded without delay, in any case not later than
the middle of 1980, and without awaiting the conclusion
of a new international grain agreement;
10. Urges all countries, particularly those developed
countries which are not yet contributing to it, to achieve
immediately the 500,000-ton target for the International
Emergency Reserve and to consider its enlargement in
response to growing emergency needs;
11. Urges the traditional donor countries and those
in a position to do so to provide additional food aid to
developing countries in order to assist them in building
national food reserves;
12. Strongly calls upon donor countries to do their
utmost to preserve the nutritional value, including the
protein element, of their food aid;
13. Calls upon traditional donor countries and those
in a position to do so, considering the growing need of
the developing countries for agricultural inputs and the
increasing costs of the latter, to increase their assistance
for agricultural inputs, especially fertilizer, through the
appropriate bilateral and/or multilateral channels, in
particular the International Fertilizer Supply Scheme of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, 55 and also to make substantial contributions to
the Seed Improvement and Development Programme
and the Action Programme for Prevention of Food
Losses of the Food and Agriculture Organization, so as
to reach the agreed funding level of $20 million for each;
14. Recommends that the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the regional development banks should consider
undertaking a systematic assessment of the need to improve fo,_d_ security infrastructure at the national level
as a basis for a major investment effort in the developing
countries which request such assistance;
15. Invites the International Monetary Fund to consider providing, within the context of its financing facilities, additional balance-of-payments support for meeting
the rise in the food import bills of low-income, fooddeficit countries;
16. Notes with deep concern that only limited progress has been achieved towards the solution of the
long-standing problems of international trade in agricultural products which adversely affect exports, particularly of developing countries, and whose solution could
make an important contribution to improving over-all
food production in the world;
17. Calls for urgent action in the different negotiating forums to move towards the approval and implementation of proposals to bring about the reduction and
elimination of barriers to trade in agricultural products,
in particular in relation to those of export interest to
developing countries, and thus to facilitate, inter alia,
more efficient patterns of production;
18. Urges developed countries to make their best
efforts to adjust those sectors of their agricultural and
55 Approved by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in its resolution 1/63 of 19
July 1974 (see Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Report of the Council of FAO, Sixty-third Session,
oara. 26).

104

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

manufacturing economies which require protection
against exports from developing countries, thus facilitating access to the markets of foo<l and agricultural
products;
19. Recommends that the generalized system of
preferences should be expanded to cover a wider range
of processed and semi-processed products and, whenever
possible, agricultural commodities and that the system
of information on using the generalized system of preferences, providing technical assistance, including assistance
in the field of research, development and marketing,
should be enlarged and improved to enable developing
countries to take full advantage of such preferences;
20. Recommends that the World Food Council, in
accordance with its mandate, should give continuing
attention to the impact of food trade on levels of food
production in the world, in particular with reference to
the economies of the developing countries, using to the
maximum extent possible the necessary inputs which the
different organs and organizations of the United Nations
system should provide;
21. Recommends that all Member States and international organizations concerned should take appropriate steps to put into operation the Five-Point Plan
of Action on World Food Security approved by the
Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations at its seventy-fifth session and endorsed by the World Food Council at its fifth ministerial
session, 56 mainly as an interim measure until a new international grain agreement has been concluded.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/111.

Establishment of a University for Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the President of the Republic of Costa
Rica submitted for the consideration of the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session a proposal for the
establishment of a University for Peace, as a specialized
international institute for post-graduate studies, research
and the dissemination of knowledge specifically aimed
at training for peace, within the system of the United
Nations University, and offered it to the international
community through the United Nations, 57
Bearing in mind that, in its resolution 33/109 of 18
December 1978, it expressed its appreciation of the
proposal made by the President of Costa Rica and asked
the Secretary-General to request Member States and
various agencies of the United Nations system to communicate their views to him,
Considering that both the Member States that have
replied to the Secretary-General and the agencies and
bodies consulted-the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
University, the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research and the Centre for Disarmament of the
Secretariat-have closely studied and commended the
initiative of the Government of Costa Rica,
Acknowledging with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General, submitted in pursuance of resolution
33/109, in which it is stated that general support has
~ 6 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/34/ 19), part one, para. 27 (d),
and part two, para. 65.
87 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Plenary Meetings, 11th meeting,
paras. 106-122.

been expressed for the basic idea underlying the proposal
for the establishment of a University for Peace, 58
Considering that the report of the Secretary-General
identifies three principal questions relating to the implementation of the project which require consideration and
clarification, namely:
(a) The relation of the new institution to the United
Nations University,
(b) Possible duplication between the activities of
the University for Peace and those of other existing
institutions,
(c)

Provision of the necessary financial resources,
Approves the idea of establishing a University for
Peace as an international centre of higher learning for
post-graduate studies, research and the dissemination of
knowledge specifically aimed at training for peace, with
its headquarters in Costa Rica;
2. Decides to establish an international commission
which, in collaboration with the Government of Costa
Rica, shall prepare the organization, structure and setting in motion of the University for Peace, bearing in
mi nd th e following conditions:
(a) The University for Peace should be international
in character and should be a part of the system of the
United Nations University;
(b) The association which may link the University
for Peace with the United Nations University should be
determined by common agreement between the two
institutions;
(c) The University for Peace should be organized
and structured in such a manner as not to involve any
duplication of effort with other, similar international
institutions;
(d) It should be guaranteed that the constitution and
operation of the University for Peace will be financed
by voluntary contributions and should not have any
financial implications for the budget of the United Nations or the United Nations University;
3. Entrusts the Secretary-General with the task of
constituting the Commission on the University for Peace,
composed of eleven members, as follows:
(a) A representative of the Secretary-General;
(b) A representative of the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization;
(c) A representative of the Rector of the United
Nations University;
(d) A representative of the international academic
community, to be appointed by the Secretary-General in
consultation with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
(e) Five experts to be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral from candidates recommended by the Governments of Member States, taking into account the principle
of geographical distribution;
(f) Two representatives of the Government of
Costa Rica;
4. Requests the Commission on the University for
Peace to submit to the Secretary-General a report on its
findings, in accordance with paragraph 2 above, for
subsequent submission by him, together with his comments, to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
l.

104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
5 8 A/34/ 496, para.

14.
