-

UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TNIRT.Y-FIFTH

YEAR

2193’”

MEETING:

31 JANUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2193) . , . . . . , . . , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . , . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Malawi to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13764) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I........

1

SlPV.2193

81.1
:’

.,

,% :

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sf . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemenfs of the Officiul Records of the Security Coutwil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResolLrtions end
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

_-..

2193rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

31 January

(France).

they request to be invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in conformity
with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui
(Algeria), Mr. Clark (Nigeria)
and Mr. Kornatina
(Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2193)
1.

Adoption

2.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Chargk
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Malawi to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13764)
The meeting

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j?om French):
The first speaker is Mr. Tirivafi J. Kangai, representative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, whom
the Security Council, at its 2192nd meeting, invited
to participate in the discussion, pursuant to rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Adoption

1980, at 11.30 a.m.

4. Mr. KANGAI:
Mr. President, on behalf of the
Patriotic Front and the heroic people of Zimbabwe,
we wish to thank you and the members of the Security
Council for giving us this opportunity to appear before
this august body. We are happy that you have invited
us to participate in this discussion concerning the grave
situation in our country, Zimbabwe, in particular,
and southern Africa, in general.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Question con’cerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 25 January 1980 from the Charge!
d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent
Mission
of
Malawi to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13764)

5. It is regrettable that this series of meetings has
had to be convened at this point to take decisions on
the threat to peace and security caused by the ceasefire violations on the part of the United Kingdom,
the administering
Power in our country. It was our
hope that by now we should have been moving in
top gear as far as the implementation
of the Lancaster
House Agreement’ was concerned. The chances are
there, the end of the tunnel is near, and the will on
our part is there. It is well known that we have fought
for years in order to establish peace, security, selfdetermination
and national sovereignty for ourselves
in Zimbabwe.
We therefore signed the Lancaster
House Agreement on the clear understanding that what
we have been fighting for should be not only achieved
but also protected. That is why we have done everything we possibly could do to comply with that Agreement, despite its shortcomings.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fi’o177 French):
In accordance with the decision taken at the 2192nd
meeting, I invite the representatives of Botswana,
Cuba, Egypt, Liberia, Malawi, Mozambique, Somalia,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Viet Nam to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tlou
(Botswana), Mr. Ron KourI (Cuba), Mr. Ahdel Meguid
Dennis (Liberia),
Mr. Muwamba
@wpt),
Mr.
(Malawi),
Mr. Monteiro (Mozambique),
Mr. Sha$
(Somalia), Mr. Mkapa (United Republic of Tanzania)
and Mrs. Nguyen Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chambes.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I should like to inform the members of the Security
Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Algeria, Nigeria and Yugoslavia in which

6. For its part, the British Government has left no
stone unturned in its efforts to please, favour and
bolster the Smith-Muzorewa
clique.
1

-

nates against Patriotic Front forces in favour of
Muzorewa. If this continues, we are going to tell the
United Nations that it should take responsibility for
the decolonization
of our country. We should like to
point out here that, because of the war that we have
fought in Zimbabwe, we are now part of the decolonizing power there.

7. If today things are going well in Zimbabwe, why
have African ministers come here? Why have our
leaders told us not to go to Zimbabwe to campaign
but to participate in this debate? Why did our colleague from the Patriotic Front, Mr. Callistus Ndlovu,
fly in from Salisbury today? This is the concern that
is growing in our country. Things have to be corrected.
Elections have to take place, but we want things to
be done very well.

12. The net effect of the presence of South African
troops is that there is a serious threat to peace and
security in that region. We call, in very strong terms,
for their immediate withdrawal. They should be withdrawn quickly, under a specific form of international
supervision,

8. So it is unbelievable to hear some people saying
that things are going very well; that Africa is content.
Is that why there are distinguished ministers in this
chamber?
9. During the past few weeks we have observed
several violations of the Lancaster House Agreement
by Lord Soames, the British Governor now in Zimbabwe. The following are the most serious.

13. We were told last month, in London, that those
forces would withdraw as soon as the Governor
arrived. Two days ago we were told that they had
been withdrawn, We think that their withdrawal should
be verified by an international body. Was it not our
argument at Lancaster House that thousands of troops
would be needed to maintain law and order and to
enforce a cease-fire in Zimbabwe? If the British need
more forces to maintain law and order in Zimbabwe,
they should simply request more Commonwealth
forces. Surely many Commonwealth
countries represented here would be happy to contribute forces for
that purpose. Certainly our several thousands of
soldiers now in assembly areas would be happy to
guard the Zimbabwe side of Beit Bridge. Are we 10
believe that South African troops are now part and
parcel of the Commonwealth monitoriug forces?

10. First is the presence of South African troops,
the continued presence, deployment and use of South
African troops by Lord Soames, who is now administering Southern Rhodesia in preparation for the elections. The Patriotic Front, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the non-aligned movement and the whole
progressive world community have been shocked by
the flagrant use of racist South African troops. This
action by Britain, in collaboration
with the SmithMuzorewa clique and the South African racist regime,
stands condemned.
The British
Government
has
admitted the presence of what it calls a small contingent which is guarding the Beit Bridge. We shoufd
like to dispute that understatement
of the actual
number of South African troops in our country. Our,
information,
based on field observation, is that there
are at least 6,000 South African troops extensively
deployed in strategic areas throughout Zimbabwe. Our
observation
is that those highly equipped South
African troops fall into three main categories: those
which operate under South African command, wearing
South African uniforms, and are based mainly in the
southern part of Zimbabwe, including Beit Bridge; a
large number on secondment to the Rhodesian Army,
wearing Rhodesian uniforms, deployed throughout
Zimbabwe as pilots, policemen and so on; and a large
number of South African mercenaries who have been
there since the date of the unilateral declaration of
independence.

14. Secondly, there is the redeployment of RhodeSian troops and auxiliaries. Lord Soames has redeployed Rhodesian troops, mercenaries and the private
army of Muzorewa. That private army is known in
Rhodesian military jargon as the “auxiliaries”.
Lord
Soames redeployed those troops in areas previously
liberated by Patriotic Front forces. Those auxiliaries
are terrorizing civilians and attempting to coerce them
into supporting
Muzorewa. That action by Lord
Soames is a clear violation of the Lancaster House
Agreement which specifies that the Rhodesian troops
should be confined to their bases. The auxiliaries
should have been disbanded, because they are the
personal army of an individual.

1
’

:
i
!
’

15. The British Government should order the return
of Rhodesian
troops to their bases and the disbandment of the auxiliaries and all mercenaries in
our country. We request the Security Council to see
that this is done immediately,
so that all political
parties can campaign freely, without threat of death
at the hands of those unruly auxiliary bandits.

11. We should observe that the presence of those
troops is used to manipulate the political environment in favour of Bishop Muzorewa and the white
community. Their presence has created an atmosphere
in which free and fair elections are impossible. Intervention by South Africa in Zimbabwe, in the event of
our victory-which
is sure-is
almost certain. The
British Government
has shown its true coIours by
extending an invitation to South African troops and by
deploying them to surround the Patriotic Front forces.,
The British Government has demonstrated
that it is
not an impartial administrator
but openly discrimi-

16. Yesterday
the representative
of the British
Government
told this body [2192nd jneeting] that he
firmly rejected the statement that there had been ceasefire violations
relating to the implementation
of the
Agreement. In the same breath he told this body that
the auxiliaries were part of the Rhodesian forces and
‘2

L

There is a change going on in our country, and they
are going to be part of our community.
They had to
give up their privileges simply because of the war that
we were fighting. So we should like to disagree here
with our friend, Sir Anthony Parsons, that Muzorewa
and the white community gave up a lot by signing the
Agreement. They did so because of the war that we
fought, the war to bring peace and security in our
country and national sovereignty.

that they were deployed to help the police contain
breaches of the cease-fire. The auxiliaries were not
supposed to monitor cease-fire violations; they are a
private army, the personal property of Bishop
Muzorewa,
ill-trained,
politically
motivated
thugs
who, according to the Agreement, should be confined
and eventually disbanded.
17. Yesterday we were also told that Rhodesian
forces were now monitoring
the cease-fire. This
concern is the basis of our request for the convening
of the Security Council. The Rhodesian forces, which
include large numbers of foreign mercenaries, should
be confined to their bases and should themselves
be monitored by Commonwealth forces. That is what
the Agreement calls for. The British Government has
thus admitted that it has deployed Rhodesian forces,
including
mercenaries and auxiliaries,
to monitor
Patriotic Front forces. Why, then, does the British
Government reject the allegation of the African Group?
That is a very serious breach of the Agreement by the
administering
Power which must be corrected immediately.

22. The British media and those of their allies have
teamed up with Lord Soames in putting the blame on
our forces for whatever goes wrong in Zimbabwe
today. The idea has been and still is to paint our
forces as the “bad guys” and those of Muzorewa and
South Africa as the “good guys”.
23. Yesterday
[ibid.]
there was an attack by
Sir Anthony Parsons on our liberation movement.
That is nothing new. Most of the members of the
Council remember the detente in southern Africa
during 1974 and 1975. Our liberation movement was
singled out and attacked, harassed and almost wiped
out by the British and their allies. That is nothing new;
we are used to it; and if this continues, we shall take
stock. Of course we are going to play a major role in
the new Government in Zimbabwe. We want good
relations with our friends in the United Kingdom,
but, if this continues, we shall have to think otherwise.

18. Yesterday we were told, too, that South African
forces had withdrawn from Beit Bridge. We consider
that to be a smokescreen, a cover-up for decades of
involvement in our country.
19. Thirdly, there is the unequal treatment of the
Patriotic Front forces. The Lancaster House Agreement clearly specifies that the British Governor will
treat the Rhodesian forces and the Patriotic Front
forces equally. We noted earlier that he has redeployed
the Rhodesian forces and reinforced them with South
African forces, Muzorewa’s
auxiliaries or private
army, and mercenaries. That is a gross violation of
the Agreement,
which places the Patriotic
Front
forces at the mercy of their opponents. That type of
bias has spoiled the political environment.
It creates
a situation which is bound to threaten the cease-fire.
We request that the Governor rectify this situation
before it is too late. We should also like to point out
that, were it not for the heroic battles fought by the
Patriotic Front forces, the battles which pushed Smith
and Muzorewa against the wall, the British would not
have returned to Zimbabwe today. Our forces should
be treated with the honour they deserve.

24. During the Lancaster House talks, the British
and the Rhodesian regimes estimated that the Patriotic
Front had only 12,000 to 15,000 men. We have, however, been able to assemble over 23,000 men. Was
that not good faith on our part? Scattered fighting
broke out because our forces came into contact with
auxiliaries and Rhodesian forces which should have
disengaged before our forces could move to their
assembly points. Our forces should not be asked to
remain in the assembly areas if the auxiliaries and
Rhodesian troops are not confined to their bases. Our
forces should not be asked to disengage and to’remain
in their bases if South African troops are in our country
extensively. We object to that.
25. Fourthly,
there is the Governor’s bias in the
campaign. The return of Patriotic Front co-leaders
Robert Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo was delayed
purposely in order to give Muzorewa a head start in
the campaign. We view that very seriously, because the
Governor is required to be impartial.
The reasons
given in each case were not sound at all.

Muzorewa did not give up much by signing the
Lancaster House Agreement. He had failed to deliver
the goods. Before the internal settlement was signed,
Muzorewa promised the people of Zimbabwe and the
world that he would deliver a cease-fire, that sanctions
would be lifted and that there would be international
recognition. None of those promises was fulfilled, and
the people continued to support the Patriotic Front.
So no credit whatsoever should be given to Muzorewa
for signing the Agreement. He failed, and he is a thing
of the past, if he ever was anything at all.
20.

26. We are still recognized by OAU, by the nonaligned movement and the United Nations and all its
agencies. But yesterday we heard Sir Anthony Parsons
trying to stop us from speaking here. We should
like to remind him that we are not at Lancaster House
or in Salisbury;
we are in the Security Council
chamber.

21. The white community in our country did not give
up much by signing the Lancaster House Agreement.
3

27. We should like further to inform the Council
that Lord Soames has refused entry to our 200 cars
and vehicles from Mozambique. They are now at the
border ‘without permission to enter Zimbabwe. He
demanded that we should pay customs duties. We are
informed that, although we have paid those customs
duties, the Governor continues to impose more charges
each time we pay that money. That is a deliberate
attempt to deny us transportation for effective campaigning. Our organization feels very strongly on this
point. On the other hand, hundreds of new cars for
Muzarewa have just flooded in from South Africa.
Lord Soames has also refused the distribution of our
campaign literature and, on, top of that, our new office
in Salisbury has not been supplied with telephone
services. We have been there for almost a month
now, and we still do not have telephone services. How
can we reach the people out there and in other cities,
how can we campaign, if we are denied telephone
services? Delays are occasioned on purpose. Sometimes this is a result of decisions taken by the Rhodesian bureaucrats and endorsed by Lord Soames,
and nothing is done. We demand that our vehicles at
the Mozambican border be allowed entry immediately.

those gross violations, but no corrective measures
have been taken. The situation continues to deteriorate, threatening the cease-fire, peace and security.
We are quite confident that, if elections are conducted
freely and fairly, the people will participate and choose
their Government democratically.
We are afraid that
the British seem to feel that the people’s choice will
not coincide with their own interests. The people’s
choices have of course drawn the largest crowds in
the past three weeks. It is very clear that we are going
to win the elections; the signals are there. The British
did not know that our liberation movement had support in the country, and now they are in a dilemma.
32. We recommend to the Security Council that
corrective measures should be taken immediately
under international supervision. The Patriotic Front is
willing to co-operate in rescuing the Agreement from
collapse. Those measures should include: first, immediate verification of the withdrawal of South African
troops and mercenaries; secondly, confinement of
Rhodesian troops to their barracks; thirdly, disbandment of auxiliaries; fourthly, termination of the
unequal treatment of forces; fifthly, an end to partiality
in the administration of the country and the treatment
of different political parties; sixthly, speedy return of
refugees and an end to their harassment, searches and
humiliating
screening; and seventhly, an end to emergency regulations.

28. Fifthly, there is the delay in the return of refugees. The speedy return of all refugees from neighbouring .countries is being deliberately frustrated for
political reasons, because it is assumed that refugees
will vote for the Patriotic Front rather than for the
Bishop. No effort is made to facilitate the return of
refugees, despite the clearly stated position that they
need to be repatriated as soon as possible. We request
that the Security Council should see to it that the
British Government commits itself to facilitating the
return of refugees who are victims of a situation
beyond their control.

33. The Patriotic Front has observed that the Rhodesian Civil Service, taking directives from Ian Smith,
Muzorewa and Peter Walls, is still running the show in
Zimbabwe. At the beginning, I did mention that there
were short-comings in the Lancaster House Agreement. Now we see that the Governor is using the
instruments that Ian Smith had used-the civil service,
the judiciary,
the army and now the police. Lord
Soames seems either helpless or co-operative. We
place the responsibility for correcting the situation on
the shoulders of the British Government. Since the
British Government has not corrected the situation
for over four weeks now and actually demonstrated
partiality
by retaining foreign troops, we have no
choice but to ask the Security Council to take the
necessary measures.

29. Sixthly, there is the state of emergency and martial law. We wonder why the Governor saw fit to extend
the state of emergency for another six months, when
he knows that he is supposed to leave shortly after
theelections
are held? He is using emergency powers
to detain large numbers of our supporters without
trial. If that continues unchecked, we can assure the
Council that thousands of Patriotic Front supporters
will be behind bars before the election dates.
30. We agreed at Lancaster House that all political
prisoners should be released so that they, too, could
participate in. the political process. We regret to inform
this body that there are still several hundred Patriotic
Front- political prisoners being detained, throughout
Zimbabwe. Just before this meeting began, wereceived
a message to the effect that others were detained
yes,terday. ‘It,is wei known to us that Zimbabweans
who ,had committed even criminal offences while in
Zambia and Mozambique have since been released.

34. It is our hope that the members of the Council
will not fail the heroic people of Zimbabwe, which
suffered for 75 years under British racist domination
and 15 years of repression under an illegal minority
regime. We feel that we are being sold down the
river by the administering Power, which has added
more fire by inviting the racist South African troops
to our motherland. Time is of the essence. If corrective
measures are not taken soon, we shall not have any
alternative besides that of continuing the armed liberation struggle.

31. The Patriotic Front has adhered to the letter and
the spirit of the Lancaster House Agreement. We have
drawn the attention of the British Government
to

35. We have struggled for years since the introduction of colonialism in our country. We are prepared
to struggle for more years to come. We should like to
4

say that our mighty fighters have not been trained to
fight only until the beginning of this year. They have
been trained to fight as long as necessary-for 50 years
or for 100 years, if corrective measures are not taken.

37. Mr. LUSAKA
(Zambia): We are meeting today
to consider a particularly
serious situation that has
developed in Southern Rhodesia since the arrival of the
British Governor
Lord Soames in that Territory.
.4dmittedly, his arrival signalled the return of the illegal
rkgime to legality. But Rhodesia can only become
independent Zimbabwe if the British Government has
the political will to ensure that the Lancaster House
Agreement’
is implemented fully and faithfully. This
meeting is indeed in accord with Security Council
resolution 460 (1979), by which the Council decided
to keep the situation in Southern Rhodesia under
constant review until the Territory attained full independence under genuine majority rule.
38. Resolution
460 (1979) took into account the
negotiations that had taken place at Lancaster House
on the independence of Southern Rhodesia. Shortly
thereafter an agreement was signed by all parties to
the conflict.
39. It is an accepted fact that the Lancaster House
Conference was itself the direct result of the war of
national liberation which the heroic people of Zimbabwe, through the Patriotic Front, had relentlessly
waged against settler racist domination.
Contrary to
British propaganda,
the capitulation
by the illegal
rigime was not the result of Muzorewa’s alleged
magnanimity.
Neither was it a result of a voluntary
change of heart by the settler racists. Victory has
indeed resulted from the armed struggle prosecuted
by the Patriotic Front. It should be remembered that
over the years, several attempts to resolve the Rhodesian problem,
on the HMS Tiger, on the HMS
Feo&ss, at Malta, at Geneva or through the AngloAmerican shuttle diplomacy, had all failed to yield any
fruitful, desirable results.
40. In their just struggle against colonialism
and
settler racist rule, the people of Zimbabwe received
the support of OAU and the front-line States, the nonaligned movement, the United Nations and progressive members of the international
community.
The
international
community,
through those bodies,
refused to accept anything that was aimed at depriving
the people of Zimbabwe of their right to genuine
independence
or their right to choose their own
leaders on the basis of free and fair elections. ACcordingly,
the international
community
steadfastly
refused to accord any recognition to successive SOcalled internal settlements which were concocted in
Southern Rhodesia after the unilateral declaration of
independence in the then rebel colony. The decision
not to recognize the Muzorewa-Smith
regime played
a very important role in thwarting the evil intentions

of those opposed to the establishment
independent Zimbabwe.

of a genuinely

41. In Zambia’s view, if the British Governor, and
therefore the British Government, had observed and
adhered to the terms of the Lancaster House Agreement, the prevailing tension would have been averted.
Indeed, this meeting of the Security Council woulc!
not have been convened.
42. Paragraph 2 of the pre-independence
arrangements, contained in annex D to the report of the Constitutional Conference on Southern Rhodesia’ held at
Lancaster House from September to December 1979,
reads as follows:
“Rhodesia continues to be part of Her Majesty’s
dominions, The Government and Parliament of the
United Kingdom have responsibility and jurisdiction
for and in respect of it. It is for the British Parliament to grant legal independence to Rhodesia.”
This is a restatement of Britain’s recognized international responsibility as the legal administering Power
with power over Rhodesia. In addition, the Agreement provided that an Order in Council, to be promulgated by the British Government,
was to appoint
a Governor on whom it would confer, and in fact did
confer, executive and legislative authority. This’ pro-,”
vision was indeed fulfilled by the British Government.
The Order in Council requires the Governor to ,act
according to the instructions given to him’ by the
British Government
for the fulfillment
of his task:
There is no doubt, therefore, as to the responsibility
that Britain is expected to discharge in Southern Rhodesia. We are only judging the performance of the
British Governor by using a yardstick which the
appointing authorities set for themselves.
43. As the Council is aware, the British Governor,
acting on instructions from the British Government,,
had allowed the continued presence of South African.
troops inside Rhodesian territory. That was contrary.
to the Lancaster House Agreement, which stipulated,,
infer &a, that South African and mercenary %forces
were to be withdrawn from the Territory as soon as
the Governor arrived in Southern Rhodesia. Security
Council resolution 460 (1979), on Rhodesia; also urged
the United Kingdom
to ensure the removal from
Rhodesia of South African and mercenary forces.
During the talks in London, the British Government
admitted that there were some South African troops
in Rhodesia. The British Commander
of the Commonwealth Monitoring
Force in Salisbury, a MajorGeneral Acland, did in fact place the number at just
under a thousand. Certainly the British wanted to
underplay the impact of the presence of South African
and mercenary forces. The British should know that
the presence of even one South African soldier or
mercenary in Southern Rhodesia raises eyebrows
among concerned members of the international
community who favour genuine independence for Zimbabwe.

pendence to South Africa by Britain in 1910, and all
the problems now being faced by the international
community.
Let the Council be reminded of the
British action in Palestine, when the latter was a
Mandated Territory, and the problems being faced
in the area today. Perhaps unwittingly, the Americans
have inherited an unpalatable situation from an ally
with which they enjoy a special relationship.

44. The presence of South African troops, which
obviously are foreign in Rhodesia, is not compatible
with the publicly stated British position that the United
Kingdom has assumed power in the Territory. If the
British are to seek help in administering the transitional
period in Southern Rhodesia, they would be well
advised to seek that help from either the Commonwealth of Nations or the United Nations. They were
advised accordingly
during the Lancaster House
talks. The fact of the matter is that South African
forces have no business whatsoever in either Rhodesia or Namibia, or anywhere else outside the confines of South Africa.

50. South Africa continues to meddle in the affairs of
Zimbabwe in more ways than one. They are spending
millions of dollars and supplying material in support
of the puppet candidates. As we are aware, South
Africa aided and abetted the Smith-Muzorewa rt?gime
in its wars of aggression against the people of Zimbabwe and the front-line States for several years.
South African forces and mercenaries today remain
inside Rhodesia, beyond the Beit Bridge. They are
also reported to have been deployed by the Governor
to border areas for patrol purposes.

45. Why did the British Government find it necessary
to issue a joint statement with the South African
Government
to the effect that South African troops
would be withdrawn from the Rhodesian side of the
Beit Bridge as soon as Rhodesian forces were available
to guard that bridge? As far as we know, the Lancaster
House Agreement does not in any way provide that
the United Kingdom and South Africa will administer
Southern Rhodesia jointly. In any case, it is reported
that South Africa itself has said that to guard the
bridge, one does not have to sit on the bridge itself.
Zambia is therefore perplexed and puzzled by the
British reasoning and indeed by the timing of the
announcement.

51. South Africa has no right to arrogate to itself
the responsibility
for determining the form of government in the neighbouring independent African States.
The Pretoria rkgime should not rely on the principle
of invincibility
on account of its military strength.
South Africa should not forget the humiliating defeat
that its forces suffered a few years ago, when it chose
to intervene militarily in the affairs of another State.
Britain must therefore ensure that South Africa accepts
the outcome of a free and fair election in Southern
Rhodesia. The international community must remain
vigilant in ensuring that South Africa does not again
intervene in the affairs of the British colony of Rhodesia or in an independent Zimbabwe after its forces and
mercenaries
have been expelled from Rhodesian
territory.

46. Yesterday’s
announcement
by the British
Government that South African troops had been withdrawn was meant to take the steam out of the deliberations of the Security Council. My delegation views
that announcement just as we viewed the announcement of the British Government in the mid-1960s that
sanctions would bring down the illegal Smith rkgime
in a matter of weeks rather than months. And, of
course, in its wisdom the Council should know what it
means.

52. The British Governor also continues to violate
the terms of the Lancaster House Agreement in respect
of the status of the military forces inside Rhodesia.
Much has already been said about this aspect, and my
task is therefore to highlight the dangers inherent
in the British attitude. It was the understanding that
all the armed forces in Rhodesia would be accorded
equal status. Yet, while the forces of the Patriotic
Front have been confined to assembly points, those of
Rhodesia continue to be deployed and used by the
Governor instead of the police units stipulated in the
Agreement. Furthermore, there are other devices for
monitoring
the cease-fire, which Rhodesian forces are
not required to police, since those blood-thirsty forces
are well-known outlaws who have been fighting against
the people of Zimbabwe for many years. The misuse
of the forces is therefore a matter of serious concern,
as it has the effect of further eroding the carefully
worked out Agreement.
The Governor should be
working to defuse the situation and not to inflame the
tensions. The same can be said of the notorious
private armies or the auxiliary forces that belong to
Muzorewa.

47. The implications
of this episode of the South
African presence in Southern Rhodesia must be viewed
in a broader international
perspective. If it is not
checked fully, it can have serious consequences for
the future of the region. We in Zambia can at least
humbly claim that we know the mentality of the South
African Boer, who was, regrettably, highly praised by
the British Government after the joint announcement
on the so-called South African troop withdrawal.
48. The international
community
must be sensitive
to the numerous utterances that have been made by
the leaders of npnrtheid
in Pretoria,
who have
threatened to intervene in Zimbabwe should the outcome of the forthcoming elections not accord with
South Africa’s expectations. Who are they, anyway,
to dictate the outcome of the elections in Zimbabwe?
49. Against this background, we view with suspicion
the motives of the British and South African Governments in this matter. By way of a slight digression,
let the Council be reminded of the granting of inde6

53. Contrary to the provisions of the Lancaster
House Agreement, the Governor has set the auxiliaries
loose to harass, molest and even kill people who support the Patriotic Front. The auxiliaries have also
been allowed to occupy areas that were previously
occupied by Patriotic Front forces. The auxiliaries
are in effect used as armed thugs in the frantic but
vain campaign against the Patriotic Front, to harass
and intimidate people and make them vote otherwise.
The Governor should ensure that all forces are confined
to base in the interests of free and fair elections and
above all in the interests of peace in Zimbabwe.

the arrival in Rhodesia of the British Governor leaves
much to be desired. It is self-evident that a number of
violations of the Lancaster House Agreement have
been committed by the British Government
through
the instructions which have been, and still are being,
given to Lord Soames. I want to emphasize the fact
that Lord Soames acts under the instructions of the
British Government,
as stipulated in the Lancaster
House Agreement. There have been other serious
violations in the area of the human rights of Zimbabweans and an obvious bias against the Patriotic
Front on the part of the administering
Power in its
pronouncements,
in its omissions and in its actions.
Only a few can be tabulated at this stage.

54. Paragraph 4 of the pre-independence
arrangements, contained in annex D to the report of the Constitutional Conference on Rhodesia,’ reads in part as
follows:

58. First, the British Government has created difficult conditions for the return to Southern Rhodesia
of Zimbabwean refugees, who inchide men, women
and children. Many of these Rhodesian refugees are
still unable to go back to Southern Rhodesia to participate in the elections in order to bring in a Government of their choice.

“

The question now at issue is who is to form
the future independence Government. The British
Government’s
position is that this must be decided
by the people of Zimbabwe, in free and fair elections in which all parties will be able to take part
on equal terms.”
a..

59. The front-line countries from which the refugees
are being repatriated have complained to the British
authorities, that not enough is being done to facilitate
the return of refugees and exiles. These people are
Zimbabwean nationals, and they have the inalienable
right to return to their homeland.

55. The British Government’s thinking on the issue,
as set out in the Agreement, is the same as that of
the international
community,
which was set out in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 1960, on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples. My country is fully committed to supporting
any measures that are aimed at the implementation
of resolution 1514 (XV) in all its aspects. We believe
that it is through this process that the international
community
could bring peace to Southern Rhodesia
and to the region of southern Africa as a whole.

60. In Zambia, for instance, the first phase in the
programme for the return of refugees to Zimbabwe
involves some 14,000 refugees and exiles. The programme has, however, not been started, because
the British authorities in Salisbury have been giving
lame excuses about the inadequacy of reception
centres. They have, for example, put the rate of return
at 3,000 persons a week, a rate that will not allow all
the refugees to return in time for the elections,
especially since the exercise of repatriation has not yet
been put in motion. Zambia has been ready to transport the refugees by road at Chirundu, Victoria Falls
and Kariba and also by rail and by air. However,
the British authorities in Salisbury are insisting. that
refugees should go to the small coal-mining town of
Wankie instead of to Bulawayo and Salisbury. The
British strategy obviously
relies on the fact that
Wankie, being a smaller place, can only take a limited
number of refugees. The objective, therefore, is to
ensure that as few refugees as possible return at this
time and that the majority of refugees have a slim
chance of participating in pre-independence
elections.
The British authorities have also insisted on unnecessary security checks on refugees returning to Rhodesia and on flimsy excuses such as the alleged cholera
outbreak in countries where the World Health Organization has not declared the existence of cholera, or
the alleged lack of water supplies in areas where this
has never been a problem before. In our view, it is
within the power of the British authorities,
with
the assistance of the ever willing United Nations High
Commissioner
for Refugees, to expedite the return of
Zimbabwean refugees and exiles.

56. It should be recalled that the British Government’s representatives had expressed strong views in
their pronouncements
during the thirty-fourth session
of the General Assembly on their Government’s
commitment
to bring about an internationally
acceptable solution to the problem of Southern Rhodesia.
It was against this background that we assumed that
the British
Government had worked hard towards
ensuring the successful conclusion of the Lancaster
House negotiations
on Rhodesia. The Lancaster
House Agreement sought to give a semblance of free
and fair elections, but the gross violations during the
Lancaster House talks and after the signing of the
Agreement contradict the principles previously stated.
First, the Governor was sent to Salisbury before the
signing of the Agreement and without consultation
with the Patriotic Front. Secondly, sanctions were
lifted unilaterally
by the United Kingdom and some
of its allies before the Agreement was signed. Thirdly,
the Governor set the date for the registration of voters
without prior consultation with all the parties concerned.
57. It is also regrettable that available information
on the breaches of the terms of the Agreement since
7

informed about the incident, but nothing has been
done to release him. On the same day in the Kandani,
Chihota and Mahusekwa liberated areas, known as Ff
and F2, auxiliaries
brutally committed
atrocities
against the local people. Six youngsters were abducted,
two from Mahusekwa and the rest from Mhondoro.
Their fate is unknown. In the Delta area, a man was
bayoneted in the stomach and his legs cut because he
was suspected of being a guerrilla.

61. Secondly, the British Government, through Lord
Soames, has deliberately failed to release thousands
of political prisoners detained by the Smith-Muzorewa
regime. The British Government has instead extended
for a further six months the state of emergency and
has maintained
martial law. All these measures are
making it difficult for all the people of Zimbabwe to
participate
fully in the electoral process. There is
absolutely no justification for such actions being taken
at a time when the war waged by Patriotic Front
forces, now in assembly points, has been halted. Why,
if I may ask, did Lord Soames extend for a further
six months the state of emergency when the elections
are due in less than six months?

68. Ninthly,
on 8 January, two whites of the Rhodesian forces, together with auxiliaries, shot a youth
in the legs. On the same day, in the Chigodora area,
auxiliaries
were propagating Muzorewa slogans and
saying that the terrorists had been defeated and that
people should vote for Muzorewa. At Manica bridge,
Rhodesian forces and auxiliaries occupied the area
and started
harassing people
and propagating
Muzorewa slogans. Again on 8 January, in Zimunya
area, Madzimbewa,
Gombakomba
and Gweshe
schools could not open because of the activities of
the auxiliaries; in the Dora Reserve, Rhodesian security forces shot cattle belonging to the local people,
while in Rusape, Rhodesian forces and auxiliaries
intimidated
the masses.

62. Thirdly, the Governor appears to have allowed
Muzorewa to make seditious statements publicly. For
example, Muzorewa has on many occasions threatened
that there would be civil war in Rhodesia if the Patriotic Front won the elections. Thus far, Muzorewa
has not been rebuked by the Governor for his utterances. Besides, it is reported that many Rhodesian
blacks and whites who enjoy the sympathy of Governor Soames have not been disarmed. How can the
British Government justify these actions as being in
line with its professed goal of conducting free and
fair: elections’?

69. Tenthly,
on 9 January, 27 freedom fighters
were detained after being disarmed at Rusape,
Inyazura and Headlands. They were supposed to
be taken to the assembly points. On the same day
auxiliaries and Rhodesian forces stopped and disarmed
freedom fighters at F and F4 liberated areas on the
Governor’s
orders. Particulars were taken of the
freedom fighters and they were later taken to the
Rhodesian forces camp and asked to conform to the
rules of the old Muzorewa amnesty. Further, branch
chairmen and secretaries of ZANU were eliminated
and freedom fighters were forced to join the party of
Muzorewa or face detention.

63. Fourthly, on 1 January 1980, in the Chitunha
and Maembure areas, a civilian was shot dead and his
wife seriously wounded. In the same areas, a Rhodesian security aircraft dropped pamphlets praising
the auxiliaries and saying “We are back. Vote for us
‘!
and not for the terrorists”.
64. Fifthly, on 4 January, reports were confirmed
that an exchange of gunfire in the Mtoko and Nanhunga
camps was started by a group called “Trekker”,
which poses as forces of the Zimbabwe African
National Liberation Army (ZANLA). This happened
in the Zone Dl liberated area.

70. Eleventhly,
on 10 January, auxiliaries were
reported camping at various places in the Gutu area.
Nine people were arrested.

65. Sixthly, on 5 January at 1000 hours, Rhodesian
forces occupied areas evacuated by ZANLA forces
in F, Fl, F2, F3 and F4 liberated areas. At 1040 hours,
the same day, in Fort Victoria, Rhodesian security
forces were deployed in various areas in Makombe
and Mushana mission. On the same day, it was confirmed that auxiliaries were intimidating
the villagers
in Nyamahubogo.
Activity by security forces was
confirmed
in .Rushinga, Darwin and Chatungama,
which are protected villages. The liberated. areas of
Kairo and Karuya in A, B and C areas were also
occupied by *security forces.

71. Twelfthly, on 11 January, the Governor signed
an order extending the controversial state of emergency until 26 July.
72. Thirteenthly,
on 21 January, the Rhodesian
Information
Ministry issued a booklet entitledZANU’s
PNI.I.V Policy, which was intended to persuade voters
not to choose ZANU-Patriotic
Front.

66. Seventhly, on 6 January, auxiliaries arrested
Mr. Chimwanda, Vice-Chairman of the Zaka district.
In Shabani,
police were confiscating
Zimbabwe
African National Union (ZANU) T-shirts and auxiliaries were harrassing,people.

73. Fourteenthly, on 25 January, the Government of
Botswana complained of the seizure of Botswana
trucks and the arrest of Botswana Government drivers,
which hindered the return of refugees. Refugees Were
screened at reception centres. Systematic press and
radio propaganda was stepped up to discredit the
Patriotic Front.

67. Eigbthly,
on 7 January, auxiliaries
arrested
Mr. Manyika Bikita and the Bikita police station was

74. Fifteenthly, on 28 January, three days ago, Rhodesian authorities objected to the airlift of 5,000 refu8

gees from Ndola in Zambia to Salisbury, on the excuse
that the number was too large and that Salisbury
had no adequate logistical facilities.

diately; that all the Rhodesian forces and auxiliary
forces are confined to base; that equal treatment is
accorded to the Rhodesian and Patriotic Front forces;
that Zimbabwean refugees and exiles are allowed
speedy and unimpeded return to Rhodesia; that the
unnecessary and arbitrary state of emergency and
martial law are revoked immediately;
and, indeed,
that all political prisoners are released to enable them
to participate in the forthcoming elections. These conditions should be scrupulously observed to ensure
free and fair elections and eventually international
recognition of any Government
that emerges from
such elections.

75. One wonders that the British response would be
to all these obvious breaches.’
76. My delegation wishes to place on record its
appreciation of and praise for the Patriotic Front for
the co-operative spirit with which it has adhered to
the Lancaster House Agreement under very difficult
conditions. The Patriotic Front has done whatever
was possible to facilitate the implementation
of the
Agreement in good faith. Indeed, the leadership of
the Patriotic
Front has demonstrated
remarkable
statesmanship. The Patriotic Front has now put down
its guns and is eager to participate in the elections,
contrary to what its adversaries had wished. The
people of Zimbabwe should now exercise their right
to choose their leaders. For our part, we want this
process of elections to be free, fair and democratic.
Let the British be seen to be allowing other people
to exercise their democratic rights and not to be
obstructing the democratic process. That is our plea.
We hope it will be heeded, in the interests of all.

80. In other words, we believe that, if taken, these
measures would contribute greatly to ensuring the
effective implementation
of the Lancaster House
Agreement. We want a free and independent Zimbabwe
that is born peacefully.
81.

Mr.

FLORIN
(German Democratic
Republic)
jkom Russion):
The delegation of the
German Democratic Republic wishes to express its
whole-hearted sympathy with the raising by the African
Group of the question referred to in document
S/13764. That question has been very convincingly set
forth by representatives of African States. We share
the serious concern of the members of OAU at the
explosive situation in Southern Rhodesia, the persistence of which has created a threat to international
peace and security.

(interprrtcrtion

77. Zambia, together with the other African States,
has always been ready to co-operate in the full and
successful implementation
of the Lancaster House
Agreement. Our suggestions are therefore being made
in a constructive spirit, because we want to see peace
in Zimbabwe. We want some of these conditions for
peace to take root now. In this regard, Britain as the
Administering
Authority has a key role in the matter.
There is still time to prevent disaster. That could be
done if the British Government had the political will
to do ‘it. We wish to remind it of the spirit of the
Meeting of Commonwealth
Heads of Government,
held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August 1979, which contributed to the Lancaster House meeting. We want
the British Government to be impartial and fair. The
Security Council should ensure that conditions are
created for free and fair elections to be held in Zimbabwe. Only then can permanent peace come to that
troubled country and region.

82. The straightforward foreign colonial domination
of Southern Rhodesia was replaced by the Smith racist
rkgime, which, in turn, was replaced by a puppet
rggime. However, the armed struggle of the Ziminternational
support for that
babwean patriots,
struggle and, last but not least, the actions of the anticolonialist States in the United Nations forced those
concerned to hold talks that were to create the conditions for solving the problem of Southern Rhodesia in
a way that would promote a free and independent
,,j
Zimbabwe.
83, The representatives of the Patriotic Front displayed a sense of high responsibility,
a willingness
for accommodation
and a readiness to compromise.
They acted constructively
in order to achieve agreement. It is precisely the repres’entatives of that movement who today are faithful to the Agreement and
who, despite the many difficulties
they have faced,
are doing everything they can to bring about the
peaceful liberation of the country. Nevertheless, their
African brothers find themselves compelled to turn to
the Security Council-and
they have excellent grounds
,,‘,I
,m
for doing so.

78. Finally, I wish to appeal to the Security Council
to prevail upon the Government of the United Kingdom to abide by the provisions of the Lancaster
House Agreement and to take corrective measures
which will ensure that the forthcoming elections are
fair and free and thus bring &bout a genuinely independent people’s Government.
The Council should
reiterate its calls contained in paragraphs 6 and 7 of
its resolution 460 (1979). It should also call upon the
British Government
as the administering
Power in
Rhodesia to take appropriate measures to contain the
situation, because it has to succeed in this mission.

84. During the thirty-fourth
session of the General
Assembly, many delegations,
including that of the
German Democratic Republic, were already pointing to
the dangers threalening the free exercise bjl the people
of Zimbabwe of their right to Self-determiiation,
due

79. To recapitulate: the British Government should
ensure that all South African troops and foreign mercenaries in Rhodesia are withdrawn sind expelled imme9

‘stances for the Zimbabwean
they gain a hearing.

to imperialistic
manoeuvres.
Imperialistic
circles
continue to pursue the goal of a neo-colonialist settlement, by subjecting Zimbabwe to their own economic
interests and strategic plans, aimed against the African
peoples that have achieved their independence by
armed struggle. Behind the smokescreen of the exacerbation of the international
situation, and through a
campaign of hysteria and the spirit of the cold war,
artificially
instigated by the foes of d6tente among
imperialistic
circles, we see attempts being made right
now to switch Southern Rhodesia on to a neocolonialist
track. The state of emergency has been
prolonged for another six months. However, elections
are to take place in Rhodesia within a few weeks.
The date for those elections has been deliberately
advanced so as to create additional obstacles and
impediments
for the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe.
Furthermore,
the neo-colonialist
collaborationists
have long since embarked upon their official electoral
campaign-a
campaign which, we learn from the
Western press, is being financed by considerable
sums of money from South African and Western
sources. More than 200,000 refugees are still waiting to
return to Southern Rhodesia. Thousands of political
detainees of the former racist regime are, as we have
heard here, still languishing in the gaols of Southern
Rhodesia. We have learned with great concern that
there is an intention to transfer to the South African
crpcrrfheitl regime the freedom fighters of the African
National Congress of South Africa, who for years
have been in the gaols and dungeons of Southern
Rhodesia. The German Democratic Republic demands
that these persons-and,
indeed, all the other political
detainees-be
immediately released.

patriots

to ensure that

87. Furthermore,
it is a fact that there are South
African troops in the Territory of Southern Rhodesia,
despite the fact that Security Council resolution 460
(1979) clearly and unambiguously
called for the withdrawal of those troops-a withdrawal that was, furthermore, promised. Representatives of African countries who have spoken in this debate have given us
detailed information about the strength of these troops
and their weapons. Now, these are not foreign soldiers; they are special units of the racist rigime whose
policy of crpcwtheici inside the country and whose
aggressive external policy have been repeatedly condemned in this body as a serious threat to international
peace and security.
88. The South African crpcrrtheid rCgime not only
claims the right to intervene militarily in large areas of
the African continent, but has repeatedly attempted
to put these claims into effect. It is precisely South
Africa which for 14 years has played a decisive role
in maintaining the racist minority rkgime in Southern
Rhodesia.
89. Nor can we forget that this South African rCgime
is able to continue its aggressive policy solely because
of the support it receives from imperialistic
circles,
and it is only the repeated use of the veto by certain
permanent members of the Security Council that has
prevented the application of broadly based sanctions
against South Africa, despite the fact that those
sanctions have been called for by an overwhelming
majority of States Members of the United Nations.
The German Democratic Republic maintains the view
that serious measures must be taken against the rrpnrlheid rkgime, which constitutes a threat to peace under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,

85. The racist troops of the former white minority
16gime have been allowed to leave their strongpoints
and to occupy regions liberated by the Patriotic Front
forces. Those troops, guilty of murdering thousands of
innocent men, women and children in Southern Rhodesia and neighbouring countries-Zambia,
Mozambique, Botswana and Angola-are
being used today,
as was pointed out by the Minister of State of Mozambique [2/92ntl rneetirlg], for the purpose of what is
officially described as maintaining
“order and security”. Among them are thousands of foreign mercenaries. At the side of the racist army units and police
units, auxiliary troops of the former puppet rkgime are
operating-troops
that are terrorizing and intimidating
the population
of Zimbabwe
and conducting
an
electoral campaign in their own way. The racists and
their puppets are still freely using the old machinery
of oppression.

90. We should like to ask why South Africa is not
given a direct ultimatum immediately
and unconditionally
to withdraw its troops from all parts of
Southern Rhodesia. After all, the ultimatum
to the
Patriotic Front was very swiftly put into effect in the
interests, it was said, of an early solution of the
Zimbabwe problem. Maybe behind this policy is the
desire to see to it that, if the imperialist manOeuvres
fail, South Africa will have its hands untied.
91. The following words of the Foreign Minister of
Tanzania were extremely illuminating
in regard to the
South African troops in the Territory of Southern

Rhodesia:
“ .. . It must be clear that their aim was to serve

86. This question naturally arises: What kind of free
and democratic elections are these when one of the
parties taking part in the elections-a
party that, as we
know, has been condemned for its racist and inhuman
policy of oppression-is
organizing the elections with
the help of its administrative
apparatus and under the
protection of its terrorist police and mercenaries? It
is easy to imagine what it will take in these circum-

notice

that the South Africans

would prepare a
Government
and then set up a puppet rCgime in the territory as
a buffer.” [2192ntl meeting, pnra. 76.1

roup against a duly elected Zimbabwe

92. In accordance with this position of principle, the
German Democratic Republic will continue whole-

10

African troops and all other foreign mercenaries; the
elimination
of the influence of the former machinery
of power; the ending of the emergency and martiallaw situations; the liberation of all political detainees
and the return of all refugees.

heartedly to support the struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe, under the leadership of its national liberation movement, for the free exercise of its right to
self-determination.
The delegation of the German
Democratic nL~,pl-‘,~k whole-heartedly
and entirely
supports the decisions on the question of Southern
Rhodesia adopted at the sixteenth ordinary session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity, held at Monrovia
from 17 to 20 July 1979, and at the Sixth Conference
of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September
1979.

94. The delegation
of the German
Democratic
Republic believes it necessary that the Security Council, in accordance with its resolution 460 (1979), should
remain se’ized of this question until Zimbabwe has
achieved total independence.

93. The delegation
of the German Democratic
Republic shares the view of the African States that,
in order to ensure a peaceful solution of the problem
of Southern Rhodesia, the following are especially
necessary: unswerving compliance with agreements
entered into; the neutralization
of the army and auxiliary forces of the former rkgime in Southern Rhodesia;
the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of South

NOTE

1 See Soutllero R/rode,sir~: Report of’ the Cor~stif~r/ionc~/ Cm1979,
,jercwcv. Lnncrt,sfcr Hortsc’, Lo~~thr, Scpterllb~r-Decoll/,~~
Cmnd. 7802 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1980).

Ii

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIOSS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unios nont en vente clans les librairies
et lea agencea
d&ositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vour
auprhr do votre librnire ou adressez-vous
I : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes,
NEW Tork ou Genive.
ICAIC

HOJIYVHTb

Hmawrr
BUH~X

OpraxH3auiiH
x aretiTcTaax

3I3AAWHJI

8aureH
Hatwit,

xm1xw0M
CeKqlrrc

COMO

CONSEGUIR

80
hmra3me

no

npo~~~e

OPI‘AIIII

3AXIlII!

06aearlHeilHbIx
acex pn80~1x

Hau~ri
uflpa.

Km

ninullre

HWIaHHn,

PUBLICACIONRS

DE LAS

in United

Nations.

New

York

00300

XYllHTb

HAqllA
B KIfHXRblX

cnpaaK,a

Hnnon~re

no anpecy:
HbM-FIopK
llnlf

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Wnidas, Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

Oc’bEAAHEHHbIX

YOXKIIO

OpraKK3aqxs
~KeKesa.

NACIONES

xara-

06 1~3nami~x

n

06ae~KKeKKbw

UNIDAS

en venta
en librellas
y casas distria su librero
o dirIjase
a: Naciones

83-61462-December

1985-2.42s
