Reeolutlon1 adopted on the reporll of the Flnt Committee

explosions for peaceful purposes under appropriate
international control".
1919th, plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.

2666 (XXV), Status of the implementation of
General AHemhly resolution 2456 B
(XXIII) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol D of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
W eapon1 In Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, in which it expressed its confidence that the
States that possess nuclear weapons would give their
full co-operation for the effective reali7.ation of the
initiative aimed at the military denuclearization of
Latin America,
RecalUng also its resolution 2286 (XXII) of S
December 1967, in which it welcomed with special
satisfaction the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treat7. of Tlatelolco) 2•
and declared that the Treaty constituted an event of
~st~c significance in the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promote international peace and security,
Bearing in mind that the Treaty has an Additional
Pro~l II, which was opened for signature by States
possessmg nuclear weapons on 14 February 1967
Noting that the Conference of Non-Nuclear-We;pon
States, in its resolution B,24 expressed the conviction
t:!3at, for the maximum effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone, the co-operation of
the nuclear-weapon States is necessary and that such
co-operation should take the form of commitments
likewise undertaken in a formal international instrumen~ which is legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
Considering that accession to that Protocol only entails the following obligations for the nuclear-weapon

States:

. ~a) To respect, in all its e,:tpress aims and proV1S1ons, the statute of denucleanzation of Latin America in respect of warlike purposes, as defined delimited
and set forth in the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
'
(b) Not to contribute in any way to the performance
of . acts involving a violation of the obligations of
article 1 of the Treaty in the territories to which the
Treaty applies,
(c) Not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons
against the contracting parties of the Treaty,
Convinced that these obligations are entirely in conformity with the general obligations assumed under
the Charter of the United Nations, which every Member of the Organization has solemnly undertaken to
fulfil in good faith, as set forth in Article 2 of the
Charter,
Noting that, despite the appeals that the General
Assembly has addressed to them on two occasions in
resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 ~d
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, and the appeals they have received from the Conference of
28 Unit~d Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634 (1968), No. 9068.
24 Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty-third

Session, agenda item 96, document A/7277 and° Corr.l and 2,
p. s.

17

Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, in resolution B, and from
the General Conference of the A,ency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, in resolution 1 (1), 211 only two of the States that posseu
nuclear weapons have so far signed Additional Protocol II and only one has ratified it,
Noting also that the Treaty of Tiatelolco, which has
been signed by twenty-two Latin American States. la
already in force for sixteen of them,
Bearing in mind the repeatedly stated declaratiom
of the nuclear-weapon States to the effect that nuclearweapon-free zones established on the initiative of the
States within the zone should be supported,
Noting that the Treaty of Tiatelolco is the only one
it has been possible to conclude for the establishment
of such a zone in a densely populated area and that,
as a result of the Treaty, there already exists a statute
of total absence of nuclear weapons covering an area
of 6.6 million square kilometres with a population of
approximately 117 million inhabitants,
Noting also that the A$Cncy for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America has been duly
establi~hed in conformity with the Treaty and became
operative on 2 September 1969,
1. Reaffirms the apPCals it has addressed to the
nuclear-weapon States, m its resolutions 2286 (XXII)
and 2456 B (XXIII), to sign and ratify Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as
soon as possible;
2. Notes with satisfaction that one of those States
has already signed and ratified the Protocol and that
another has signed it and is now actively en1aged in
the ratification process;
3. Deplores that not all nuclear-weapon States have
as yet signed the Protocol;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Status of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 2666
(XXV) concerning the signature and ratification of
Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of
Tiatelolco) ";
S. Requests the Secretary-General to amnge for
transmittal of the present resolution to the nuclearweapon States and to inform the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session of any measure adopted by
them in order to implement it.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2667 (XXV). Economic and social consequeneee
of the armaments race and it• extremely
harmful effects on world peace and security
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the threat to mankind posed by the
ever spiralling arms race, especially in view of the
existing large stockpiles of, and impending new qualitative advances in, nuclear armaments,
Aware that world military expenditures have been
continuously increasing, in spite of the achievements
in the field of arms limitation and disarmament during
the 1960s,
Convinced that unless vigorous measures are taken
without delay to stop the arms race and to make con2G See A/7681,

annex, chapter I.

18

General A■aembl:,-Twenty-S.ftb Senion

f

crete progress towards disarmament, Ving the highest
priority to nuclear disarmament, military expenditure
IS likely to increase at an even greater rate during the
1970s,
Deeply concerned that the arms race, nuclear and
conventional, constitutes one of the heaviest burdens
which peoples everywhere have to bear and that it
absorbs immense material wealth, human energy and
intellectual resources,
Deeply convinced that the elimination of the enormous waste of wealth and talent on the arms race,
which is detrimental to the economic and social life
of all States, would have a positive impact, especially
on the developing countries, where the need for skilled
personnel and the lack of material and financial re..
sources are most keenly felt,
Convinced that a halt in the arms race, a reduction
of military expenditures and concrete progress towards
disarmament would greatly facilitate the achievement
by nations of their economic and social goals and
would contribute effectively to the improvement of international relations and the maintenance of world
peace and security,
Conscious that it is the fundamental task of the
United Nations to promote, in accordance with the
Charter, the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion for
armaments of the world's human and economic resources,
Determined to take appropriate steps to bring the
arms race to a halt and to make progress towards
rneral and complete disarmament, which is the most
tmportant question facing the world today,
Wishing to promote the elaboration and implementation of a comprehensive programme for disarmament,
which would also facilitate the United Nations development programmes during the 1970s,
Believing that thorough consideration of the main
aspects of the arms race would facilitate a better understanding and evaluation of its negative consequences
and of the great dangers with which it is fraught,
1. Calls upon all States to take effective steps for
the cessation and reversal of the arms race and for
the achievement of steady progress in the field of disarmament;
2. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue to pay urgent attention to all
questions meant to put an end to the arms race, particularly in the nuclear field;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with
the assistance of qualified consultant experts appointed
by him, 26 a report on the economic and social consequences of the arms race and of military expenditures;
4. Calls upon all Governments to extend their full
co-operation to the Secretary-General to ensure that
the study is carried out in the most effective way;
5. Calls upon non-governmental organizations and
international institutions and organizations to co-operate with the Secretary-General in the preparation of
the report;
2e The Group of Consultant Experts on the Economic and
Social Consequences of the Arms Race and Military Expenditures is composed of the following persons: Mr. Gheorahe
Dolgu, Mr. William F. Duisenberg, Mr. Vasily S. Bmelyanov,
Mr. Placido Garcfa Reynoso, Mr. Vojin Guzina, Mr. Douglas
Le Pan, Mr. Ladislav Matejka, Mr. Akira Matsui, Mr. Jacques
Mayer, Mr. Maciej Perczynski, Mr. Mullath A. Vetlodi, Mr.
Henry Wallich, Mr. Kiffe Wodajo and Sir Solly Zuckerman.

6. Requests that the report be transmitted to the
General Assembly in time to permit its consideration
at the twenty-sixth session.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2668 (XXV). Question of Korea
The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea,
signed at Seoul, Korea, on 13 August 1970,2-,;
Reaffirming its resolution 2516 (XXIV) of 25
November 1969 and its previous resolutions on the
question of Korea,
Recognizing that the continued division of Korea
does not correspond to the wishes of the Korean people
and constitutes a source of tension which/revents the
full restoration of international peace an security in
the area,
Recalling that the United Nations, under the Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to maintain peace and security and to extend
its good offices in seeking a peaceful settlement in
Korea in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter,
Anxious that progress be made towards creating conditions which would facilitate the reunification of
Korea on the basis of the freely expressed will of the
Korean people,
Concerned at reports of further events in Korea
which, if continued, could hamper efforts to create the
peaceful conditions which are one of the prerequisites
of the establishment of a unified and independent
Korea,
1. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United Nations in Korea are to bring about, by peaceful means,
the establishment of a unified, independent and
democratic Korea under a representative form of govemmem; and the full restoration of international peace
and security in the area;
2. Expresses the belief that arrangements should be
made· to achieve these objectives through genuinely
free elections held in accordance with the relevant
resol"ittldns of the General Assembly;
3. Calls for co-operation in the easing of tensions
in the- area and, in particular, for the avoidance of
incidenft and activities in vioL n of the Armistice
Agreemi,nt of 1953;
4. Notes with approval the efforts made by the
United Nations Commission for the Unification and
Rehabilitation of Korea, in pursuit of its mandate, to
encourage the exercise of restraint and the easing of
tensions in the area and to secure maximum support,
assistance and co-operation in the realization of the
peaceful reunification of Korea;
5. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to pursue these
and other efforts to achieve the objectives of the United
Nations in Korea, to continue to carry out the tasks
previously assigned to it by the General Assembly and
to keep members of the Assembly informed on the
situation in the area and on the results of these efforts
through regular reports submitted to the SecretaryGeneral, and to the General Assembly as appropriate;
21 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/8026 and Corr.l ).
