General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

136

among the least developed countries, urgently call for the
continuation and further strengthening of actions of solidarity by the international community in support of the
recovery efforts and the economic development of those
countries,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian
region, 171
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the medium-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the
Sudano-Sahelian region;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments, agencies
of the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations, private organizations and individuals that have
contributed to the implementation of the medium-term and
long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the
Sudano-Sahelian region;
3. Strongly urges all Governments to make special efforts to increase the resources of the United Nations SudanoSahelian Office, including voluntary contributions through
the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities, as well as other bilateral channels so as to enable
it to respond more fully to the priority requ'irements of the
Governments of the States members of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe);
4. Requests all organs, agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system to continue and increase their assistance through joint undertakings with the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office, in response to requests from the
Governments of the Sudano-Sahelian countries, for the implementation of their recovery, rehabilitation and development programmes;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to pursue further the
consultations envisaged in paragraph 5 of Economic and
Social ~ouncil resolution 1980/51, with a view to working
out specific arrangements for joint undertakings between the
United Nation~ Sudano-Sahelian Office and the appropriate
organs, agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system;
6. Commends the Administrator of the United Nations
Development ~ogramme for the results achieved through
the Umted Nat10ns Sudano-Sahelian Office in assisting the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Dro~ght Control in the Sahe! in the implementation of their
medmm-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme;
7. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations SudanoSahel~an Office as th~ c~ntral point and principal body responsible for co-ordmatmg the efforts of United Nations
agencies to help the countries of the Sahe! to implement
their recovery and rehabilitation programme;
8. Notes with appreciation the effective manner in
which the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office is discharging its responsibilities in responding to the priority
requests of the States members of the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe! within the
framework of their programme;
9. Invites the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office
to continue to strengthen its close co-operation with the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahe) and with the Committee with
a view to hastening the implementation of the medium'-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the
Sudano-Sahelian region;
171

N36/208 and Add. I.

10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report
to the General Assembly, through the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/204.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Equatorial Guinea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/105 of 5 December 1980, in
which, inter alia. it recognized the need for the adoption
of special measures of assistance to enable Equatorial
Guinea to rebuild its economy and to restore to normal the
social and public services of the country. and drew the
attention of the international community to the critical social
and economic situation confronting Equatorial Guinea and
to the list of urgent short-term and long-term projects required by the Government to carry out its programme of
rehabilitation and reconstruction,
Taking note of the address delivered by the First VicePresident of the Supreme Military Council and Commissioner for External Affairs of Equatorial Guinea to the General Assembly on 28 September 1981, 172 in which he
described the grave social and economic problems of his
country and expressed the hope that the international community would contribute generously towards satisfying the
needs of Equatorial Guinea at the conference of donors to
be held at the beginning of 1982.
Noting further that there are no official national income
statistics available for Equatorial Guinea and that, since
ther~ has been no_ official census since 1964. official population figures will be forthcoming only after the census
proposed for the second quarter of 1982,
Noting from the report of the Secretary-General, to which
is anne~ed th~ report of the review mission dispatched to
Equatonal Gmnea, 173 that the economic and financial situ_atio1;1 in that country remains grave, that the tight budgetary
situation and the large external trade deficit constitute a
constraint on the Government's ability to embark on a programme of reconstruction and rehabilitation and that external financial assistance is essential if the Government is to
provide the population with health, education and other
essential social and public services,
I. Urgently reiterates its appeal to all Member States
to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral
c_hannels, towards satisfying the reconstruction, rehabilitatton and development needs of Equatorial Guinea;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Committee for Development Planning, in the light of
the new data and information provided by the Government
of_ Eq_uatorial ~~i~e_a, to consider, on the basis of existing
c_ntena, the ehgibihty of that country for inclusion in the
hst of the least developed countries;
3. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Bank, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization. the United Nations Children's Fund and the
172
Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirt,·-sixth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting. paras. 134-163:
m A/36/283.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

United Nations Fund for Population Activities-to maintain
and expand their programmes of assistance to Equatorial
Guinea, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General
in organizing an effective international programme of assistance, to report periodically to the Secretary-General on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have made
available to help that country and to provide all possible
assistance to meet the critical humanitarian needs of the
population and to provide food, medicines and essential
equipment for hospitals and schools;
4. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international financial and development institutions, to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to Equatorial
Guinea or, where one is already in existence, to the expansion of that programme, and to contribute generously towards satisfying the needs of Equatorial Guinea at the
forthcoming conference of donors;
5. Notes that the United Nations Development Programme will assist the Government of Equatorial Guinea
in preparing new official national income statistics and new
population figures so that the Government can bring these
data to the attention of the Committee for Development
Planning in order to enable the Committee to re-examine
the request of Equatorial Guinea for inclusion in the list of
the least developed countries on the basis of the existing
criteria and those new statistics;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
(b) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of the
international programme of assistance to Equatorial Guinea
and the mobilization of that assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial
institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1982, of the
status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Equatorial Guinea;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
of Equatorial Guinea and the progress made in organizing
and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December /981

36/205.

Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/146 of 20 December 1978,
34/135 of 14 December I 979 and 35/85 of 5 December
1980 on assistance for the reconstruction and development
of Lebanon,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/15 of 29 April 1980,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance for the reconstruction and development of
Lebanon, 174
174

A/36/272 and Corr. I.

137

Taking note of the statement made by the United Nations
Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of Lebanon before the Second Committee on 2
October 1981 , 175
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Lebanon;
2. Commends the continuous efforts of the United Nations Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction and
Development of Lebanon in the discharge of his duties;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and intensify his efforts to provide all possible assistance within
the United Nations system to help the Government of
Lebanon in its reconstruction and development plans and
in their implementation;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and the organs and
other bodies in the United Nations system to expand and
intensify programmes of assistance within the framework
of the needs of Lebanon:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the
manner he deems appropriate, all possible assistance to the
Resident Co-ordinator, so that he may engage in co-ordinating the continuing United Nations activities in Lebanon,
with a view to ensuring their harmony and success;
6. Also requests lhe Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/206.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the Central African
Republic

The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolution 35/87 of 5 December 1980 in
which it affirmed the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in its reconstruction, rehabilitation and development efforts.
Noting the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic to the General Assembly on 7 October I 98 I, 176 in which he described the
serious economic and financial problems of the countrv and
affirmed that the situation had deteriorated owing to the
insufficiency of financial resources and that external assistance was essential,
Noting further the statement made by the representative
of the Central African Republic before the Second Committee on 29 October 1981 177 to the effect that the response
of the international community to the urgent appeal of the
Gener:il Assembly had not been adequate to meet the needs
of the situation,
Bearing in mind that the Central African Republic is
landlocked and is classified as one of the least developed
countries,
Recalling trat the Substantial New Programme of Action
for the I980s for the Least Developed Countries, adopted
unanimously by the United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, 178 calls for increased aid to these
countries.

m Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirty-sixth Session. Second Committee, 6th meeting, paras. 13-27.
17
" Ibid .. Plenar_v MeetinKs, 29th meeting, paras. 89-127.
'" Ibid., Second Committe<>. 27th meeting. paras. 54-57.
17
' Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries. Pari.1·. 1-14 Septem/Jer /9/1,/ (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82 1.8), part one. sect. A.
