V.

Resolutions adoptecl on the reports of tbe Second Committee

Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,
Reaffirming article 32 ofthe Charter ofEconomic Rights
and Duties of States, which declares that no State may use
or encourage the use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain
from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign
rights,
Bearing in mind the general principies goveming international trade and trade policies for development contained in its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964,
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
resolution 152 (VI) of 2 July 1983 38 entitled "Rejection of
coercive economic measures", and the principies and rules
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and paragraph 7 (iii) of the Ministerial Declaration adopted on 29
November 1982 by the Contracting Parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade at their thirty-eighth session, 45
Reaffirming its resolutions 38/197 of 20 December 1983
and 39/210 of 18 December 1984,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the effects of economic measures taken by developed
countries for coercive purposes, including their impact on
intemational economic relations, 46 and considering that
further work should be undertaken in order to implement
resolutions 38/197 and 39/21 O,
Grave/y concerned that the use of coercive measures
adversely affects the economies and development efforts of
developing countries and that, in sorne cases, those measures have been intensified, creating a negative impact on
intemational economic co-operation,
l. Deplores the fact that sorne developed countries
continue to apply and, in sorne cast>~, ~ 1 ve increased the
scope and magnitude of econo!r.; .. measures that have the
purpose of exerting, directly or indirectly, coercion on the
sovereign decisions of developing countries subject to
those measures;
2. Reaffirms that developed countries should refrain
from threatening or applying trade restrictions, blockades,
embargoes and other economic sanctions, incompatible
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and in violation of undertakings contracted, multilaterally
and bilaterally, against developing countries as a forrn of
political and economic coercion which affects their economic, political and social development;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive, in-depth report on the economic measures
mentioned in paragraph 2 above, taken by developed
coutltries for coercive purposes, including their impact on
intetnational economic relations, with a view to appraising
the economic effects of such measures on the development
and development prospects of affected developing
countries and with a view to assisting in concrete international action against those measures, and to submit that
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
4. A/so requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
comprehensive in-depth report, to request further comments from Governments and inputs from competent
organizations of the United Nations system, particularly
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the regional commissions and those specialized
45 See General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Basic lnstruments and
Se/ected Documents, Twenty-ninth Supplement (Sales No. GATI/1983-1),
document U5424.
46 A/40/596.

147

agencies that have received information on the application
of economic coercive measures against developing
countries;
5. Appeals to Governments and to the pertinent international organizations to provide the necessary information to the Secretary-General, as requested in paragraph 4
above.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/186. Preferential Trade Area for Eastem and
Southern African States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3362 (S-Vll) of 16 September
1975 on development and international economic cooperation and 36/ l 80 of 17 December 1981, in which the
international community was invited to apply special
measures for the social and economic development of
Africa in the l 980s,
Recalling a/so its resolution 37/139 of 17 December
1982, in which it, inter afia, called upon donor Governments and organs, organizations and bodies ofthe United
Nations system to provide substantial resources for promoting the accelerated development of African countries
and the effective implementation of the Lagos Plan of
Action for the lmplementation of the Monrovia Strategy
for the Economic Development of Africa, 47 and the Final
Act of Lagos, 48
Appreciating in this regard the establishment ofthe Preferential Trade Area for Eastern and Southern African
States in December 1981,
Noting the progress rnade in the reduction of tariffs
among member States to stimulate growth and development in the area, in the launching of clearance and payments arrangements and in the measures taken to intensify
co-operation among member States in the agricultura!,
industrial, educational, cultural and other sectors, with a
view to creating an economic community of the eastern
and southern African States by the year 1992,
1. Invites donor Governments to provide substantial
financia) and technical assistance to the Preferential Trade
Area for Eastern and Southern African States to accelerate
its development into an economic community;
2. Invites a/so the United Nations Development Programme to continue to make resources available to the
Preferential Trade Area from its regional indicative planning figures on an urgent basis;
3. Calls upan international financia! institutions, particularly the World Bank, the International Development
Association, the International Fund for Agricultura)
Development and the African Development Bank, to provide immediate assistance to the Preferential Trade Area;
4. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to take into account in their work
programmes co-operation with the Preferential Trade
Area;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985
47 A/S-11/14, annex l.
4 8 /bid.. annex 11.
