A/RES/77/268

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 January 2023

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 13
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up
to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 18 January 2023
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/77/L.44)]

77/268.

Education for democracy
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, including the principles and
purposes contained therein, and recognizing that human rights, the rule of law and
democracy are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and that they belong to the
universal and indivisible core values and principles of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the right of everyone to education, which is enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 3 the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 4 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 5 and other relevant instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 67/18 of 28 November 2012, 69/268 of 5 March 2015,
71/8 of 16 November 2016, 73/134 of 13 December 2018 and 75/199 of 21 December
2020 and the results of the plan of action for the third phase (2015 –2019) of the World
Programme for Human Rights Education, 6 recalling also Human Rights Council
resolutions 39/3 of 27 September 2018 7 and 42/7 of 26 September 2019 8 on the World

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and
corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1, A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.1 and A/69/53/Add.1/Corr.2), chap. IV, sect. A,
resolution 27/12.
7
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/73/53/Add.1), chap. III.
8
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/74/53/Add.1), chap. III.
1
2

23-01160 (E)

260123

*2301160*

A/RES/77/268

Education for democracy

Programme for Human Rights Education, and taking note with appreciation of the
plan of action for the fourth phase (2020–2024) of the World Programme, 9
Taking note of section VII, entitled “Supporting the global citizenship agenda
through education for democracy”, of resolution 1 adopted on 20 November 2013 by
the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its thirty-seventh session, 10
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, as set out in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 11 are integrated and indivisible and
balance the three dimensions of sustainable development, and acknowledging t he
importance of taking measures to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education
and promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all, including expanded
opportunities for all children, particularly girls, to access quality education, as well
as the need to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels,
Recognizing the importance of equal opportunities for young people, including
young women, to be an integral part of decision-making processes and participate in
all spheres of life, and reaffirming that lifelong learning is an indispensable means
for effective participation in the knowledge societies and economies of the twentyfirst century and for promoting inclusive and equitable societies,
Stressing the complementarity and mutual reinforcement of human rights
education, training and learning and education for democracy,
Reaffirming that democracy is a universal value based on the freely expressed
will of people to determine their own political, eco nomic, social and cultural systems
and their full participation in all aspects of their lives, 12
Recognizing that education for democracy nurtures responsible and active
learners, capable of contributing effectively to peace and prosperity in their societ ies
and beyond,
Recognizing also the profound and disproportionate negative impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on gender equality and on the realization
of the right to education, deeply concerned that the related disproportionate impa cts
of the unprecedented global school closures, including on equal learning opportunities,
have exacerbated pre-existing inequalities between and within countries, such as the
digital divides, and stressing the importance of ensuring a proper return to sc hool for
all children and youth still out of school as a consequence of the pandemic, in
particular girls, who are among those disproportionately lacking access to education,
Taking note of the Incheon Declaration: Education 2030 – towards inclusive and
equitable quality education and lifelong learning for all, adopted at the World
Education Forum 2015, held in Incheon, Republic of Korea, from 19 to 22 May
2015, 13 which affirmed the understanding of education as a main driver of
development that is essential for peace, tolerance, human fulfilment and sustainable
development, as well as key to achieving full employment and poverty eradication,
__________________

A/HRC/42/23.
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General
Conference, Thirty-seventh Session, Paris, 5–20 November 2013, vol. 1 and corrigendum,
Resolutions, sect. IV.
11
Resolution 70/1.
12
Resolution 60/1, para. 135.
13
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum 2015, Incheon, Republic of Korea, 19–22 May 2015 (Paris, 2015).
9

10

2/5

23-01160

Education for democracy

A/RES/77/268

Taking note also of the Global Education Ministers Conference on addressing
hate speech through education, which was jointly organized by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide on 26 October 2021,
Taking note further of the Global Education Monitoring Reports, which monitor
progress towards the education targets within the Sustainable Development Goals
framework, and affirming that education can encourage constructive and inclusive
political participation,
Recognizing that, while democracies share common features, there is no single
model of democracy and that democracy does not belong to any country or region,
Mindful of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the World
Conference on Human Rights, 14 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women, 15 the World Plan of Action on
Education for Human Rights and Democracy adopted by the International Congress
on Education for Human Rights and Democracy, 16 the World Programme for Human
Rights Education proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 59/113 A of
10 December 2004 and the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Education
and Training, 17
Recalling the establishment of the United Nations Democracy Fund and the
efforts of the Fund to advance the United Nations democracy agenda, as well as the
operational activities in support of democratization processes carried out by the
United Nations system, including by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs of the Secretariat, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the United Nations Development Programme,
Acknowledging the important role of international, regional and other
intergovernmental organizations, civil society, academia, the private sector and other
stakeholders in support of democracy and education for democracy,
Recognizing that education contributes to the strengthening of democracy, good
governance and the rule of law at all levels, the reduction of economic inequality, the
realization of human rights, gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls, the achievement of all internationally agreed development goals, including the
Sustainable Development Goals, the development of human potential, the eradication
of poverty and the fostering of greater understanding among peoples,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report entitled “Literacy for life:
shaping future agendas, and education for democracy”, submitted by the Secret aryGeneral in cooperation with the Director General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization; 18
2.
Reaffirms the fundamental link between democratic governance, peace,
development and the promotion and protection of all hum an rights and fundamental
freedoms, which are interdependent and mutually reinforcing;
3.
Recalls the Global Education First initiative, launched by the Secretary General on 26 September 2012, in particular its third priority area on fostering global
citizenship;
__________________

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4 –15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
16
A/CONF.157/PC/42/Add.6.
17
Resolution 66/137, annex.
18
A/77/187.
14
15

23-01160

3/5

A/RES/77/268

Education for democracy

4.
Also recalls the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in which
Member States committed themselves to the Sustainable Development Goals and
targets, including to ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed
to promote sustainable development, including, among others, through education for
sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality,
promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation
of cultural diversity and of culture’s contribution to sustainable development, and
further recalls the importance of measuring progress towards the achievement of the
Goals;
5.
Encourages the Secretary-General, United Nations agencies such as the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
and other relevant stakeholders to strengthen their efforts to promote the values of
peace, human rights, democracy, respect for religious and cultural diversity, and
justice and the rule of law through education;
6.
Strongly encourages Member States and national, regional and local
education authorities, as appropriate, to integrate education for democracy, along with
civic education, human rights education and education for sustainable development
into their education standards and to develop and strengthen programmes, curricula
and curricular and extracurricular educational activities aimed at the promotion and
consolidation of democratic values and democratic governance and human rights,
taking into account innovative approaches and best practices in the field, in order to
facilitate the empowerment of citizens and their participation in political life and
policymaking at all levels;
7.
Encourages Member States and national, regional and local education
authorities, as appropriate, to further efforts to strengthen, through education, the
connections between democratic governance, peace, sustainable development and the
promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
8.
Encourages Member States to intensify their efforts towards educating and
empowering young people, in particular to shape, in the aftermath of COVID -19,
societies that are anchored in respect for human rights and the rule of law;
9.
Calls upon Member States to work with relevant stakeholders to take steps
to close the digital divides, including the rural-urban, youth-older persons and gender
digital divides, and promote digital inclusion by addressing the challenges associated
with access, affordability, digital literacy and digital skills, ensuring that the benefits
of new technologies are available to all, including those living in rural and remote
areas, taking into account the needs of those who are in vulnerable situations and the
importance of promoting inclusive learning environments, and providing distance
learning opportunities, especially in developing countries;
10. Encourages Member States to further their efforts to develop and
strengthen educational policies and initiatives that contribute to combating
disinformation, misinformation, stigmatization, racism, xenophobia, hate speech,
discrimination, exclusion, and violence, in particular through accessible media and
information literacy and digital literacy to improve education for democracy in the
emerging digital environment;
11. Takes note of the Transforming Education Summit, convened by the
Secretary-General from 16 to 19 September 2022 in New York, as well as its preSummit, hosted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization from 28 to 30 June 2022 in Paris;
4/5

23-01160

Education for democracy

A/RES/77/268

12. Also takes note of Member States’ engagement throughout the
Transforming Education Summit process, including through national consultations,
and invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
relevant stakeholders, including the Sustainable Development Goal 4 -Education 2030
High-level Steering Committee, to support Member States, upon their request, in the
country-level implementation of their national commitments made during the
Transforming Education Summit process;
13. Invites United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, including the
United Nations Democracy Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to provide appropriate expertise and resources for the development of
relevant educational programmes and materials for democracy;
14. Encourages international, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, within their respective mandates, to share their best pra ctices and
experiences in the field of education for democracy, including but not limited to civic
education, with each other and with the United Nations system, as appropriate;
15. Decides to continue its consideration of the issue of education for
democracy at its seventy-ninth session, under the agenda item entitled “Integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields”;
16. Invites Governments, the agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to intensify their
efforts to promote education for democracy, requests the Secretary -General, in
cooperation with the Director General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to submit a report, within existing reporting obligations,
to the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session on the implementation of the
present resolution, and invites the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on the right to education, within her existing mandate, to contribute to the report of
the Secretary-General.
57th plenary meeting
18 January 2023

23-01160

5/5
