S/PV.8456

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8456th meeting

Monday, 4 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo/Mr. Esono Angue . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Amon-Tanoh
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Mercenary activities as a source of insecurity and destabilization in Africa
Letter dated 31 January 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/97)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-02636 (E)
*1902636*

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. José Singer Weisinger,
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican
Republic, for his service as President of the Council for
the month of January. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Singer Weisinger and his team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Mercenary activities as a source of insecurity
and destabilization in Africa
Letter dated 31 January 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/97)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to warmly
welcome the Ministers and other representatives present
in the Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Chad, the Central African Republic,
the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon, Rwanda and the
Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mahamat is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/97, which contains the text of a letter
dated 31 January 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations addressed
2/31

04/02/2019

to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the presidency of Equatorial
Guinea for having organized this high-level debate on
the activities of mercenaries as a source of insecurity
and destabilization in Africa and in particular, pursuant
to the concept note before us (S/2019/97, annex), in
Central Africa. I welcome the presence of the President
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea at this meeting.
(spoke in English)
The use of mercenaries dates back through the
ages. From antiquity to the medieval era to the present
day, those who fight for financial reward or other
material compensation have been a near constant on the
battlefield. The shadowy nature of the practice makes
data hard to come by, but reports suggest a surge in the
use of mercenaries and other foreign fighters.
While the numerical picture may be murky, the
impacts of mercenaries today are all too clear. The
presence of mercenaries and other foreign fighters
worsens conflict and threatens stability. Some
mercenaries go from war to war, plying their deadly
trade with enormous firepower, little accountability
and complete disregard for international humanitarian
law. Mercenary activities undermine the rule of
law and perpetuate impunity. They abet the illegal
and inequitable exploitation of a country’s natural
resources. They provoke large-scale displacement and
intercommunal tension. Even Machiavelli, famously
tolerant of questionable behaviour, wrote in The
Prince that mercenaries are “disunited, undisciplined,
ambitious and faithless”.
The nature of mercenary activities has evolved
over the years. Today, they are exploiting and feeding
off other ills, such as transnational organized crime,
terrorism and violent extremism. In Africa, the focus
of today’s discussion, mercenary activities remain
a serious concern. We have seen illicit activities and
trafficking by terrorist and mercenary groups operating
in the Sahel, as well as the alleged involvement of
mercenaries in post-election violence in Côte d’Ivoire
in 2010.
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Mercenaries and other foreign fighters have
committed innumerable violations of human rights
and humanitarian law against civilians in the Central
African Republic. They have also suppressed movements
of herders along traditional routes, such as the border
with Cameroon. In retaliation for repeated attacks,
pastoralists have hired other armed groups or rebels to
protect themselves and their livestock, thereby fuelling
the cycle of violence. Equatorial Guinea itself has
reported serious attempts against, its own Government.
Indeed, last year, Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba of
Equatorial Guinea underscored to the Council the need
for “vigilance and control of groups that sow insecurity
and instability” (S/PV.8156, p. 10). Meeting these
challenges requires action on many fronts.
First, we must bolster the legal regimes, globally
and nationally. Only 35 States are parties to the
International Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries, adopted
by the General Assembly in 1989 (resolution 44/34).
Equatorial Guinea recently acceded to the Convention
and will become the 36th party later this month. Only
three current members of the Security Council have
done so. I call on those States that remain outside the
Convention to accede to or ratify it without delay.
The legal framework also includes important African
instruments, including the Organization of African
Unity Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa and the Central African Convention for
the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can
Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly.
The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace
and Disarmament in Africa will continue to support
implementation of these standards, which will help
advance the African Union’s Silencing the Guns by
2020 agenda.
Strengthening the legal regime also means bringing
more precision to it. The international legal definition
of a mercenary is very narrow, and therefore poses a
challenge to effective investigations and prosecutions.
Secondly, we need to increase bilateral, regional
and international cooperation. Cooperation on
border management will be crucial to stemming the
largely unhindered flow of weapons and foreign
armed actors throughout Central Africa. Such steps
could include mixed border commissions, joint

S/PV. 8456

border security monitoring mechanisms and regular
intelligence-sharing between national defence forces.
Cooperation will also be essential for building
the capacity of national institutions responsible for
justice, security and human rights to carry out these
vital functions and to implement the relevant legal
instruments. A State must be able to exercise a monopoly
on the use of force within its territory, with armed
forces and police capable of protecting people while
upholding the rule of law. The strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
countries of the region is vital. I thank African Union
Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat for
his excellent cooperation. The United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa is a further part of the picture, and Interpol is
among the other organizations with an important role
to play.
Thirdly, we need to examine the political,
economic, social and psychological factors that give
rise to mercenary activities. The United Nations
Working Group on the Use of Mercenaries has
recommended a wide range of steps, including
combatting exclusion, improving civic engagement,
ensuring good governance, delivering equitable public
services, and ensuring protection for minorities and
other vulnerable groups.
Enhanced efforts to create opportunities for
young people will be critical to reducing the lure of
mercenaries and the threat of radicalization. We must
also do more to empower women and to address the
gender dimensions of mercenary activities. Our work to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals can help us
in all of these areas — yet another reason to accelerate
those efforts.
The United Nations stands ready to continue to
support Governments in tackling mercenary activities,
including by deepening our dialogue with the relevant
regional organizations and national institutions. I urge
all countries to cooperate with the United Nations
Working Group, including those that the Group wishes
to visit. Together, let us strengthen our work across
the spectrum of this challenge, from prevention to
prosecution, and from mitigating the impacts of
mercenary activities to addressing the root causes that
give rise to them.

19-026363/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.
Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): I am pleased
to address the Security Council for the second time in
less than three months in the context of a high-level
debate on issues of importance to Africa. I regret that
constraints related to the preparations for the Summit
of the African Union, to be held this weekend, have
prevented me from being with the Security Council in
person. I thank President Obiang Nguema for having
invited me to this debate, which marks the beginning
of the Equatorial Guinean presidency of the Security
Council. I wish every success to this presidency, which
is representative of Africa as a whole.
At a time when our continent is stepping up efforts
to promote peace and security, it is necessary that
we consider all sources of insecurity and instability.
Mercenarism clearly constitutes one such challenge
that must be addressed. The choice of this topic
therefore represents a concrete contribution to realizing
the goal of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
The African Union looks forward to the outcome of
this debate.
Unfortunately, the history of our continent is
replete with examples of mercenary involvement
in destabilization activities, including coups d’état,
interventions in armed conflicts and attempts to
take control of the natural resources of the countries
concerned. As early as the 1960s, when our countries
were working to consolidate their independence, some
were faced by this phenomenon. The consequences
have been devastating in terms of violence, human
rights violations and additional threats to the security
and stability of the countries in question. That situation
clearly poses a serious threat to the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and harmonious
development of African States. In the light of that
situation and the serious concerns to which it has
given rise, the Organization of African Unity adopted
its Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism in
Africa in 1977. The Convention entered into force in
April 1985. It enabled the establishment of continental
norms concerning mercenary activities, while at
the same time encouraged a number of cooperation
initiatives at the continental level.
Despite those efforts, the scourge of mercenarism
continues to persist. In that regard, it is worth noting
4/31

04/02/2019

the continued destabilization activities involving
mercenaries. The most recent example, in fact, concerns
Equatorial Guinea, where an attempted coup d’état
involving a number of foreign mercenaries was foiled
a few months ago. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the African Union’s solidarity with Equatorial Guinea
on the heels of that destabilization attempt. Similarly,
the sometimes porous nature of African borders and
the transnational nature of the security challenges
facing the continent have encouraged the mobilization
of foreign fighters to serve as mercenaries in conflicts
tearing apart some countries.
Another such development is the emergence of
private security companies. Clearly, this is often a
matter of legal entities that transact with Governments,
but their existence and proliferation nevertheless pose
challenges that warrant special attention. In that regard,
the second Africa Forum on Security Sector Reform,
held in October 2018 by the African Union Commission,
recommended the revision of the 1977 Convention for
the Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, with a view
to adapting it to developments since its adoption and
providing it with an implementation and monitoring
mechanism. More specifically concerning private
security companies, the Forum recommended the
development of a continental regulatory and supervisory
framework. The African Union Commission is currently
working on the follow-up to those recommendations
and, to that end, will consult various international
partners, including the United Nations.
Today’s debate provides us with an opportunity
to identify practical measures that can help end the
scourge of mercenarism once and for all. It is clear
that we must strengthen the international instruments
related to this phenomenon. The aim here is to expedite
the signature and ratification of existing instruments,
as well as to ensure their effective implementation. I
note with concern that the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries has been signed and ratified by only a
limited number of United Nations Member States. It
is equally important to strengthen cooperation among
States, including in the areas of intelligence and
prosecution. Without effective coordination, our work
will not be effective.
Likewise, it is crucial to provide increased
assistance so that States can strengthen their capacity to
confront the scourge of mercenarism more effectively.
More precisely, focus must be placed on security sector
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

governance and, in the case of countries emerging
from conflict, on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes. With regard to the latter, we
can never sufficiently stress the risks posed by the
failure to complete such processes.
Lastly, I underscore the fact that the fight against
mercenarism must be part of the overall context
of promoting peace and security on the continent.
Experience has shown that mercenaries often operate in
conflict areas. The African Union is actively engaged
on that front in the framework of its Silencing the
Guns by 2020 campaign. I welcome the United Nations
support for those efforts, in particular the commitment
of Secretary-General António Guterres.
The African Union is determined to play its full
role in the fight against the scourge of mercenarism
and to mobilize its member States to that end, but this
struggle against a phenomenon that is transnational in
nature cannot succeed without the full cooperation of
other international actors. I therefore renew my call for
increased international cooperation and support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Faki
Mahamat for his briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Rwanda.
Mr. Sezibera (Rwanda): I address the Security
Council today on behalf of His Excellency President
Paul Kagame, who was invited in his capacity as
Chairperson of the African Union to contribute to this
important discussion, which will help us highlight
the threat posed by mercenary activities to peace and
stability in our region. I bring the Council his greetings
and good wishes for the success of this meeting.
I also take this opportunity, on behalf of President
Kagame, to congratulate His Excellency President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and the Government of
Equatorial Guinea as they steer the work of the Security
Council for the month of February. You, Sir, can count
on the active support of the African Union and Rwanda
during your presidency. You represent our common
goal to achieve substantial progress in promoting peace
and prosperity in Africa and all over the world.
The issue of mercenaries has a long history in Africa
and has presented a grave threat to the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member States.
In reaction to that threat, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) established the Convention for the

S/PV. 8456

Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, as adopted by
the Heads of State and Government of OAU member
States in 1977. The term “mercenaries” at that time
was used to refer to persons recruited locally or abroad
to fight for financial or material gain. However, that
definition, including the mercenary activities covered
in the 1977 Convention, may no longer be adequate to
describe mercenary activities in Africa today.
It is important to make a distinction between
the role played by providers of military and security
services that are operating within a clear national
legal framework and mercenary groups that are
operating clandestinely to provide military support to
groups determined to destabilize constitutional order
and authority.
Mercenaries are part of a worrisome increase in
the incidence of transboundary criminal networks,
some of which are well financed and have sophisticated
communication and military equipment, and many of
which are connected to global terrorist networks. The
Council is aware that Rwanda is among the countries of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
that have been victims of such cross-border terrorist
networks, as reported to the Council in document
S/2018/1133. It is for that reason that the Council can
count on our full support for the objectives you, Sir,
have outlined for this meeting.
Mercenaries today are not only involved in active
combat; we now see an increase in cyberattacks and
industrial espionage carried out by mercenary groups
from the comfort of their homes. They continue to evolve
and innovate. We cannot, and should not, be static in our
response. Therefore, the existing policy frameworks of
the African Union and of the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries of 1989 need to be updated in order for
them to cope with emerging realities. For its part, the
African Union will review the 1977 Convention with a
view to further strengthening its provisions.
In conclusion, to address and neutralize the
threat of mercenary activities in Africa, we must take
robust measures to deal with this persistent source of
instability on our continent. Only a collective and wellcoordinated approach at the regional and international
levels will allow us to end the phenomenon of mercenary
activity by disrupting its financial networks and crossborder recruitment, thereby defeating its operations.

19-026365/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

I thank the President again for his decision to raise
awareness of this critical matter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the President of
Equatorial Guinea.
It is an honour and source of great satisfaction
to welcome the representatives of Heads of State and
Government, dignitaries and guests and to thank the
Secretary-General for joining us in this special meeting
of the Security Council devoted to the issue of peace and
security in Africa and, more specifically, the question
of mercenary activities as a source of insecurity and
destabilization in Africa.
We consider the election of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea as a non-permanent member of
the Council and our assumption of the presidency of
the Council, which we are initiating today, as a sign
of the confidence of the international community in
our country and our policies. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Member States that have placed
their trust in us. Since we began our term as a member
of this high-level decision-making body, we have
endeavoured to be proactive, objective and constructive
in addressing the urgent issues on the Council’s agenda,
while remaining true to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Today’s meeting is especially significant for
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea because it is
devoted to a subject that is one of the key concerns
and challenges that affect peace, security and stability
on the African continent. Armed conflicts have been
a feature of humankind since the beginning of history
and have varied greatly in terms of their motives,
implications, contexts and actors. Yet there is one
curious phenomenon that is common to all civilizations
and all wars in every historical period but has somehow
escaped the regulation of the modern world, namely,
the phenomenon of mercenary activity.
The African continent finds itself in a very difficult
situation in the face of the threat of mercenary activity
and other phenomena, such as terrorism, trafficking
and trade in illicit arms, piracy, poverty, the spread
of endemic diseases and natural disasters caused by
climate change, which are interacting to create chaos
and insecurity and seriously delay the development of
African countries.
6/31

04/02/2019

Most African countries have never experienced
peace or socioeconomic development since gaining
their independence more than 50 years ago, despite
their great economic potential in natural resources.
Africa remains the least developed continent. The
mercenary phenomenon is one of the potential causes
of that lagging behind. The hidden interests of
mercenaries have been striving to prevent Africans
from enjoying the enormous benefits of having control
over our own destinies. That is why to date stamping
out that phenomenon has also been an integral part of
the struggle for our sovereignty. That evil phenomenon
has gradually set new goals, such as controlling our
natural resources and technology for development, to
be part of the global geostrategic struggle.
We note that almost all the conflicts in Africa are,
or have been, punctuated by the presence and activities
of those veritable soldiers of fortune. Mercenary
threats are latent in all their forms in our subregion of
Central Africa, as well as throughout the whole African
continent. The persistent existence of mercenaries
on the continent poses significant challenges, such
as violations of human rights, obstacles to the selfdetermination of peoples, violations of international
humanitarian law, misery, plundering of the wealth
that belongs to the people, assassinations of political
leaders, overthrows of legitimate Governments and
other obvious criminal activities. In the case of
Central Africa, its features are particularly attractive
because its natural wealth and strategic location have
made it a propitious target for those unscrupulous
criminal networks.
Mercenary activities in Africa have been devastating
and constantly lead us to face major challenges, such
as obstacles to the self-determination of our peoples.
The negative consequences of that phenomenon are
indicative of the danger and threat that mercenary
activities pose to peace and security on the continent.
My country, Equatorial Guinea — a peaceful
country — began to be attractive to the interests of
mercenaries since the discovery of oil in the 1990s. It
is thanks to the peace we enjoy that we have been able
to reach unprecedented levels of overall development.
We are aware that mercenary activities would lead
only to a reversal of such development and cause
bloodshed among our brothers. The Government of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore strongly
condemns the existence of mercenary activities on the
African continent.
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Equatorial Guinea could have suffered the same
horrors and calamities as the mercenary wars if the
five attempts to invade the country through the use of
that diabolical system of foreign intervention had been
successful. We would like to point out that, over the
last 24 years, we have been victim of five attempts
at mercenary incursions, the ultimate objective of
which was to overthrow the legitimate Government of
Equatorial Guinea, with the sole intention of seizing
the country’s resources and depriving the people of
them, to support their own hidden interests.
Those elements carried out activities that were as
diverse as they were violent, in the form of robbing
banks, attacks on the residence of the Head of State
and even an assassination attempt on me, together with
my entire family, in December 2017, among others. We
are grateful to the Governments of Angola, Zimbabwe
and Cameroon for their cooperation in defeating those
attempts to invade.
We are aware that, as long as our countries
still have their natural resources, they will remain
attractive bait for those groups. That is why, once
again, Equatorial Guinea wants to alert this high-level
organ that mercenary groups still continue to act with
absolute impunity in Africa, thereby endangering the
security and stability of our countries. We urge the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, as
well as the partners and friends of Africa, to confront
mercenarism, just as they do terrorism and piracy,
because they are all the same.
In the statement I delivered during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its sixtieth session
on 17 September 2005 (see A/60/PV.10), I called for
greater attention to be paid to the phenomenon of
mercenarism by convening a special session of the
General Assembly. We believe that such a step could
have generated global awareness of the issue and,
possibly, led the interests behind the phenomenon to
consequently reconsider their activities. It also could
have served as a preventive measure that could have
spared the international community and this organ from
subsequently having had to deploy some peacekeeping
operations in our region. I would like to reiterate that
same appeal today, as well to point out the urgent need
to update legislation on mercenaries so as to cover all
the permutations that have evolved.
It is important to analyse the root and causes of
this phenomenon and seek lasting solutions that can

S/PV. 8456

reinforce the stability and development of our countries.
That includes finding out who are intellectually
and materially responsible for this phenomenon, its
executors and origins; in other words, it involves
getting to the bottom of the matter. The international
community must be involved in this issue, just as it is
involved in counter-terrorism.
In spite what I have said, the absence of prosecution
of this phenomenon under international law is strange,
as is the fact that the perpetrators are not held criminally
responsible. That creates a vacuum in international law
and impunity for these groups. I would like to take
advantage of the opportunity afforded by this debate
to recall the international instruments that deal with
mercenaries, which reflect the concern of the United
Nations and the African Union, both of which agree
that mercenary activity is such an important factor in
global violence and destabilization that it is imperative
to eradicate that activity. I would like to underscore
the following documents: the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries, of 4 December 1989; the Organization
of African Unity Convention for the Elimination of
Mercenarism in Africa, of 1977; and all the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. The substance and spirit
of existing international legislation on mercenaries is
in line with the concerns of the Government of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea and, I dare say, of all
of Africa in general. However, there is still a long way
to go, and we must do it together and in a spirit of
solidarity. Only in that way will we be able to optimize
our achievements in this essential area.
Finally, we understand that the contractual
relationships that might be established in accordance
with international law between legitimate Governments
and private security and defence companies that have
been legally established in their respective countries
have a legal status and cannot be equated with the
activities of banned unscrupulous groups.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Allow me, first of all, to express the regrets
of His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, President of
the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, who, owing to scheduling
constraints, could not attend this high-level debate to

19-026367/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

which you, Mr. President, kindly invited him. I would
therefore like to extend to you, Mr. President, his warm
congratulations on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February, and to assure you, Sir, of Côte d’Ivoire’s full
support in carrying out your tasks. I am also pleased to
express my appreciation for the timely initiative of this
debate on the impact of the phenomenon of mercenarism
on international peace and security, particularly in
Africa. Finally, I would like to congratulate Mr. António
Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for the quality of their briefings
and the appropriateness of their recommendations.
Unfortunately, mercenarism is an old and
widespread practice. It is characterized by the formation
of armed groups, comprising large and extremely
well-armed combat forces who are ready to fight on
behalf of the highest bidder, and thereby pose a lasting
threat to the peace and stability of States and regions.
This practice is inadmissible and cannot be allowed
to continue.
Several African countries have been continuously
victimized by the destabilizing activities of
mercenaries, as defined by the Organization of African
Unity Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa of 1977 and the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries of 1989, which aim to criminalize such
activities. To this day, these activities are a source
of major concern on the continent, particularly in
Central Africa.
It is undeniable that the appetite for natural
resources, political and social divisions within
countries and cross-border conflicts contribute greatly
to the growth of mercenarism. It is even more true
that illicit mining and trade in natural resources,
fuelled by weakened State authority resulting from the
political instability of some Central African countries,
encourages the continuation of mercenary activities in
that region.
Indeed, in an environment of instability, the armed
groups that thrive in areas not controlled by the State
are involved in various illicit trafficking activities,
including the recruitment of foreign mercenaries to
increase their numbers. That dialectic is well described
by the various reports of United Nations groups of
experts on the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
8/31

04/02/2019

Central African Republic, which reveal that armed
groups and mercenaries that generally occupy areas
rich in natural resources become involved in the illicit
exploitation and trade of those resources.
In a report on the situation in the Central African
Republic contained in document A/HRC/36/47/Add.1,
the Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise
of the rights of peoples to self-determination, which
was established by the Human Rights Council, found
that mercenaries had taken advantage of the fragile
security situation in the Central African Republic to
carry out criminal activities, including murder, looting
and the destruction of private property, as well as the
imposition of illegal taxes on local populations. Such
organized criminal activities weaken States, hamper
their development, fuel armed conflict and undermine
the international community’s peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. Faced with the threats posed by
mercenary activities, particularly in Central Africa,
our response must be collective and include the three
international, regional and national dimensions.
My country welcomes the efforts of the international
community, including the United Nations, to put an
end to mercenarism and punish those who engage in
it. The international community, in particular the
United Nations, has repeatedly condemned the use
of mercenaries, which threatens global peace and
security. A further step was taken when, on 4 December
1989, the General Assembly adopted the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. That was followed by the
establishment, in 2005, by the Commission on Human
Rights, now the Human Rights Council, of the Working
Group on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating
human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination.
However, Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about
the low level of interest in that Convention, which
remains the main legally binding instrument at the
international level. Moreover, my delegation would
like to encourage all Member States that have not yet
signed it to conclude the formalities, with a view to
extending the scope of the Convention once it is ratified
by those States.
The only specific and binding instrument at the
regional level is the Convention for the Elimination
of Mercenarism in Africa, adopted in 1977 by the
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8456

Organization of African Unity, now the African Union.
Also at that level, only 30 African countries have ratified
the Convention, while the African continent continues
to be the region most threatened by mercenary activity.
My country therefore calls on all African States to
ratify that document in order to increase the means of
combating mercenarism on our continent.

its presidency of the Security Council. We look forward
to working closely with your delegation, Mr. President,
on pressing matters of peace and security this month
and throughout the remainder of its term on the
Security Council. We also congratulate the Dominican
Republic on its excellent work during its presidency of
the Council in the month of January.

In addition, it is vital to strengthen cooperation
with a view to finding coordinated solutions to the
issue of securing common borders and repatriating
mercenaries as part of the disarmament, demobilization
and reinsertion or repatriation processes implemented
in some countries in Central Africa, in particular the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.

We share your concern, Mr. President, that stability
in Central Africa is undermined by the activities of
mercenaries and terrorist organizations that foment
both internal and international conflicts. Private
military companies or mercenary groups that act
without a mandate, oversight or accountability have
played a destabilizing role throughout history and,
in the most extreme cases, have sought to take power
from sovereign Governments. In conflict areas around
the world, there are instances of private military actors
conducting operations that are detrimental to peace and
security. By way of two examples, in Syria, we have
seen private military actors conduct defensive combat
operations to attempt to seize territory in the middle
Euphrates river valley and in the Central African
Republic, private military actors are operating in
mining areas to exploit that country’s natural resources.
I would like to make three points that place today’s
debate in the broader context of the peace and security
challenges facing the Council.

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the significant progress
made in the fight against mercenarism, particularly
the adoption and entry into force of the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. By making participation
in mercenary activities an offence subject to mandatory
universal jurisdiction, that document is an important
tool in fighting the impunity enjoyed by that scourge.
The perpetrator of an offence can now be tried by any
State party to the Convention on whose territory he is
arrested. My delegation remains convinced that the
effective implementation of existing instruments of
international law will be a decisive step in the process
of combating mercenarism.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that it is by
pooling our resources that such progress can be made
in order to free Africa from the harmful consequences
of mercenarism, thereby enabling the affected
regions to find again the right path to peace, stability
and prosperity.
On that note of hope, I would like to reiterate my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on the wise choice
of this topic, as well as my sincere wishes for success in
your conduct of the presidency of the Security Council
throughout the month of February.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting, which is focused on African countries but
is relevant throughout the world. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and Chairperson Faki
Mahamat for their remarks today and to welcome the
ministers who are joining us in the Security Council.
The United States congratulates Equatorial Guinea on

First, we must remain focused on the worrying
trend of terrorist and violent extremist activity on the
African continent, where in recent years the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations have increased the lethality of
their attacks and expanded their area of operations. The
deplorable attack on civilians at a business and hotel
complex in Nairobi on 15 January was a stark reminder
of the threat posed by such terrorist groups.
Secondly, State fragility leaves many countries
more vulnerable to terrorism, violent extremism and
armed conflict. When we encourage accountable,
transparent governance, promote the rule of law and
support fiscal transparency, we are doing the essential
security-promoting work of strengthening State
capacity and fostering self-reliance.
Thirdly, given the growing youth population of
many African countries, it is essential to foster economic
opportunities that offer young people the chance to
thrive and prosper. We know that armed groups, rebel
leaders and terrorist organizations recruit young men

19-026369/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

who have few alternatives. We must encourage the
adoption of policies that improve the business climate,
develop Africa’s middle class and provide a path forward
for sustainable and inclusive economic growth. Finally,
the United States would like to draw a sharp contrast
between illegal destabilizing mercenary activities
and the legal legitimate role that private military and
security companies can play in many places, including
in Central Africa. Private security actors train national
militaries, provide logistics support to United Nations
and African Union (AU) peace operations and protect
facilities. Actors operating in such roles in accordance
with all applicable laws and the consent of host
Governments contribute positively to the maintenance
of peace and security across the continent. For example,
the United States Global Peace Operations Initiative
has invested nearly $1.2 billion since 2005, frequently
operating with private security contractors to build the
capacity and readiness of forces to take part in United
Nations and AU peace operations.
We again thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting. We look forward to continuing
to work together on this topic, which is central to the
future of international peace and security.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I welcome you, Mr. President, to New York.
We are happy to see you presiding over the Security
Council. This is the first meeting of the Council under
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea in the month
of February. We are grateful to you, Sir, for having
honoured us with your presence on this important
occasion and for setting the tone of the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea for the month of February. We will
fully support our friends from Equatorial Guinea. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
their briefings. We also thank the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the African States for attending this meeting.
We are grateful to Equatorial Guinea for organizing
and conducting today’s discussion. It is no secret that
the activities of soldiers of fortune, despite being a
criminal offence in many countries, including Russia,
are still an unwelcome reality of contemporary armed
conflicts. In that regard, mercenarism in Africa, the
topic of today’s debate, is more relevant than ever.
We would like to draw attention to the fact that
the use of mercenaries is often directly linked to
interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States.
The Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention
10/31

04/02/2019

and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States,
adopted by the General Assembly in 1981, stipulates
a ban on the training, financing and recruitment of
mercenaries and their deployment on the territory of
another State. It also refers to the obligation of States
not to carry out any activities aimed at violating the
integrity or at undermining or overthrowing the political
system of other States. We live in a time when that
appeal is more relevant than ever. An unconstitutional
change of Government and the violent overthrow of
a State regime with external support are therefore
inadmissible. However, mercenaries are often recruited
and financed for precisely such tasks.
Foreign mercenary companies have played a
particularly nefarious role on the African continent.
The use of mercenaries to fight national liberation
movements in Africa and to prevent peoples under
colonial oppression from exercising their right to selfdetermination remains a stain on the conscience of a
number of Western States.
Even after their independence, young African
States faced attempts by the colonial Powers to carry
out coups d’état using mercenaries, who were often
involved in atrocities and the torture and executions of
civilians. Guided by self-interested economic goals or
the desire to prevent the establishment of independent
Governments with differing ideological views, those
former colonial masters wilfully carried out violations
of the principles of international law condemning
colonialism, racism and foreign hegemony.
The issue of the nefarious activities of mercenaries
in various African States has been repeatedly considered
by the Security Council, which has consistently pointed
to the inadmissibility of the use of foreign fighters to
destabilize States and violate their territorial integrity
and sovereignty. Their malign activities are also used in
the fight to control Africa’s rich natural resources, which
is one of the key sources of the problems facing Africa:
the fight to control Africa’s rich natural resources.
We are aware of the fact that Equatorial Guinea
recently had to confront such challenges and managed
to confront them. We share its concerns in this regard
and strongly condemn any form of interference in the
internal affairs of a sovereign State.
Many conflicts in Africa, including those externally
provoked, are often breeding grounds for the activities
of criminals of all stripes. The clearest example in this
context is the crisis that followed the regime-change
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

operation in Libya, which dealt a devastating blow
to the entire system of regional security and led to a
large-scale influx of weapons and criminal elements
into the countries of the Sahel. We call on those
devising similar plans to carefully consider what that
short-sighted policy in Libya led to. Similar policies
should not be applied to other regions.
The problems in Central and West Africa are
compounded by the activities in a number of countries of
illegal armed groups, as well as terrorist and extremist
organizations, whose members are fighting not only for
their distorted political or ideological goals, but also
for money.
Of particular concern is the situation in Mali, the
Lake Chad basin and the Great Lakes region. In order to
successfully combat these challenges, what is required is
not only decisive action by national and regional armed
forces, but also the suppression of external financial
flows that fuel mercenary and extremist activity. We are
convinced that in order to eradicate these phenomena,
it is vital to achieve a lasting resolution of conflict;
strengthen State institutions, first and foremost in the
security sector; and implement measures promoting
socioeconomic development.
In many cases, the support of the international
community is needed, and such assistance should be
provided only at the request of the countries concerned.
Colonial approaches should become a thing of the past,
and certain practices that have become State policy,
from blackmail, threats and provocations to the use of
force against sovereign States, should also be consigned
to history.
We would note that the challenges and threats
facing the Central African region, including mercenary
activities, are interlinked and interconnected, and
that the States themselves are highly interdependent.
Destabilizing the situation in one country could send
shockwaves through the entire subregion, undermining
the security of neighbouring countries. It is therefore
extremely important to monitor the situation
very closely.
We support the quest for African solutions to the
problems facing the continent, including the problem
of mercenary activity. A relevant impetus could be
provided by updating the 1977 Organization of African
Unity — predecessor of the African Union — Convention
for the Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa. We
believe that that document laid important groundwork

S/PV. 8456

for collective efforts to prosecute and eradicate such
illegal activities on the continent.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Mr. President, it is an
honour to have Your Excellency here with us today,
setting the tone of Equatorial Guinea’s presidency for
this month of February. Let me also congratulate you
and your delegation for having convened this very
open debate on an important theme. Rest assured that
Indonesia will fully support your presidency.
We would like also to thank the Secretary-General,
António Guterres, and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for
their respective statements.
Mercenaries, whether local entities, foreign fighters
or private military or security companies involved in
illegitimate operations, have exacerbated numerous
conflicts in many parts of the world, including in Africa.
These guns for hire, driven not only by monetary gains
but at times also by various ideologies and other raisons
d’être, have been used by some States, non-State actors
and businesses.
As also reported by the Working Group on the use
of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination, mercenaries run a wide gamut,
from the criminality of human, arms and drugs
trafficking to the theft of precious natural resources,
targeted killings, kidnappings and other savagery at the
behest of parties desiring a particular conflict outcome.
Mercenaries create a vicious circle of crime and human
rights abuses. They have many faces, ranging from
commercial criminals to foreign terrorist fighters and
radical extremists.
Indonesia is deeply concerned at the danger that
the activities of mercenaries represent for international
peace and security. We call for full respect of the
sovereignty, constitutional order and territorial
integrity of countries and non-interference therein. In
that light, we concur with the need to better regulate the
mercenary phenomenon.
To ensure that mercenary activities do not cause
insecurity and destabilization, Indonesia additionally
underlines the following four points: first, capacitybuilding; secondly, regional and subregional
contributions; thirdly, the responsibility of States;
and, fourthly, respect for international law and
humanitarian law.

19-0263611/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

First, State capacity-building and the consequent
writ of a State over all of its territory are crucial.
Examples abound of situations in which conflict and
weak institutions have led to lands being exploited by
terrorists and mercenaries for their nefarious purposes.
The strengthening of capacity must also entail
rule-of-law, judiciary and other law-enforcement
machinery. Effective State prosecution of mercenary
activities provides credible deterrence. While the State
must be accountable to citizens for their protection, it
is also vital that civil society, media, youth and women
all play positive and cohesive nation-building roles.
Economic development and assistance to countries is
also important in order to achieve economic resilience,
which would deter civilians from becoming mercenaries
or helping mercenary causes.
Secondly, we emphasize the contribution of
regional and subregional organizations.
In that context, Indonesia fully supports the
African Union (AU) Agenda 2063, with its key pillar
of a conflict-free Africa, as well as the five thematic
priorities of the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020.
The AU initiative Silencing of the Guns: Prerequisites
for realizing a conflict-free Africa by the year
2020” — is an essential plank for curbing mercenary
activity and very laudable. A successful outcome of
that mechanism, including the AU-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will
significantly elevate peace, security and development
on the continent. Africa knows what is best for Africa.
However, those mechanisms need the full support of
the United Nations and other partners. We need to
engage other international and regional organizations,
including those in the field of transnational crime, as
well as other organizations.
For its part, Indonesia, through its bilateral
assistance programmes to Africa in multiple fields,
as well as its contributions to eight United Nations
peacekeeping operations, has been relentless in that
regard. We have approximately 1,757 Indonesian troops
and police deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Africa. We remain determined to stand
shoulder to shoulder with our African brothers and
sisters. In that regard, we also urge the Council
to examine how mercenary activity has created
greater threats to United Nations peacekeepers in the
12/31

04/02/2019

fulfilment of their mandates and to their personnel
safety and security.
Thirdly, we reiterate that all countries need to
exercise high vigilance against the menace posed by
mercenaries, including by ensuring that any territories
under their control are not used for and their nationals
do not take part in any negative activities involving
mercenaries. These include financial, material
and political support to them for the purposes of
destabilizing the legitimate Government of any State.
No business organization should be left unaccountable
for the unlawful use of mercenaries to promote its
commercial interests. Furthermore, private military
and security company personnel worldwide must
also be held fully accountable for any illegal actions.
Indonesia fully supports General Assembly resolution
73/159, on the subject of mercenaries, and we urge
everyone to abide by it.
Fourthly,
recognizing
that
regulation
is
inconsistent and that many gaps exist, it is very
important that everyone fully respect international
law, international humanitarian law and related
norms regulating mercenary activities, particularly in
conflict and near-conflict situations, where they are
most lethal. Businesses must be held accountable and
abide by international law and resolutions pertaining
to mercenaries.
In conclusion, mercenaries survive due to the
simple principle of supply and demand. It is high
time that we take action to suppress the demand for
mercenaries in the global market. At the same time, we
must halt mercenary exports and supplies. Only then
will we have success in our joint endeavours. Let us all
strip the soldiers of fortune of their fortune.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is the eve of the Chinese new year. First of all, I would
like to convey my best new year greetings to you, Sir.
At the same time, I wish peace and tranquillity to the
people of the world.
I am speaking in my capacity as Special
Representative of His Excellency President Xi Jinping
of China. At the outset, I thank Your Excellency
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo for attending and
presiding over today’s high-level meeting.
China congratulates Equatorial Guinea on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February and will fully support its
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

work. I also congratulate the Dominican Republic on its
exemplary work as President of the Council in January.
I thank Secretary-General Guterres; Mr. Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Mr. Sezibera, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Rwanda and current Chair
of the African Union, for their briefings. I also wish
to thank Côte d’Ivoire and Gabon for sending their
Foreign Ministers to today’s meeting.
China supports Equatorial Guinea’s initiative to
convene today’s meeting and appreciates the country’s
efforts in fighting mercenaries. We are confident that
today’s meeting will serve to galvanize international
consensus on jointly addressing the threats and
challenges posed by mercenaries. Mercenary activities
threaten international peace and security and jeopardize
peace and stability in developing countries, especially
those on the African continent. Such activities exact a
heavy toll on human life and on property and seriously
affect the social stability and economic development of
African countries. This is therefore an issue to which
the international community must pay rapt attention.
Mercenary activities violate the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
interfere in the internal affairs of developing countries,
including in Africa, and encroach on their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. Such activities
lead to tensions and armed conflict among countries.
Recruiting, using, financing and training mercenaries
are clear violations of international law. China is firmly
opposed to such activities. In that respect, I would like
to address the following three points.
First, it is imperative to abide by the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and the basic
norms governing international relations, implement
General Assembly resolutions on countering mercenary
activities and adhere to the principle of sovereign
equality and non-interference in the internal affairs of
other countries. We must support African countries in
their efforts to maintain their sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, fully respect the leadership of
African countries in regional affairs and support the
approach of African solutions to African problems.
Secondly, we should strengthen international and
regional cooperation. The international community
should coordinate its efforts to assist African countries
in properly responding to and, ultimately, eliminating
the threats posed by mercenary activities. We should

S/PV. 8456

continue to improve cooperation and partnership
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, and scale up
efforts in conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction. Through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation and based on the willingness
of countries, the international community should
assist African countries in enhancing their security
capacity-building in training, equipment and resources.
Countries of the region can cooperate in the areas of
border control, information-sharing and countering the
illicit trafficking of weapons, in particular small arms
and light weapons.
Thirdly, integrated policies should be in place. As a
phenomenon that is closely linked to terrorism, human
trafficking and resource plundering, mercenary activity
has become an important factor that threatens peace
and stability in Central Africa. Therefore, resources in
various fields should be pooled in order to strengthen
coordination and law enforcement so as to generate
strong synergies in combating terrorist activities.
The international community should support African
countries in accelerating development, reducing
poverty, eliminating the root causes of conflict and
turmoil and stepping up socioeconomic development.
China supports African countries and peoples
in their pursuit of peace, tranquillity, prosperity and
development. We successfully convened the Beijing
Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation in
September. It was agreed that China and Africa should
strengthen peace and security cooperation. Cooperation
in the field of nuclear security was identified as one of
the eight priority areas for cooperation between China
and Africa.
In addition, China supports Africa’s implementation
of the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and its Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiative. China has also decided to
establish a China-Africa peace and security cooperation
fund with a view to supporting peace, security, stability
and peacekeeping cooperation between China and
Africa. Finally, I wish to emphasize that China will
continue to support Africa in achieving peace, stability
and development, and will work with Africa to build a
stronger Sino-African community with a shared future.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): As this is the first
official meeting under your presidency, Mr. President,
I would like to congratulate Equatorial Guinea on its
assumption of the presidency of Security Council for

19-0263613/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

the month of February and to wish you success in your
work. Likewise, I would like to commend the delegation
of the Dominican Republic for its very good leadership
in guiding the work of the Security Council during the
month of January.
Allow me to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, and Mr. Richard
Sezibera, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Rwanda, for their very informative
statements. I also welcome the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs who are present with us today in the Chamber.
Mercenary groups pose a serious threat to
the independence, security, stability and peaceful
development of many nations in Africa. We therefore
welcome the initiative of the Government of Equatorial
Guinea to hold this high-level presidential debate in the
Security Council. The topic of the debate covers a broad
and impressive array of issues. As such, we would like
to comment on a few that are of particular importance
to Poland.
First, weak legal systems, a lack of good
governance and the rule of law, as well as poverty and
unemployment, create an environment conducive to
mercenary-related activities. Therefore, the promotion
of the rule of law, which is at the core of the activities
of the United Nations system and is also a priority of
Poland’s membership in the Council, has to be more
streamlined and focused in the context of the current
discussion. We also encourage regional organizations,
particularly the African Union, to continue to promote
the rule of law and the principles of security, territorial
integrity and peaceful cooperation, as well as the
institutional development of States, as the most effective
remedies to mercenary activities.
Secondly, law always lags behind the dynamic
development of real-life situations on the ground.
Introducing new legal instruments in a rapidly changing
world is not always sufficient. We believe that existing
law is relevant but that, as always, their universal
applicability and effectiveness is problematic. That
is where we should focus our attention. We therefore
consider this debate as an opportunity for the United
Nations, its Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and United Nations entities such as the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries to build
broader consensus on this issue, similar to that which
exists on the fight against terrorism. Poland was one of
14/31

04/02/2019

the original ratifying States of the Montreux Document.
Our strong support for that document is based on our
conviction that any international activity that involves
the use of force must not contravene international
humanitarian law or human rights law. We therefore
remain deeply concerned about the illegal use of private
military companies that do not follow basic principles
of international law and constitute a destructive factor,
which can be seen within and outside of Africa.
Thirdly, decades of internal and international
tensions and the rise of fundamentalism and religious
extremism have fuelled the proliferation of mercenary
groups around the region. A few ways to prevent
or limit the spread of such conditions is to promote
confidence-building measures, foster dialogue between
interested parties and avoid tensions that may spin out
of control.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that our
recent discussions on the subject of women and peace
and security provide us with examples of measures that
decrease the risk of the escalation of conflict, which in
turn diminishes the risk of mercenary practices, among
other dangers.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I extend our heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February,
Mr. President, and commend you for the dynamic and
very relevant programme of work you have drawn
up — proof of which is the convening of today’s
important debate.
I also welcome Secretary-General António
Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, and Mr. Richard
Sezibera, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Rwanda, and thank them for their
informative briefings.
The problem of the use mercenaries and the activities
they carry out is complex. It arises from multiple
factors, as we have seen, such as weak institutions,
limitations in the international legal frameworks that
criminalize them and perverse incentives to illicit
monetary gain without the slightest consideration for
human life and dignity.
The use of mercenaries, activities related to
mercenaries and military and private security
companies, many of which are vehemently criticized
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

for dubious methods in the conduct of contractual
services, undermine human rights, particularly the
self-determination of peoples and, as a result, peace
and security worldwide.
According to relevant reports, the list of human
rights and humanitarian law violations perpetrated by
mercenaries include executions, sexual slavery, rape
and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence,
torture, mutilation, forced displacement, forced
disappearance, arbitrary destruction of cultural goods
and forced enlistment and recruitment of children.
We are also alarmed by the link between drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime involving
mercenaries, the violence that is generated from this
connection and the erosion of the constitutional order
of States. More perplexing are the acts of barbarism
represented by violations of the human rights committed
against innocent child victims of kidnappings, torture,
detention, sexual slavery and the forced recruitment as
child soldiers.
In the face of such atrocities, we commend the
work of international institutions and agencies that
shed light on the causes of this global issue and make
recommendations to combat and avoid them. We
therefore recognize the work carried out through the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights by the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination.
The most recent report of the Working Group
(see A/73/303) introduces several important aspects
that we believe should be the focus of our attention to
and consequently addressed through our respective
axes of action. These include the improvement of
the international legal framework for the prevention
and punishment of the recruitment, use, financing
and training of mercenaries and foreign fighters; the
strengthening of national institutions and regulations,
including levels of respondent liability, and the
establishment of an international legally binding
instrument for private military and security companies;
increased international cooperation among States for
the prevention, prosecution and punishment of these
crimes; addressing the root causes of conflicts, which
may be diverse in scope — historical, social, political
and economic — including their history of armed
conflict or instability, poverty, high unemployment,

S/PV. 8456

the exploitation of natural resources and institutional
weaknesses; and responses to the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflicts, with a focus on the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children and the
implementation of preventive measures.
Preventing violence, combating terrorism and
crime and respecting human rights, especially those of
our children, are key elements to safeguard world peace
and security.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I offer Equatorial
Guinea a warm welcome to the Security Council and
congratulate it on assuming the presidency for the
month of February. I also thank and congratulate the
Dominican Republic for its excellent stewardship of the
Council in January.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat,
and His Excellency Mr. Richard Sezibera for their
briefings today. Let me also wish a very happy new
year to our Chinese colleagues.
The United Kingdom welcomes this debate and the
focus on stability, conflict prevention and peacebuilding
during Equatorial Guinea’s presidency of the Council.
The United Kingdom recognizes the deeply negative
effect that contemporary forms of mercenary activity
can have. That includes the link between their activities
and barriers to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), particularly SDG 16 on peace, justice
and strong institutions. We are committed to supporting
our African partners in achieving their vision of a more
peaceful and prosperous continent. We are working
jointly to tackle a range of shared security challenges,
and we are working on the provision of capacitybuilding for African security and justice institutions
and training for African peacekeepers.
We are also committed to aligning our development
support with initiatives that will foster Africa’s longterm stability. It is clear that there is a mutually
reinforcing link between stability and security and
prosperity and growth. That is why we are stimulating
high-quality investment into Africa to create wealth,
build infrastructure and create jobs. It is why we are
supporting Africa’s youth in accessing life-changing
education and skills. And it is why we support so
strongly the empowerment of women and girls, so
that African development can be truly inclusive and
therefore truly sustainable.

19-0263615/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

The holistic approach we take to supporting
Africa’s security and stability must also be applied
to the modern mercenary phenomenon. We must
recognize that it is not just a source of conflict, but a
symptom of underlying causes of instability. Mercenary
groups thrive where there are fragile State institutions,
a culture of impunity, weak rule of law and extreme
poverty. Some have links to serious and organized
crime threats, including the trafficking of small arms
and light weapons and the illegal exploitation of
resources. Their activities can undercut the rules-based
international system which the Council was designed
to uphold. Where this occurs, we should bring the full
range of mechanisms at the Council’s disposal to bear,
including sanctions regimes.
As you pointed out, Sir, it is important to draw
a distinction between mercenaries — a term clearly
defined in international humanitarian law — and
properly regulated and responsible private security
companies. The legitimate global private security
industry provides an essential service, supporting
diplomatic, commercial and humanitarian activity in
complex environments around the world.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
raising standards in the private security industry. In
this regard, we welcome the important work of the
Montreux Document Forum and the International Code
of Conduct Association (ICoCA). We urge all States,
companies and non-governmental organizations that
employ private security companies to recognise ICoCA
membership and certification to relevant standards in
their contracting process and to abide by the International
Code of Conduct for Private Security Providers.
In this context, the United Kingdom is troubled
by reports of the involvement of some private military
companies in destabilizing activities in a range of
countries. This is particularly troubling when those
countries — such as the Central African Republic, Syria,
Ukraine or Venezuela — are on the Security Council’s
agenda. We urge all such private sector organizations to
ensure that their actions do not cross the line between
legitimate security service provision and irresponsible
or destabilizing activities. There may be a role for the
relevant Security Council sub-committees to consider
whether there is evidence that any such actors have
perpetuated or exacerbated conflict or instability.
In closing, I would like to pay tribute to the ongoing
efforts of the African Union and African subregional
16/31

04/02/2019

organizations to prevent unconstitutional changes
of Government. This includes preventing the use of
mercenaries to destabilize or replace democratically
elected Governments. The United Kingdom urges the
African Union to continue to strengthen its capacities
in this regard by making effective use of information
gathered through the Continental Early Warning
System, and greater use of preventive diplomacy and
mediation practices.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset, on behalf of my authorities, to warmly
thank you, Sir, for having organized this debate and for
your presence among us. I also offer you our best wishes
for your success in Equatorial Guinea’s presidency of
the Security Council this month.
I thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Rwanda for their very enlightening briefings. I
also welcome the presence among us of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
Regional Integration of Gabon.
I further wish a happy new year to our
Chinese colleagues.
The phenomenon of the use of mercenaries
constitutes a real threat to the peace and security of
the African continent and of all the other regions of
the world where it is developing. Mercenary activity
is a multiplier of instability, upon which it feeds and
which it then increases. As foreign nationals and
non-members of regular armed forces who are recruited
in return for financial or material remuneration to
participate directly in armed conflicts, mercenaries are
not constrained by borders and thrive on the instability
and fragility of States. We have seen that phenomenon
in the past, particularly in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Côte d’Ivoire in the early 2000s. We continue to see
it today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
the Central African Republic and in the Sudan. The
impact of mercenaries’ activities is well known. What
first comes to mind is their destabilization of States
and undermining of constitutional order. We must also
consider their involvement in the illicit trafficking of
arms and natural resources. Finally, and above all, we
must address their multiple violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, in such forms
as sexual and gender-based violence, torture, forced
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

displacement and the recruitment of child soldiers.
Those violations were documented in the latest report
of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries as
a means of violating human rights and impeding the
exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
(see A/73/303).
I would also like to raise the issue of private
security and military companies. The latter must
of course be distinguished from the phenomenon
of mercenarism, since their activities are subject to
international regulation, as embodied, for example, in
the International Code of Conduct for Private Security
Service Providers and the Montreux Document. We
must, however, remain vigilant to ensure that those
private companies do not carry out destabilizing
activities in the countries in which they are deployed.
Given that observation, the question arises as to
how to curb the phenomenon of mercenarism. The first
line of response is prevention. While mercenaries fuel
conflicts, they are also a symptom of the root causes of the
instability and fragility of certain States. In that regard,
strengthening the rule of law — in particular improving
governance and combating corruption — investing in
educating young people, combating climate change
and developing cross-border cooperation are all factors
that, by their very nature, can address those root causes
of conflict. Accordingly, we welcome the efforts of the
African Union (AU), African subregional organizations
and the States members of the AU through the
implementation of the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative, which we fully support. We also commend
all the work undertaken to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063, the launch of the African Continental
Free Trade Area and the measures taken to combat the
proliferation of, and illicit trade in, small arms and light
weapons, such as the 2010 adoption of the Kinshasa
Convention at the level of the Economic Community of
Central African States.
The second part of the solution lies in dealing
with the phenomenon of mercenarism in and of
itself. The first step involves providing a security
response, such as through the robust action of certain
peacekeeping operations, including the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic and the Intervention
Brigade of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Such a security response is also predicated upon the

S/PV. 8456

action of African peace support operations — whose
development and predictable and sustainable financing
we fully support — and the activation or reactivation of
joint bilateral commissions of a number of States.
The security response is clearly only a first step
to addressing the phenomenon of mercenarism. The
response must also be political. In countries in which
mercenary groups are active, political processes must
consider foreign combatants as an integral part of any
strategy to dismantle armed groups. In that regard,
the implementation of demobilization, disarmament,
reintegration and repatriation programmes for former
members of armed groups who are engaged in a peace
process is often a necessary condition for the return
to peace and national reconciliation. Moreover, with
regard to demobilization, disarmament, reintegration
and repatriation programmes, the issue of the fate of
child soldiers is key to ensuring their demobilization
and possible repatriation to their countries of origin,
as well as to preventing their re-recruitment. Lastly,
the issue of submitting foreign combatants to the
judicial system should also be a part of the equation,
whether through ordinary or special tribunals or the
International Criminal Court.
Given the threat posed by mercenary activities, only
close international cooperation among States, regional
organizations and the United Nations will enable us to
act effectively. Rest assured of France’s commitment to
this struggle.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. I wish you and your team good luck
in the coming months. Let me also commend you,
Sir, on the initial statement that you delivered and the
very concrete example of your own country and how
mercenaries have threatened its security.
I would also like to thank the Dominican Republic
for its accomplishments as the previous President
of the Security Council in January and to commend
the representative of the Dominican Republic for
the statement on mercenaries that he just delivered,
which included an impressive list of the behaviour of
mercenaries, in particular towards women and children,
which he aptly described as “barbaric”.
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, referred to the “scourge
of mercenaries” in describing and summarizing their
activities. I believe that that is absolutely the right

19-0263617/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

description and, as we have heard in the discussion
around the table so far, there is strong unity among
Member States. Everyone recognizes that not only do
mercenary activities pose a threat to regional stability
and security in Central Africa but they also represent a
symptom of broader trends in conflict situations — they
are exacerbated by, and are closely linked with, trends
related to terrorism, violent extremism and national
organized crime, including trafficking in weapons.
In looking at the root causes, we see that one of
the main reasons for joining a mercenary group is
the lack of economic alternatives and opportunities,
especially for young people. In addition, the lines
between mercenary groups, organized crime and
terrorist groups are blurred. I believe that we have to be
honest and admit that any solution to this challenge will
not be found overnight. There are no easy solutions to
the problem of mercenaries in Africa. That is why we
need to take a more nuanced and long-term approach.
From Germany’s perspective, there are six potential
strategies for addressing the problem.
The first involves enabling State actors and security
forces. In his statement, the Secretary-General made a
very strong point of reminding us that the monopoly
over the use of force should reside with national
Governments, and not with mercenaries. We should
enable State actors and security forces to effectively
provide security for the population throughout the
entire territory, while of course respecting human
rights and the dignity of individuals. We need strong,
capable security institutions that follow the rule
of law. We need to strengthen the security sector
arrangements through various initiatives, particularly
under Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16, which
was also highlighted by my United Kingdom colleague,
United Nations regional envoys and, more broadly,
regional and subregional cooperation. Security sector
reform, capacity-building and training are, in our view,
key instruments for progress.
Secondly, with regard to non-proliferation and
disarmament, weapons and ammunition are the hard
fuel of conflicts, and their illicit flow is certainly an
important source for mercenaries. Non-proliferation
and disarmament are therefore important elements
in the strategy to stop mercenary activities. Under
the leadership of the African Union (AU) and
in close cooperation with Africa’s subregional
organizations — such as the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
18/31

04/02/2019

of West African States and the Regional Centre on
Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes
Region, the Horn of Africa and Bordering States — a
continental plan of action for the control of small arms
and light weapons was developed. That plan is also part
of the AU’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, which
we applaud. Germany strongly supports all activities in
that context. We are working with the African Union
to cut the flow of arms into areas of conflict, improve
control over arms and ammunition in fragile States and
train a new generation of experts to take the lead in
arms control. We therefore very much look forward to
the discussion to be held at the end of your presidency,
Mr. President, on the subject of silencing the guns. We
also look forward to supporting you, Sir, and lending
our support to your activities with a view to adopting a
draft resolution on the issue.
Thirdly, I would like to underline the role of
sanctions and expert monitoring as a concrete response
to mercenary activity. With respect to sanctions
specifically, designation criteria exist within the United
Nations that can serve as the basis for the listing of
individuals involved in mercenary activities, including,
for example, criteria related to human rights violations.
Fourthly, on accountability, we must ensure
that human rights violations and abuses committed
by mercenaries are duly investigated and that those
ultimately responsible are held accountable. I am very
encouraged that, for instance, the Foreign Minister
of Côte d’Ivoire, who I would like to welcome here,
also underscored the importance of punishment. Our
Russian colleague also mentioned the importance
of prosecution. We need to enhance the capacity and
responsiveness of national and international criminal
justice systems and national and regional human rights
mechanisms. That must explicitly include instances
where mercenaries act at the direction of a State.
Fifthly, on private military and security companies,
they must be distinguished from mercenary activities.
Many of those companies follow legitimate objectives.
But I would like to return to what Chairperson Moussa
Faki Mahamat clearly said earlier, that private military
and security companies pose many challenges. A
number of colleagues around the table also mentioned
concrete cases, including the representatives of France,
Poland and the United Kingdom. We have to make
sure that private military and security companies
follow legitimate objectives. We also must prevent
abuse, strengthen compliance with international
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as
promote transparency, the principle of the rule of law
and effective regulation of the commercial military and
security providers.
In that context, I would also like to highlight
the international code of conduct and the Montreux
Document, the adoption of which was actively
supported by Germany, and we encourage all States and
stakeholders to align themselves with those documents.
Sixthly, we must provide a secure space in which
young people can work peacefully towards their own
future, thereby reducing the appeal of mercenary groups
as an employer for disillusioned youth. We can build on
efforts that have already been undertaken, such as the
SDGs, as I already mentioned. I also want to mention
last year’s General Assembly resolution on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, which now serves
as a good point of reference and stresses
“the importance of addressing the socioeconomic
dimension of youth unemployment, as well as
facilitating the enhanced participation of youth in
decision-making processes” (General Assembly
resolution 72/311, para. 32).
Lastly, in line with our strategic focus on
prevention, the importance of which the President of
Equatorial Guinea mentioned, we must address the
conditions that are conducive to mercenarism in the
Central African region and beyond. They include
challenging humanitarian situations, high numbers of
displaced people, the surge in terrorist activities and the
devastating effects of climate change on the livelihoods
of millions, only to name a few of the root causes.
In conclusion, the topic of mercenaries serves as a
very good example of the urgent need for the Security
Council to move towards a more thematic, preventive
and cross-cutting discussion on threats to international
peace and security. The root causes of violence and
conflict deserve the focused attention of the Council,
and we remain committed to their presence on
the agenda.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the presence of His Excellency President
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and the other highlevel officials among us, including the Foreign Minister
of Côte d’Ivoire. We wish success to the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea in guiding our work this month, and

S/PV. 8456

we once again commend the Dominican Republic for its
excellent work last month. We appreciate the convening
of this debate and the important briefings delivered by
the Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Rwanda and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
We wish to underscore the relevance of the topic
that brings us together today, given the tangible impact
of the criminal activities of mercenaries and foreign
combatants on international peace and security. We
believe that the instability caused by those actors, as
well as their serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, deserve the effective
attention of the Security Council.
As was pointed out this morning, the repercussions
of this issue are particularly intense on the African
continent and affect countries such as Somalia, the
Central African Republic, the Union of the Comoros,
Equatorial Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire, among others.
The porousness of borders, the scarce presence
of the State and the occurrence of political crises
contribute to the expansion of the phenomenon. Under
those circumstances, we believe that efforts to fight
that scourge and contribute to the achievement of
sustainable peace should focus on the following areas
of action: conflict prevention, addressing root causes
and strengthening regional cooperation.
First, with regard to conflict prevention, situations
of conflict or dispute are skilfully used by mercenaries
and foreign fighters for the development of their
illicit activities, so it is essential to prevent them.
This prevention work requires strengthened local
and national capacities, specifically when it comes to
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the promotion of
dialogue and the promotion of social cohesion. The
support of the international community in these efforts,
especially that of the United Nations regional offices, is
necessary. Through their monitoring and early warning
functions, the latter contribute to the timely detection of
factors that trigger new episodes of tension and crisis,
which provides an opportunity to counteract them.
Secondly, with regard to addressing the root
causes, weak institutions, tensions generated by
regimes that restrict freedoms, the deterioration of
economic indicators, injustice and marginalization
are fertile ground for agents who promote violence
or are instruments of violence, such as mercenaries.
It is therefore critical to address these causes through

19-0263619/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

a multidimensional approach aimed at building
and strengthening capacities and institutions that
promote human rights, the rule of law and sustainable
development, in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We stress that, if institutions
are to be created in order to be effective and enjoy
legitimacy, they must be representative of their
respective societies. For that reason, their inclusiveness
must be ensured. Special emphasis must be placed on
protecting young people and children in order to prevent
their recruitment and provide them with opportunities
through quality education.
Thirdly, with regard to regional and neighbourhood
cooperation, since mercenary activities have crossborder implications, which can be rapidly adapted to
the different geographic contexts in which mercenaries
operate, this phenomenon must be addressed from
a regional perspective. That is why we welcome the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative,
which promotes peace, stability and prosperity on the
African continent. We believe that, given its relevance,
the initiative should enjoy the strong and unanimous
support of the international community, and in
particular that of the Council.
We also underscore the importance of strengthening
intelligence work and border control, which are
fundamental elements in addressing the usual sources of
financing for mercenaries, such as illicit trafficking in
arms, people and natural resources. The establishment
of joint commissions is vital for these purposes.
In conclusion, I stress the need to promote new
accessions to and strict compliance with the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries, which includes, among
other aspects, the adoption of the national legislation
necessary to effectively address this phenomenon.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, South
Africa wishes to congratulate Your Excellency President
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, and the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. You may be
assured of South Africa’s full support and cooperation
during your presidency of the Council.
We also want to thank the Dominican Republic for
its excellent presidency of the Council in January.
We thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, and the Chairperson of the African Union
20/31

04/02/2019

Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for their
insightful briefings. We further thank His Excellency
Mr. Richard Sezibera, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Rwanda,
for his remarks on behalf of President Paul Kagame, in
his capacity as the President of the African Union. We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire, and His
Excellency Mr. Abdu Kambogo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and Regional
Integration of Gabon.
South Africa welcomes the convening of this timely
debate and the selection of the important theme on the
role of mercenary activities as a source of insecurity and
destabilization in Africa. It is an important, undisputed
fact that over the years, Africa has been at the receiving
end of mercenary activities, which have contributed
to undermining peace, security and stability on the
continent. Several African countries have been targets
of ongoing attempts by mercenary groups to overthrow
legitimate and democratically elected Governments.
Their transnational activities also threaten regional
stability, especially in cases where the security of
neighbouring countries is intertwined. South Africa
condemns such activities, as they pose serious
challenges to our collective efforts to promote and
ensure peace and stability in our respective countries.
Equally concerning, the activities of mercenaries pose
a serious threat to the peace and stability of several
regions on the continent, which is already fragile owing
to ongoing conflicts.
Since the advent of democracy in 1994, South
Africa has been part of the collective efforts to promote
peace and stability throughout our beloved continent.
We support the objectives of the African Union aimed
at achieving greater unity and solidarity among
African countries and the people of Africa, while also
defending the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of its member States. These objectives
and principles are clearly articulated in the Constitutive
Act of the African Union. Key among these principles
is the condemnation and rejection of unconstitutional
changes of Government, as well as non-interference by
any member State in the internal affairs of another.
As a responsible member of the African Union
and the United Nations, South Africa condemns all
mercenary activities in any African or non-African
country. We believe that these activities are in
clear contravention of continental and international
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

conventions and legal instruments. As eloquently
captured in the concept note for this meeting (S/2019/97,
annex), the recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries violate the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and those of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union.
South Africa reaffirms the need for the unequivocal
implementation of all international and continental
legislation and instruments against mercenaries, in
particular the 1989 International Convention against
the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of
Mercenaries and the 1977 Organization of African
Unity Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa.
For our part, South Africa has an uncompromising
and strict policy against its nationals who partake in any
mercenary activities. The Constitution of our country
provides that the resolve to live in peace and harmony
precludes any South African citizen from participating
in armed conflict, nationally or internationally, except as
provided for in the Constitution or national legislation.
In pursuance of this objective, in 1998 the
Parliament of South Africa passed legislation entitled
the “Regulation of Foreign Military Assistance Act”.
The objective of the Act is to regulate the rendering
of foreign military assistance by our nationals, persons
permanently residing within our borders and foreign
citizens rendering such assistance from within our
borders. Through these actions, South Africa has
consistently taken strict measures against its nationals
found to be involved in mercenary activities or
violating the Regulation of Foreign Military Assistance
Act. We have previously cooperated and collaborated
with fellow African countries in instances where our
nationals were implicated in mercenary activities.
My delegation stresses that it is the obligation of
all States to take all necessary measures to eradicate
mercenary activities wherever they may occur. In that
regard, the Security Council should encourage all
Member States to commit to preventing their nationals
and foreigners in their respective territories from
engaging in mercenary activities.
Representatives will recall that, during its sixtysecond session, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 62/145 on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right of peoples to self-determination. South Africa
is concerned about the new forms of mercenary acts in

S/PV. 8456

the form of private security companies. Over the years,
there has been a clear nexus between the activities of
mercenaries and private military companies and the
negative consequences of such companies on some
of the continent’s protracted conflicts. We call on the
international community to put in place a regulatory
and legally binding framework on the work of those
companies. The Montreux Document on the selfregulation of private military companies could be used
as required once that instrument has been universally
agreed. My delegation is convinced that we should
address the perception around the privatization and
corporatization of security services, as such a role should
be the sole responsibility of sovereign Governments.
In conclusion, I wish to stress that South Africa
is firmly committed to working with fellow African
States and members of the Security Council to address
the challenge of mercenary activities and their negative
impact on peace and stability both regionally and
internationally. That is in line with the aspirations of
the African continent as envisaged in Agenda 2063:
The Africa We Want, in particular the desire for a
peaceful and secure Africa, and through the flagship
project Silencing the Guns by 2020.
We wish our Chinese friends a happy new year.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I would like to welcome your
Excellency and to congratulate your friendly country
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We thank you for convening this important
meeting to discuss an important and vital topic in all
its dimensions. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Mr. Mousa Faki Mahamat,
for their valuable briefings on this phenomenon, which
is threatening the sovereignty, security and territorial
integrity of countries and the right of peoples to
self-determination. I would also like to welcome the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire and
Rwanda at this meeting.
There is no doubt that the phenomenon of using
mercenaries in conflict is a threat not only to the
security and safety of States but also to regional and
international peace and security. It also constitutes a
gross violation of the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. This phenomenon
becomes more complicated when it is linked with other
serious issues, some of which are on the agenda of the

19-0263621/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

Security Council, such as terrorism, foreign fighters,
illegal migration and transnational organized crime.
The activities carried out by mercenaries in
various conflicts violate international law and lack
ethical, human and legal foundations. Mercenaries are
clearly completely indifferent to international treaties
and conventions in time of war. That is manifested
through the intentional targeting of civilians, prisoners
and civilian facilities, as well as by committing war
crimes. It is deplorable that some Governments and
non-State actors continue to use mercenaries with a
view to spreading chaos, conducting military coups and
waging wars.
Reports issued by non-governmental organizations
involved in this issue indicate that the high level of
poverty and unemployment as well as the fragility of
State institutions are all factors for joining the ranks
of mercenaries, particularly since, according to those
reports, payments given to mercenaries range from
$500 to $1,000 or sometimes $2,000 per day. The
number of such mercenaries is almost 20 million, which
is very ominous, as their numbers are nearly equivalent
to uniformed armies. While historically it is not a
new issue, spending on this phenomenon has reached
almost $100 billion, and it is expected to double by the
year 2020.
There are Central and West African countries that
have unfortunately become fertile ground for mercenary
activities, since they have rich natural resources. That
has disrupted the political and development processes
in those countries, while their Governments incurred
large sums of money in order to reduce and eliminate
such activities. There is also a close link between
mercenaries and natural resources. The number of
mercenaries increases in areas rich in natural resources
with a view to controlling those resources in order
to fund their illegitimate activities. There are many
examples, including your friendly country, Sir, and the
attempted coup that you suffered a few weeks before
joining the Security Council.
The questions contained in the concept note
(S/2019/97, annex) should draw our attention because
our responses would lead us to realistic visions in order
to address this phenomenon and reach common ground
on an international instrument that incriminates and
addresses this phenomenon. If we consider the existing
legal instruments, the international commitment to
abide by them and the international efforts to eliminate
22/31

04/02/2019

that scourge, we will see that they are not commensurate
with the threat to the international community posed by
the phenomenon.
Many are aware of the reluctance of the international
community to address that very dangerous and
significant threat and to implement legal instruments to
deter international networks that rely on the recruitment
of mercenaries and their deployment in conflict areas
despite the fact that the phenomenon has long existed.
It is clearly defined by international humanitarian law
and in article 47 of the 1977 Protocol additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating
to the protection of victims of non-international armed
conflicts, as well as the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries.
The recommendations issued during the current
session of the General Assembly by the Working Group
on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination are important, including with
regard to Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which promotes
peaceful and inclusive societies, while focusing on the
importance of “strengthen[ing] democracy and good
governance, economic, social and cultural rights and
development” (A/73/303, para. 79 (a)).
In conclusion, given the serious consequences of
this phenomenon for international peace and security,
the Security Council should focus more on addressing
it. It is not enough to discuss this serious issue only in
the General Assembly or the Human Rights Council.
We also support the role of the Working Group on
the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination and the implementation of its
recommendations. We urge States to adopt strict
measures against the perpetrators of such atrocities and
crimes, which violate human rights and international
humanitarian law. Such perpetrators should be held
accountable without exception or impunity. We reaffirm
that respect for human rights, development, peace,
equal opportunities and the rule of law act as safeguards
against young people becoming mercenaries.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to
congratulate you on Equatorial Guinea’s assumption
of the presidency of the Council. I should like also to
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

congratulate the delegation of the Dominican Republic
on the outstanding work it did during its presidency of
the Council last month.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate, and the Secretary-General and
the Chairman of the African Union Commission, as
well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, for
their interesting statements.
This debate is very timely given that mercenary
activities are a destabilizing factor that have had a
significant impact on a number of countries on the
Security Council’s agenda. Several of those countries
are in Africa, but the continent is certainly not the only
one concerned by this problem. Mercenary activity
not only complicates and compounds conflicts that
are already under way, but can also contribute to the
germination of latent conflict. We must therefore
remain attentive in the context of an approach aimed at
conflict prevention.
As indicated in the concept note for this debate
(S/2019/97, annex), tackling these kinds of activities
is a complex task, as they most often take place in a
context with an overlapping array of various interests
and motives that encompass organized crime, violent
extremism and attempts to achieve political goals
through non-democratic means. Mercenary activities
can also be a source of financing for armed groups
created for other purposes, while other such groups are
merely seeking to enrich themselves.

S/PV. 8456

Mr. President, to congratulate your country on having
ratified that Convention. Given that today only 36
Member States, including Belgium, are signatories
thereto, we call on all Member States to ratify it without
further delay.
That being said, the legal standards and instruments
to which we are signatories will have an impact only if
States enforce them at the national level. Here we refer
to international humanitarian law; international texts
on human rights; and texts emanating from regional
organizations. In this area, as in others, we advocate
for a strengthening of cooperation among States.
The Security Council already has at its disposal
mechanisms aimed at affecting the interests of the
sponsors and organizers of mercenary activities, in
particular targeted sanctions aimed at those individuals
who act against efforts towards peace and at their means
of financing. Here I would cite the illicit trafficking
of weapons, illicit financial transfers and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.
In conclusion, all States can be faced, one way or
another, with the issue of mercenary activities, to which
they must respond. Belgium, for its part, will always
opt for transparency and international cooperation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
Mr. Abdu Razzaq Guy Kambogo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and Regional
Integration of Gabon.

While there are various definitions of mercenary
activities, a debate such as today’s is useful in terms of
broadening our understanding of the issue. In its work,
the Council is currently dealing with several cases of
mercenary activity. For example, in Libya combatants
from Darfur sell their services to the various factions.
In doing so they remain operational and pose a threat to
the Sudan or, eventually, other countries of the region.
In Yemen, we are concerned at the use of children by
mercenary groups. And let us not forget either that
maritime piracy can also represent a form of mercenary
activity, but here I do not wish to infringe on tomorrow’s
debate on this topic.

Mr. Kambogo (Gabon) (spoke in French): It is
a pleasure and an honour for Gabon to have been
invited by Equatorial Guinea to take part in this very
important meeting.

To contain the phenomenon of mercenary activity,
which usually has an international dimension, States
should take full advantage of existing international
instruments, in particular the 1989 International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. Allow me on this point,

I am pleased to convey to the President of
Equatorial Guinea, Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
the brotherly greetings and congratulations of Mr. Ali
Bongo Ondimba, President and Head of State of the
Gabonese Republic, for having brought before this
important forum the issue of mercenaries, which

I should like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission. I also thank the
Dominican Republic and congratulate it on its term in
January, and I welcome and congratulate the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire and Rwanda.
Nor can I fail to thank all previous speakers for their
excellent contributions to our discussion today.

19-0263623/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

represents a real source of insecurity and destabilization
in Africa in general and in Central Africa in particular.
The recent events in Equatorial Guinea remind
us of the sad fact that Africa continues to fall victim
to upheavals as a result of a phenomenon that we
had believed to be a thing of the past and which,
unfortunately, constitutes a genuine threat to peace and
security in our countries.
This high-level debate provides us with the
opportunity to take an objective look at security issues
in the subregion, which are a source of deep concern
and are exacerbated by the presence of an increasing
number of hostile, well-equipped armed groups. The
terms of reference for this debate as given to us by the
President of the Security Council stress the impact of
this heinous phenomenon of mercenaries not only on
political stability, but also on the economic development
of African States.
That is why Gabon strictly respects all international
legal instruments relating to the combat against
mercenarism, and that is why we stress the importance
of respecting the national sovereignty of each country.
In that vein, we encourage all States of Central
Africa to continue to strengthen their fraternal ties,
friendship, good-neighbourly relations and cooperation
while providing holistic, coordinated responses to
the challenges posed by transnational threats such as
mercenaries, terrorism and violent extremism.
Only the mobilization earnest cooperation of our
States can effectively combat such threats to peace and
security. In that regard, Gabon, in its capacity as current
Chair of the Economic Community of Central African
States, will continue to work for the consolidation of
peace and stability in the subregion. It is worth recalling
that Central Africa has a remarkable institutional
architecture capable of promoting the prevention and
management of sources of instability and crises, in
particular the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa and the Central African Early Warning System.
On behalf of the highest authorities of the Republic
of Gabon, I must certainly take this opportunity to
commend the work of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the ongoing support of
the African Union.
Another issue that contributes to the destabilization
of our States is the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, which results from the armed conflicts in
24/31

04/02/2019

certain countries of the continent and fuels poaching
and illegal wildlife trade. Such trade is one of the
primary sources of funding for mercenaries, which
we firmly condemn. Despite our firm commitment to
combating that phenomenon, it must be recognized
that without the sustained support of the international
community, we will not be able to permanently contain
those scourges.
In conclusion, on behalf of the President of Gabon,
Ali Bongo Ondimba, I would like to again congratulate
Equatorial Guinea, as President of the Security Council,
on the relevance of the theme of today’s debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, allow me to offer my sincere congratulations to
you, Mr. President, and to your brotherly country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. We are confident that your
country and your Mission here in New York will be
able to successfully discharge the serious tasks of the
presidency of the Council.
I would also like to convey to you, Sir, greetings
from your brother President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi, who
would have liked to be present at today’s meeting in
response to your kind invitation. However, regrettably,
he could not be here due to previous commitments.
I would like to thank the Dominican Republic for
its presidency of the Security Council last month. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for their briefings
at the beginning of this meeting. I also welcome the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, Côte d’Ivoire
and Gabon to the Council today. I also congratulate
China on the Chinese new year.
I would like to commend you, Sir, for your interest
in today’s topic on peace and security in Africa. That
is reflected in the judicious selection of themes to be
considered by the Council this month.
I believe that today’s theme on the impact of
mercenary activities on peace and security in the region
of Central Africa is an emerging trend and a threat to
peace and security in various regions of our continent.
It is closely linked to the growing impact of non-State
actors and the negative repercussions of their criminal
activities on peace and stability in our States. Egypt
reiterates the importance of stepping up African and
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

international efforts to address the problem. We will
work tirelessly during our presidency of the African
Union, which is to begin in a few days, to pay greater
attention to eliminating this phenomenon as part of the
global strategy to maintain peace and stability on the
African continent.
Egypt has always been committed to the
implementation of measures outlined in sanctions
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, in
particular arms embargos and the transfer of assets
and funds, aimed at preventing armed groups — other
than regular State armies, of course — from acquiring
weapons. Access to weapons can undermine the
security and stability of countries and entire societies.
In that regard, Egypt underscores the importance of
strengthening and promoting national institutions, in
particular national security forces, to enable States to
exercise full control over their territory. We also call for
greater regional and international cooperation through
information-sharing on transnational security threats,
foremost of which is terrorism and mercenary groups.
In the light of all this, Egypt is very proud of
our efforts to address threats to transnational peace
and security, in particular terrorism, when we were
members of the Security Council in 2016 and 2017. We
actively participated in the negotiations of resolution
2368 (2017) of July 2017, on combating the financing
of terrorism. We also submitted a draft resolution on
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons, which
was unanimously adopted by the Security Council as
resolution 2370 (2017) in August 2017. In that regard,
I would like to pay tribute to the efforts of Equatorial
Guinea in focusing on emerging unconventional
transnational security threats, which undermine the
stability and security of African countries.
Today’s debate on mercenaries is another important
step in our regional and international cooperation that
can be used to address those threats. Egypt is very
interested in technical cooperation with our African
brothers in order to assist them in strengthening
African national capacities in the areas of security,
border control and addressing negative security threats.
In addition, we are ready to take part in cooperation
efforts to rebuild and develop their countries and
eradicate poverty in the context of our endeavour to
address the root causes of mercenary activities and
other security threats faced by the continent.

S/PV. 8456

International and regional efforts to combat the
phenomenon of mercenaries already possess the
appropriate legal frameworks, in particular the 1989
International Convention against the Recruitment, Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries, as well as the
1977 Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa. We call on all States to accede to those
treaties and commit to implement them.
In that regard, emphasis should be placed on
strengthening regional cooperation among African
States, and the international community as a whole,
so as to ensure that mercenary groups are deprived of
any support, whether weapons or funding, as part of a
comprehensive strategy that includes the peacebuilding
dimension and addresses the root causes of the problem
through a cooperative approach among the States of
the region, the African Union, other African regional
organizations and international partners.
Finally, the relevance of eliminating the phenomenon
of mercenary combatants is linked to the common
African and international efforts to promote and
achieve the goal of silencing the guns by 2020, in view
of the concrete impact of this negative phenomenon on
the peace and security situation on the continent. In that
regard, we value the importance of the special meeting
on this subject, Sir, to be held under your Council
presidency. We reiterate our sincere appreciation for
your initiative, Mr. President, in choosing this vital
subject to be the focus of our discussion today. We
are confident that it will contribute to strengthening
our efforts to combat the phenomenon of mercenary
combatants and strengthen the foundations of security
and stability in the Central African region and on our
continent as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I would like to congratulate our sister country
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and wish it every success in the fulfilment of
its mandate. Allow me to welcome you, Mr. President,
and express the full satisfaction of the delegation of the
Central African Republic in seeing you conduct this
important public debate, the topic of which is highly
relevant in view of the criminal activities carried out by
mercenaries in the Central African subregion.

19-0263625/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

04/02/2019

Before going to the heart of the matter, I would like
to apologize on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic, who very much wanted to be here but has
not been able to attend owing to the peace negotiations
taking place in Khartoum, which require his constant
monitoring and presence in Bangui.

Assembly resolution that is dealt with annually by the
Third Committee. However, the resources deployed
and the measures taken so far appear to be insufficient
and require more extensive implementation. Existing
sanctions can undoubtedly be bolstered against
mercenaries in order to serve as an example and
a deterrent.

Recurrent crises lead the perpetrators of such
crises to recruit mercenaries to fill the ranks of their
combatants. My country’s case is instructive in that
regard, as the many rebellions that have taken place in
the Central African Republic have always included the
involvement of mercenaries from various countries. The
other reason for that recruitment is the fragmentation of
armed groups, which further complicates any attempts
to seek a solution to end the conflict.

The proliferation of mercenaries and the circulation
of small arms and light weapons are a source of serious
concern. Those two scourges must be treated with
rigour. To that end, only sustained cooperation between
the countries of Central Africa can eradicate them, as
they undermine good-neighbourly relations and create
an atmosphere of suspicion among those countries.

Armed groups, supported by foreign fighters,
engage in various illicit and criminal activities, such as
the exploitation of mineral resources and smuggling in
diamonds and gold. As demonstrated during the Security
Council’s debate on 16 October 2018 (see S/PV.8372),
natural resources are increasingly becoming the causes
of conflict and their deep-rootedness. We note that
the persistence of tensions in mining areas is higher
than in others. The exploitation of natural resources
and competition over those resources provoke violent
clashes between various groups for control of their
zones of influence, thereby leading to their engagement
in several activities falling under State sovereignty.
The current difficulties in finding a peaceful resolution
to the crisis in the Central African Republic adequately
illustrate the inextricable nature of armed conflict and
its being fuelled by the looting of natural resources by
armed groups.
The concept note (S/2019/97, annex) provided
to us covers relevant issues to which we are not able
to provide the requisite responses, given the time
allocated to us. We have witnessed the proliferation of
mercenarism in Africa for many years, but especially
in Central Africa in recent years. Given that mercenary
activity is driven by profit, it would be difficult not
to make the link between this growing trend and the
wealth possessed by States targeted by such acts of
violence and destabilization.
Furthermore, the actions carried out so far by the
States of the region, together with the Security Council
and the United Nations, abound in a positive way, as
the issue of mercenaries is now the subject of a General
26/31

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chad.
Mr. Moustapha (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
sincere apologies of your brother and friend Mr. Idriss
Deby Itno, President of the Republic of Chad, who
would have liked to participate in this debate had the
constraints of his schedule permitted. He has asked
that you, Sir, accept his expression of gratitude for
having convened this important debate on the impact
of mercenarism in Central Africa — a topic that is
highly relevant to the growing security challenges that
surround the subregion and many others.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
whose presence at this high-level debate is evidence
of his commitment to peace and security in Africa.
As well, I commend the relevant and very illustrative
interventions made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Rwanda, Côte d’Ivoire and Gabon.
Mercenarism has always been a factor of insecurity
and destabilization throughout the ages. As the preamble
to the Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa aptly points out, this phenomenon poses a
serious threat to the independence, sovereignty, security,
territorial integrity and harmonious development
of States. It is therefore right that the international
community tackle it energetically by putting in place
appropriate legal instruments.
Nevertheless, the evolution of international
security paradigms — with the emergence of non-State
actors, including terrorist groups and traffickers of
all kinds — and the increasing and harmful impact
of their actions on the international scene makes the
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

fight against insecurity factors, such as the use of
mercenaries, more complex. Similarly, the weakening
or even collapse of States in certain parts of the world
and the prospect of non-State groups controlling
entire portions of national territory have significantly
increased the threat, given the access of those groups
to huge financial and natural resources and, above
all, their control of large quantities of weapons and
ammunition, which they undertake to circulate. That
prospect is of concern to the international community
and requires it to be much more vigilant.
There is therefore an urgent need to implement
the existing legal instruments and tailor them to the
evolving threat. In that spirit, Chad has developed a
legal arsenal to prevent and punish all mercenary acts.
Our new criminal code, adopted in 2017, criminalizes
and cracks down on that phenomenon. It provides for
a prison sentence of 20 to 30 years for any person who
engages in such criminal activity. Legal persons can
also be declared fully responsible for mercenary acts,
and therefore heavily punished. The ratification of
the Organization of African Unity Convention for the
Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa is also part of
that process.
The Government of Chad has always strived to
combat insecurity in all its forms, in collaboration with
its bilateral, subregional, regional and international
partners. At the bilateral level, Chad regularly
organizes, together with neighbouring and friendly
countries, joint general or sectoral commissions that
provide an appropriate forum for discussing issues of
common interest and concern, including those related
to security, with a view to providing the required
solutions. Together with the Sudan, Chad has set up a
joint border force that has achieved exemplary results
in the border security field. In the Lake Chad basin,
the Multinational Joint Task Force, while effectively
reducing the operations of the Boko Haram sect, is also
involved in the systematic dismantling of its networks
for arms and ammunition supply and people recruitment.
Furthermore, subregional organizations serve as a
platform for discussion and information exchange on
the issue of security. For example, the forty-seventh
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
held in N’Djamena from 3 and 7 December 2018,
allowed for a review of the political and security
issues in the Central African subregion. The issue
of mercenarism was included on the agenda. Among

S/PV. 8456

its conclusions, while stressing the complexity of the
mercenary situation, the meeting called on
“the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the United Nations
to increase their cooperation with a view to
strengthening their commitments to combating
mercenarism, including through the implementation
of existing legal instruments”.
In addition, Chad, the Sudan, the Niger and Libya
signed a memorandum of understanding in N’Djamena
on 31 May 2018, aimed at strengthening cooperation
on security and border surveillance among the four
countries in response to the security challenges
arising from the situation in southern Libya, which is
characterized by the proliferation of terrorist groups,
traffickers of all kinds and armed groups engaged
in mercenarism. That constitutes a serious threat of
destabilization for neighbouring countries as well as
for international peace and security more broadly. Chad
has repeatedly emphasized that the volatile situation
in southern Libya offers conditions that allow for the
establishment of armed groups, including mercenaries
being paid for their services in various conflicts.
Despite making immense efforts to consolidate
peace and security for its people and contribute to
peace and security in the subregion, my country, Chad,
remains threatened by this scourge, as demonstrated
by the criminal acts directed against our territory
and citizens. We therefore call on the international
community to give special attention to fragile regions
and countries, particularly in the Sahel and Central
Africa. Chad also remains convinced that resolving
the crisis in Libya and the return of State authority
throughout the territory of that sisterly country will
contribute to reducing the threat throughout the Sahel.
In conclusion, Chad reiterates its commitment to
continuing to work to strengthen cooperation with
neighbouring States, the countries of the subregion and
the international community as a whole, with a view to
combating mercenarism and other threats to peace and
security in the region and the rest of the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Congo.
Mr. Balé (Republic of Congo) (spoke in French): At
the outset, upon the accession of the sisterly Republic
of Equatorial Guinea to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February, allow me to convey

19-0263627/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

to you, Mr. President, the heartfelt congratulations of
your great friend and brother His Excellency Mr. Denis
Sassou Nguesso, President of the Republic of the Congo,
who was unable to travel to New York. He reiterates
his support for your mandate, Sir, at the helm of this
organ entrusted with maintaining international peace
and security.
Your presence, Mr. President, in this Chamber
dedicated to peace and security throughout the world
confirms your constant commitment to peace and
development in Africa, particularly in our subregion
of Central Africa. My delegation is extremely
grateful to Equatorial Guinea for having invited the
Congo to participate in this important debate on
mercenarism, with particular reference to the Central
African subregion. Equatorial Guinea represents a
victimized African country, not to mention one that
has endured more than one attempt at destabilization
by mercenaries, the most recent of which took place
in December 2017. The Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — countries
of the subregion — are further emblematic victims of
predatory mercenary activities.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the peace agreement reached on 2 February in
Khartoum between the Government of the Central
African Republic and armed groups, establishing high
hopes for the reconstruction of that country of the
subregion, at peace and reconciled with itself, which
will hereafter be able to play its part in realizing the
peace, security and development agenda in our Central
African subregion.
The issue of mercenaries — often scrutinized in
the shadow of major current affairs such as terrorism
or maritime piracy — does not receive much attention
from the international community. Yet it is akin to
other threats to peace, stability and security. By way of
illustration, in the case of Central Africa, uncontrolled
movements of illegal groups between States in our
subregion have a negative impact on trust. It is well
known that the promotion of confidence-building
measures among States at the regional and subregional
levels alleviates tensions and conflicts and promotes
lasting peace, stability and sustainable development.
Moreover, it has been noted that it is easier for these
non-State actors — the mercenaries — to incite
coups d’état, destabilize legitimate institutions,
carry out activities of economic and/or political
intelligence-gathering, perpetrate acts of terrorism
28/31

04/02/2019

and participate in conflicts alongside mutineers,
insurgents, rebels or other armed oppositions with a
view to overthrowing legitimate Governments.
It is clear that mercenary activities and related
activities have, unfortunately, multiplied in conflict
situations in recent years. The African continent has
suffered a great deal and continues to suffer from
mercenaries who dangerously hamper its development.
The issue of mercenaries is, in that respect, a major
security concern for our countries and one that should
engage us further. That is why my delegation welcomes
its inclusion on the Council’s agenda and hopes that
today’s debate will shed more light on this phenomenon,
given the developments in the situation that call for
renewed consideration.
I am pleased to note that the issue of mercenarism
is at the heart of the concerns of the leaders of the
subregion. It was the subject of particular attention in
Brazzaville at the forty-sixth meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa. In the declaration that
led to the consideration of this item, a commitment
was made by members of the Economic Community of
Central African States to making the necessary efforts
and collaborating in order to eliminate the risk of
mercenary infiltration in the countries of the subregion.
The ministerial meeting of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, as well as the Joint
Summit of the Economic Community of West African
States and the Economic Community of Central African
States Heads of State and Government on Peace,
Security, Stability and the Fight Against Terrorism and
Violent Extremism, which gathered the Heads of State
and Government of West and Central African States
in July 2018, touched on the problem of mercenarism,
which affects the countries of the two subregions,
which are already prey to maritime piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea; the activities of terrorist groups such as
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army; as well
as transnational organized crime and security threats
related to pastoralism and transhumance.
Strengthening cooperation at the subregional and
regional levels in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and combating cross-border crime,
terrorism and the illicit circulation of weapons — areas
in which mercenaries are very active — are, among
others, measures that resulted from those two meetings,
which, as the Council is aware, contribute to reducing the
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

impact of mercenary activities in conflicts. Improved
demobilization and reintegration programmes have also
proven to be a means of preventing former combatants
from returning to service as new mercenaries.
In that context of combating this phenomenon,
we must include the entry into force of the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly. That agreement, known as the
Kinshasa Convention, is a living expression of the will
of our States to prevent the illicit and uncontrolled
circulation of small arms and light weapons, particularly
in areas of internal or border conflict. However, the
issue of mercenarism is a complex and sensitive subject
and combating mercenarism is no easy task — far
from it — even if the issue has earned the unanimous
condemnation of the international community.
We have certainly dedicated international
instruments to the issue. The Convention for the
Elimination of Mercenarism in Africa, signed in
Libreville on 3 July 1977, entered into force on 22 April
1985. It is an important regional instrument in view
of the dangers that have been posed by mercenarism
to many African States since the beginning of
decolonization. That text was adopted less than a
month after the Additional Protocol of 1977 to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949. Mercenarism is not
identified by the 1977 Additional Protocol as a serious
offense, whereas the African Convention criminalizes
mercenaries and mercenarism. The United Nations
International Convention against the Recruitment, Use,
Financing and Training of Mercenaries, of 4 December
1989, considers mercenarism to be an offence. It entered
into force on 20 October 2001.
Some countries have adopted related national laws
and regulations that contribute to their commitment
to better governance of the phenomenon. However, in
order to effectively combat mercenarism in its current
form, the adaptation of all instruments, taking into
account the evolution of the phenomenon in its various
current configurations, is a necessity requiring a more
in-depth update with which national legislation must be
aligned. Strengthening cooperation at the subregional,
regional and international levels, based on genuine
and decisive political resolve, is crucial to support the
implementation of those revised instruments.

S/PV. 8456

In that regard, the members of the Economic
Community of Central African States have affirmed
their will to develop a strategy within the framework
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa, with the
technical support of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, the African Union and international
partners, in order to eradicate the phenomenon of
mercenarism in our subregion.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having invited my
delegation to take part in this first high-level debate
of the Security Council on the theme “Mercenary
activities as a source of insecurity and destabilization
in Africa”.
I wish to convey deep and sincere congratulations to
you, Sir, from your brother, His Excellency Mr. Ismaël
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti
and Head of Government, who wishes to thank you and
your delegation for having highlighted this important
subject during your presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that your country will
carry out its duties with distinction.
(spoke in French)
Equatorial Guinea brings a unique expertise
and perspective to this issue, having addressed it
continuously on the basis of its own experience. The
clarification of the challenges outlined in the concept
note (S/2019/97, annex) before us amply demonstrates
the level of Equatorial Guinea’s expertise and wealth
of experience. We wish to express our appreciation
for the briefings made this morning by the SecretaryGeneral, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Rwanda, in his capacity as
representative of the Chairperson of the African Union,
His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame.
(spoke in English)
Djibouti takes this opportunity to reiterate
its principled position and commitment against
all violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, as underlined in the report of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of

19-0263629/31

S/PV.8456

Threats to international peace and security

the right of peoples to self-determination (A/73/303). In
that regard, we wish to make the four following points.
(spoke in French)
First, the phenomenon of mercenarism poses a
threat to peace, security and international and regional
stability, and is one of the causes of destabilization
in Africa. In that regard, the Security Council and
the United Nations must help to develop responses
in order to eliminate this phenomenon, based on the
recommendations made by the Working Group. Those
must contribute to renewing our political will in this
fight and cover all aspects, such as the recruitment,
training, engagement and financing of mercenaries.
Secondly, my delegation expresses its concern at
the increase in the number of terrorist groups, violent
extremism and transnational organized crime, in
particular human trafficking and drug trafficking in
several areas of Africa that were untouched by armed
conflict before such activity began.
Thirdly, additional efforts should be made,
especially in preparing mandates and funding for
peacekeeping operations, special political missions
and peacebuilding efforts in areas emerging from
conflict and conflict-affected areas. In Africa, it will
be necessary to ensure greater cooperation among
subregional organizations, the African Union and the
United Nations with a view to improving the results of
such activity on the ground.
Fourthly, we also welcome the common position
adopted by the African Heads of State and Government
within the framework of the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, the noble aim of which is to save future
generations from the scourge of war.
As a haven of peace and refuge in a subregion that is
racked with conflict and armed violence, the Republic
of Djibouti has always been an advocate for the culture
of peace that it draws from the very foundations of its
pastoral traditions, which are based on the notions of
hospitality and exchange. We hope that this high-level
meeting will enable us to strengthen our global response
to the phenomenon of mercenarism by capitalizing on
the efforts undertaken by the international community,
in strict compliance with international law and
international humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
30/31

04/02/2019

Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
friendly country on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for convening this
important meeting on such an important topic, which
has a great impact on security and stability in Africa.
I also congratulate the new members that joined
the Security Council in January, as well as the friendly
Republic of China and its people on the Chinese new
year. I also welcome the participation in this important
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Côte
d’Ivoire, Gabon and Rwanda.
My delegation is grateful to Equatorial Guinea
for dedicating this debate to discussing the disastrous
effects of mercenary activities on peace and security in
Africa. Mercenary groups continue to exploit conflicts
in a number of African regions and consider those areas
as havens for their criminal activities. Sometimes, such
groups carry out human and arms trafficking and,
in other cases, practice banditry and exploit natural
resources. Mercenaries seek to perpetuate conflicts,
fragile conditions and weak Governments in order to
survive in environments that suit them. Accordingly,
mercenaries are one of the greatest challenges and
threats to maintaining peace and security.
Mercenary activities in Africa and in countries
like yours, Mr. President, are among the threats posed
to stability and security in Africa, as is evident in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The continuation of such activities on
our continent causes great harm to humankind as a
whole. We applaud the courage of Equatorial Guinea
and its President in combating mercenary activities,
and we strongly support the President’s call on the
international community to more effectively combat
the three consistent evils in the history of humankind:
terrorism, mercenaries and piracy. We applaud Angola,
Zimbabwe and Cameroon in helping Equatorial Guinea
to decisively address the issue of mercenaries. We
call on the African Union to make greater efforts to
combat mercenaries and integrate those efforts into
current plans for Africa’s contribution and funding of
peacekeeping operations. We note in particular the link
between child recruitment, child abuse and mercenaries.
We also call for priority to be given to those issues as
we celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
19-02636

04/02/2019

Threats to international peace and security

After becoming aware of the threat posed by
mercenary gangs, the Sudan worked diligently to
preserve State authority in conflict areas on its territory.
We did not allow mercenaries to carry out destabilizing
activities on our land or to undermine the peace efforts
leading to the signing of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur in 2011. Following the defeat of armed groups
in Darfur and their expulsion from our land, which made
peace a reality, those armed groups were forced to carry
out criminal and mercenary activities for money, such
as banditry, extortion, exploitation of natural resources
and human trafficking. However, mercenaries carried
out attacks against the Sudan from outside its borders
between 2015 and 2017.
The threat posed by the growing activities and
practices of mercenary groups requires the international
community to decisively combat such groups. We
therefore highly appreciate the convening of this
debate, and we hope that it will lead the international
community to adopt a joint vision to combat the
phenomenon, the impact of which extends to peaceful
countries. There are many examples of that.
We would like to present some suggestions, in
addition to those that have been offered by previous
speakers, to fight mercenary activities.
First, we underline the importance of strengthening
and activating the role of preventive diplomacy
to prevent conflicts, which constitute a fertile
environment for the mercenaries, as per the SecretaryGeneral’s programme.
Secondly, we must promote the capacities and
work of expert groups in conducting investigations into
mercenary activities in areas of conflict, as well as in
developing information infrastructure that facilitates
the containment and combating of those mercenary
groups, in addition to preventing them from moving to
new regions.

S/PV. 8456

Thirdly, we must strengthen and rehabilitate border
control systems in countries of conflict that constitute
an environment conducive to mercenary activities. We
also must provide those countries with the necessary
political and technical support.
Fourthly, it is imperative that we strengthen
cooperation and coordination among States in that
regard, as well as increase exchange of experiences
and information.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Government of the Sudan attaches great importance
and priority to the issue of mercenaries, as evidenced
by the regional workshop we hosted in 2017, which
was organized by the Secretariat of the Committee
of Intelligence and Security Services of Africa, in
cooperation with the National Intelligence and Security
Service of the Sudan, and held in Khartoum over the
course of three days. The workshop addressed the
phenomenon of mercenaries, foreign terrorist fighters
and non-State actors, as well as their impact on
security and stability in Africa. Twenty-seven African
intelligence services participated in the workshop with
a view to shining a spotlight on that phenomenon and
adopting the strategies and plans necessary to fight
it, while strengthening cooperation and coordination
among African States.
I am honoured to share with those present that the
Government of the Central African Republic and all the
opposition movements, without exception, successfully
brought their negotiations to a close yesterday by
reaching a peaceful settlement. The initial signing of
the peace agreement will take place tomorrow and the
final signing will take place in Bangui next week. We
are confident and optimistic that the agreement, which
is sponsored by the African Union, will enable the
Central African Republic, a neighbourly and friendly
country, to emerge from the darkness of conflict into
the expansive horizons of peace and development.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

19-0263631/31
