A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly

Distr.
GEKEfiAL
X/RES/45/бб
18 December 1990

Forty-fifth eessioa
Agenda item 155

RESOLUTIOH ADOPTED BY THE GEHERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/45/794)]

45/66.

Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems
Off 8Hch veapona

Ths-ggflgral Лд8ет)?1у*
Recalling its previous resolutions on the prohibition of the development and
manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons.
Taking note of paragraph 77 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly, 1/
Determined to prevent the emergence of new types of weapons of mass
destruction that have characteristics comparable in destructive effect to those of
weapons of mass destruction identified in the definition of weapons of mass
destruction adopted by the United Hâtions in 1948, 2/
Hoting that in the course of its 1989 and 1990 sessions the Conference on
Disarmament considered the item entitled "Hew types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons; radiological weapons”.

1/

Resolution S-10/2.

2/
The definition was adopted by the Commission for Conventional Armaments
(see S/C.3/32/Rev.l).

90-36224

2976Z (E)

A/RES/45/бб
Page 2

Tafcina into account the sections of the reports of the Conference on
Disarmament relating to this question, 1/
1.
Reaffirms that effective measures should be undertaken to prevent the
emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction;
2.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament, in the light of its existing
priorities, to keep under review, with expert assistance, as appropriate, the
questions of the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons with a view to making,
when -necessary, recommendations on undertaking specific negotiations on the
identified types of such weapons;
3.
Calls upon all States, immediately following the recommendation of the
Conference on Disarmament, to give favourable consideration to these
recommendations;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Conference on
Disarmament all documents relating to the consideration of this item by the General
Assembly at its forty-fifth session;
5.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to continue the practice of
reporting the results of its consideration of these questions in its annual report
to the General Assembly;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-eighth session
the item entitled "Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons: report of the
Conference on Disarmament".
54th plenary meetina
4 December 1990

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortv-fourth Session.
Supplement No. 27 (A/44/27), sect. III.G and
Fortv-fifth Session. Supplement
Ho. 27 (A/45/27), sect. III.G.
