UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/1016
30 October 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

1.
The members of the Security Council, recalling the statement by the
President of the Council of 16 December 1994 (S/PRST/1994/81), in which the need
for greater recourse to open meetings of the Council was identified, and
intending to continue to enhance the transparency of the methods of work of the
Council, have agreed that the Secretary-General is to be encouraged to make
statements to the Council, when he deems it appropriate, in public meetings of
the Council.
2.
Recalling the enhancement of meetings with troop-contributing countries,
the members of the Security Council, taking note of the procedures set out in
the statement by the President of the Council of 28 March 1996 (S/PRST/1996/13),
have also agreed to the following:
(a) With reference to the existing practice of the President of the
Council of reporting, in the course of informal consultations of members of the
Council, the views expressed by participants in each troop contributors meeting,
troop-contributing countries are encouraged to make available to the President,
whenever appropriate, copies of their statements during those meetings. Written
copies of the Secretariat’s briefing at those meetings should, whenever
possible, be made available to troop-contributing countries upon request;
(b) With reference to the existing practice of the Secretariat of
providing weekly briefing notes to the Council on field operations, the
Secretariat is encouraged to make those briefing notes available to troopcontributing countries upon request;
(c) Relevant United Nations bodies and agencies may be invited to troop
contributors meetings, when they have a specific contribution to make to the
issue under discussion;
(d) With reference to the existing practice of inviting to troop
contributors meetings Member States that make special contributions to
peacekeeping operations other than troops and civilian police - that is to say,
contributions to trust funds, logistics and equipment - other Member States
contributing to peacekeeping operations, as appropriate, should also be invited
to these meetings;

98-33107 (E)

301098

/...

S/1998/1016
English
Page 2

(e) The President of the Council will inform troop contributors about
forthcoming Council deliberations and expected decisions.
3.
The Secretariat should establish an appropriate mechanism for alerting
non-members of the Security Council about unscheduled or emergency meetings of
the Council during nights, weekends or holidays.
4.
(a) The annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
shall include, as an appendix, in addition to the elements identified in the
note by the President of the Security Council of 12 June 1997 (S/1997/451), the
annual reports of the sanctions committees;
(b) With effect from 1999, the bureau of each sanctions committee shall be
appointed by that committee, following consultations between Council members,
either at its first meeting if that meeting takes place in January, or in
writing at the instance of the Presidency of the Council under a no-objection
procedure.

-----
