S/2003/659

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 June 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 18 June 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Further to recent briefings by the Secretariat on the situation in Liberia and on
the ongoing Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)-led peace
talks in Ghana, I have the honour to refer to the ceasefire agreement signed by the
Liberian parties in Accra on 17 June 2003, which envisages a United Nations role in
supporting its implementation (see S/2003/657, annex).
The ceasefire agreement provides for the establishment of two ECOWAS-led
verification and monitoring mechanisms. The first is the Joint Verification Team
(JVT), which is tasked to verify on the ground the information provided by the
parties on the locations of their respective units. It is composed of two
representatives from each of the parties and includes representatives of the United
Nations, the African Union and the International Contact Group on Liberia (ICGL).
JVT is expected to travel to Liberia within 72 hours of the signature of the
agreement. The second mechanism is the Joint Monitoring Committee (JMC), which
will supervise and monitor the ceasefire and which will also include representatives
from the United Nations.
I have received the attached letters dated 11 and 16 June 2003 from the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, Dr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, respectively
requesting the United Nations to provide a helicopter to transport JVT within
Liberia, and inviting the United Nations to designate two military officers to
participate in JVT (see annexes I and II).
In connection with those requests, the Secretariat has made arrangements to
provide a helicopter from the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
for the transportation of the members of the Joint Verification Team once issues
relating to security arrangements and support services on the ground, which are
being discussed with ECOWAS, are resolved. The Secretariat has also designated
two United Nations military officers who will participate in JVT, and another two
will be assigned to JMC.
I should be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annexes to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-40212 (E)

200603

*0340212*

S/2003/659

Annex I
Letter dated 11 June 2003 from the Executive Secretary of
the Economic Community of West African States to the
Secretary-General
A ceasefire agreement is expected to be signed soon between the Government
of Liberia, the Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD) and the
Movement for Democracy in Liberia (MODEL).
In accordance with the terms of agreement, an ECOWAS-led Join Verification
Team (JVT), comprising two representatives from each of the warring parties, as
well as representatives of the United Nations, the African Union and the
International Contact Group on Liberia, will be sent to Liberia immediately
following the signing of the ceasefire agreement.
It has therefore been recommended that I seek the assistance of the United
Nations in providing a helicopter for the transportation of 16 members of JVT to
various locations within Liberia from Saturday 14 June 2003 to Tuesday, 17 June
2003.
I have the honour to request United Nations assistance in providing a
helicopter for that purpose.
(Signed) Mohamed Ibn Chambas
Executive Secretary

2

S/2003/659

Annex II
Letter dated 16 June 2003 from the Executive Secretary of
the Economic Community of West African States to the
Secretary-General
I am writing to request you to designate two United Nations military personnel
to participate in the Joint Verification Team which is scheduled to visit Liberia in the
event a ceasefire agreement is reached by the Liberia warring parties.
May I also take this opportunity to express the appreciation of ECOWAS for
the transportation facilities the United Nations plans to make available to JVT for its
mission in Liberia.
(Signed) Mohamed Ibn Chambas
Executive Secretary

3
