United Nations

A/RES/68/216

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 19 (h)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2013
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/68/438/Add.8)]

68/216. Harmony with Nature
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1 Agenda 21, 2
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation), 5
Recalling its resolutions 64/196 of 21 December 2009, 65/164 of 20 December
2010, 66/204 of 22 December 2011 and 67/214 of 21 December 2012 on Harmony
with Nature and its resolution 63/278 of 22 April 2009, by which it designated
22 April as International Mother Earth Day,
Recalling also the 1982 World Charter for Nature, 6
Noting the interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on Harmony with
Nature, held on 22 April 2013, to commemorate International Mother Earth Day by
discussing different economic approaches, in the context of sustainable
development, to further a more ethical basis for the relationship between humanity
and the Earth,
Noting also the first Peoples’ World Conference on Climate Change and the
Rights of Mother Earth, hosted by the Plurinational State of Bolivia in Cochabamba
from 20 to 22 April 2010, 7
_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Resolution 37/7, annex.
7
A/64/777, annexes I and II.

13-45241 (E)

*1345241*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/216

Harmony with Nature

Recognizing that a number of countries consider Mother Earth the source of all
life and nourishment, and that these countries consider Mother Earth and humankind
an indivisible, living community of interrelated and interdependent beings,
Recalling the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012,
entitled “The future we want”, 8
Expressing concern about documented environmental degradation, potentially
more frequent and intense natural disasters and the negative impact on nature
resulting from human activity, and recognizing the need to strengthen scientific
knowledge on the effects of human activities on the Earth ecosystems, with the aim
of promoting and ensuring an equitable, balanced and sustainable relationship with
the Earth,
Recognizing that gross domestic product was not designed as an indicator for
measuring environmental degradation resulting from human activity and the need to
overcome this limitation with regard to sustainable development and the work
carried out in this regard,
Recognizing also the uneven availability of basic statistical data under the
three dimensions of sustainable development and the need to improve their quality
and quantity,
Reaffirming that fundamental changes in the way societies produce and
consume are indispensable for achieving global sustainable development and that all
countries should promote sustainable consumption and production patterns, with the
developed countries taking the lead and with all countries benefiting from the
process, taking into account the Rio principles,
Recognizing that many ancient civilizations, indigenous peoples and
indigenous cultures have a rich history of understanding the symbiotic connection
between human beings and nature that fosters a mutually beneficial relationship,
Recognizing also the work undertaken by civil society, academia and scientists
in regard to signalling the precariousness of life on Earth, as well as their efforts,
along with those of Governments and private sector organizations, to devise more
sustainable models and methods for production and consumption,
Considering that sustainable development is a holistic concept that requires
the strengthening of interdisciplinary linkages in the different branches of
knowledge,
1.
Nature; 9

Takes note of the fourth report of the Secretary-General on Harmony with

2.
Invites Member States to consider existing studies and reports on
Harmony with Nature, including the follow-up to the discussions at the interactive
dialogues of the General Assembly, such as the dialogue held on 22 April 2013 on
different economic approaches, in the context of sustainable development, in order
to further a more ethical basis of the relationship between humanity and the Earth,
and to promote further studies on this subject;

_______________
8
9

2/4

Resolution 66/288, annex.
A/68/325 and Corr.1.

Harmony with Nature

A/RES/68/216

3.
Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold a regular,
inclusive and interactive dialogue, at the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly, to be
held at the plenary meetings to be convened during the commemoration of
International Mother Earth Day on 22 April 2014, with the participation of Member
States, United Nations organizations, independent experts and other stakeholders, to
advance discussions on Harmony with Nature in order to promote a balanced
integration of the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable
development;
Encourages giving appropriate consideration to the issue of Harmony
4.
with Nature in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;
5.
Recalls its resolutions requesting the Secretary-General to establish a
trust fund for the participation of independent experts in the interactive dialogue to
be held at the plenary meetings to be convened during the commemoration of
International Mother Earth Day, and in this regard invites Member States and other
relevant stakeholders to consider contributing to this trust fund once it is
established;
Also recalls the launching of the Harmony with Nature website on the
6.
occasion of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development by the
secretariat of the Conference and the Division for Sustainable Development of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to make use of the existing website maintained by the
Division by gathering information and contributions on ideas and activities to
promote a holistic approach to sustainable development in harmony with nature
being undertaken to advance the integration of scientific interdisciplinary work,
including success stories on the use of traditional knowledge and on existing
national legislation;
Recognizes that planet Earth and its ecosystems are our home and that
7.
“Mother Earth” is a common expression in a number of countries and regions, and
that some countries recognize the rights of nature in the context of the promotion of
sustainable development and are convinced that, in order to achieve a just balance
among the economic, social and environmental needs of present and future
generations, it is necessary to promote harmony with nature;
Calls for holistic and integrated approaches to sustainable development
8.
that will guide humanity to live in harmony with nature and lead to efforts to restore
the health and integrity of the Earth’s ecosystems;
9.

Invites States:

(a) To further build up a knowledge network in order to advance a holistic
conceptualization to identify different economic approaches that reflect the drivers
and values of living in harmony with nature, relying on current scientific
information to achieve sustainable development, and to facilitate the support and
recognition of the fundamental interconnections between humanity and nature;
(b) To promote harmony with the Earth, as found in indigenous cultures, and
learn from them, and to provide support for and promote efforts being made from
the national level down to the local community level to reflect the protection of
nature;
10. Encourages all countries and the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system to develop and strengthen the quality and quantity of basic statistical data on
the three dimensions of sustainable development, and invites the international
3/4

A/RES/68/216

Harmony with Nature

community and the pertinent bodies of the United Nations system to assist the
efforts of developing countries by providing capacity-building and technical
support;
11. Recognizes the need for broader measures of progress to complement
gross domestic product in order to better inform policy decisions, and in this regard
welcomes the launching by the Statistical Commission of a work programme to
develop broader measures of progress, 10 which, based on a stocktaking exercise of
current national, regional and international practices to measure progress, will
conduct a technical review of existing efforts in this area, with a view to identifying
best practices, and to facilitating the sharing of knowledge, especially for the benefit
of developing countries;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to continue the consideration of the sub-item entitled “Harmony
with Nature” at its sixty-ninth session under the item entitled “Sustainable
development”.
71st plenary meeting
20 December 2013

_______________
10
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2013, Supplement No. 4 (E/2013/24), chap. I, sect.
C, decision 44/114.

4/4
