United Nations

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6760th meeting
Wednesday, 25 April 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Ms. Jiang Hua
Ms. Moya
Ms. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Eick
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Taib
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Pinheiro da Silva
Mr. Panin
Mr. Wensley
Mr. Yagninim
Mr. Wilson

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Securing borders against illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
Letter dated 5 April 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2012/195)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-31963 (E)

*1231963*

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Botswana and the Syrian Arab
Republic to participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to associate the views of my
delegation with the contents of the letter (S/2012/257)
sent yesterday by the Chairman of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries relating to the agenda item for
today’s debate.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate that we believe
that the Security Council must stay within its mandate
as articulated in Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations and not delve into discussions that fall
primarily within the functions and competencies of the
General Assembly and other relevant organs of the
United Nations.
The item before us today, and its related issues, is
one of the most daunting challenges facing the
international community today. Lax border controls
pose major risks to the security and socio-economic
state of all of our nations. The pervasive nature of
transnational crime, including drug trafficking,
terrorism, human trafficking, the illicit trade in arms
and other forms of transnational crime, has made it an
international problem that can be curbed only through
collective and concerted efforts based on the principle
of shared responsibility.
In most of the Council’s deliberations on borderrelated issues, as manifested in a number of resolutions
and presidential statements adopted over the past
couple of years, there are references to the issue of
drug trafficking that have focused specifically on the
connection between drug production and security and
terrorism and organized crime. In those decisions the
Council recognized the need for the international
community to come up with an integrated and balanced
approach for addressing those problems based on the
principle of responsibility.

2

The Islamic Republic of Iran, because of its
location in a region of tension and conflict that is also
considered a meeting point for illegal activities such as
illicit trading in small arms, organized crime, terrorism
and drug trafficking, has incurred much damage
resulting from such activities. However, Iran has
spared no effort to combat such illegal activities,
including preventing and combating the illicit trade in
small arms and human trafficking and has made
significant progress in that regard.
On the issue of controlling narcotic drugs, over
the years the Islamic Republic of Iran has maintained
many tens of thousands of military and disciplinary
forces mobilized along its long border areas and has
allocated billions of dollars to the fight against narcotic
drugs. Iran has also strived to reinforce and reorganize
the fortifications, facilities and intelligence control
systems of its transit and border checkpoints in order to
prevent the entry of trafficking caravans into the
country.
All of those measures have resulted in the
confiscation of massive volumes of various types of
narcotics that have set records among opium and
heroin seizures worldwide. We have shouldered a great
burden, largely to deal with that threat. Given the fact
that the menace serves to create a breeding ground for
terrorism, Iran’s efforts in that regard have
undoubtedly also made a fundamental contribution to
the global fight against terrorism.
On the issue of small arms and light weapons, we
believe that States bear the primary responsibility for
preventing and combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all of its aspects, including
identifying and solving the problems associated with
that trade. Taking that into account, we have developed
and established a comprehensive set of laws,
regulations, guidelines and directives in the Islamic
Republic of Iran that enable relevant national
authorities and agencies to prevent and combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and its
associated problems. Based on existing regulations, the
illicit manufacturing, possession, storage or trade of
any small arms is considered an offence and all
individuals involved in such activities shall be arrested
and punished accordingly.
Trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, is one of the most serious manifestations of
transnational organized crime. It is an affront to human

12-31963

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

dignity and a modern form of slavery. Active
cooperation at the global level should be developed in
order to efficiently target the demand side of the
problem. The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a transit
country, has also taken serious steps in implementing
several projects on enhancing border control in order to
better fight transitional organized crime, including
human trafficking.
Before I conclude, let me emphasize the need for
a review of the relevant regional and international
policies and programmes in order to overcome
shortfalls and effectively counter such global problems
as illicit cross-border trafficking and movement. The
Islamic Republic of Iran emphasizes once more its
strong determination to combat those global problems
and expresses its readiness to cooperate with other
partners to resolve decisively such problems.
Finally, with regard to the baseless allegations
made this morning against my country, in particular by
the representative of the Israeli regime, I would like to
mention that the representative of the Israeli regime, in
line with the regime’s warmongering and propaganda
campaign against my country, has once again used this
body to level baseless allegations against Iran.
That regime, with a history of criminal behaviour,
referred to arms smuggling from Iran while, with its
brutal, killing apparatus, that regime has embarked on
many criminal acts, including State terrorism. A vivid
example of that is the assassination of Iran’s nuclear
scientists.
The Israeli regime’s baseless allegations against
the peaceful nature of our nuclear activities is another
attempt to divert the attention of world public opinion
from its clandestine development and unlawful
possession of hundreds of nuclear warheads, nuclear
weapons arsenal and other weapons of mass
destruction, which threaten the region as a whole and
act against international peace and security.
I therefore do not deem it necessary to respond to
those absurd allegations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): The illicit movement
of people and goods across borders is as old as borders
themselves. But the past two decades have seen
unprecedented growth in the scale, scope and impacts
of such movements and of the criminal networks that

12-31963

support them. They are complex, well-resourced
networks that span continents and are sustained by
illicit trafficking and movement of people, funds and
goods.
We are now also seeing an alarming convergence
of those networks. Constantly seeking points of
weakness, they target jurisdictions with weak State
capacity. Once established, they further undermine
governance, public safety and development prospects
and provide fertile ground for crime, instability and
terrorism.
The very viability of States is often at risk, with
the perpetrators posing serious threats to security and
to stable democratic Government. No corner of the
globe is beyond their reach, including my own region,
the Pacific, which has been targeted by people
smugglers, human and narcotics traffickers, and others.
We have learned much about what works in
combating and disrupting these illicit networks, not
least the importance of robust legislative frameworks,
effective border and law enforcement institutions, and
good governance for protecting our jurisdictions. But
we have also learned that no country can meet these
challenges alone. The multinational character and
reach of these networks make international cooperation
essential. And we have learned to look at those
challenges through a broader lens, taking into account
the drivers of demand for such activities and the links
between different criminal activities.
In the Pacific, national responses have been
coordinated through the Pacific Islands Forum
Regional Security Committee, and through regional
groupings of border control and law enforcement
officials. New Zealand also supports its Pacific Island
neighbours
through
bilateral
capacity-building
programmes. In partnership with the Forum Secretariat,
we bring Pacific law enforcement officials together in
an annual working group on counter-terrorism, which
this year will address the link between terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We participate actively
in the Trans-Pacific Network on Dismantling
Transnational Illicit Networks, and in other regional
initiatives of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
forum and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum. We contribute bilateral assistance to
partners in South-East Asia. New Zealand and
Australia have also partnered to fund the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime transnational

3

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

organized crime threat assessment for East Asia and the
Pacific.
In June, building on our chairmanship of last
year’s meeting of governmental experts on small arms
and light weapons, New Zealand will fund a workshop
for our Caribbean Community partners on combating
the illicit trade in firearms across borders, focusing
particularly on maritime security issues, which have so
far received insufficient attention within the United
Nations.
More integrated and coherent capacity-building
would be in everyone’s interests, particularly those of
small developing States that have the greatest need. In
that regard, we should like to stress four points.
First, we should strengthen cooperation and
coordination between United Nations agencies and
with other international bodies that provide capacitybuilding. That cooperation must focus on providing
consistent advice and more coherent capacity-building
support, in line with national priorities. Practical steps
could include enhanced information-sharing and more
coordinated risk and needs assessments and prioritysetting, as well as strengthened cooperation with
relevant bodies, such as INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization.
Secondly, the United Nations should consider
options for achieving more integrated delivery of
assistance on the ground. International donors should
support and respect national partners seeking to
articulate their own priority needs. Regional
organizations also have an important role to play in
coordinating international assistance and aligning it
with regional priorities. The United Nations should be
making better use of such regional partnerships.
Thirdly, the Security Council should ensure more
coordinated assistance within its own areas of
responsibility. It could, for example, ask the SecretaryGeneral to include in his reports to the Council advice
relating to illicit trafficking and movements, and
integrate these aspects into mission mandates where
they threaten peace and security. This is particularly
important in peacebuilding situations, where
transnational criminal activity can be an obstacle to
sustainable peace. The Council could also instruct its
own committees and bodies to coordinate their work
with other international actors.

4

Finally, we must view illicit trafficking and
movements through a broader lens than just that of
enhanced border controls. That point was well made
this morning by the Ambassador of Costa Rica. While
strengthening national border and law enforcement
institutions is very important, they alone cannot stem
the flow of illicit movements unless we
contemporaneously address issues such as illicit
financial flows and the factors that drive demand.
Strengthened coordination of international policy and
capacity-building is also required. We welcome recent
steps in this direction, such as the establishment of a
United Nations task force on transnational organized
crime.
The criminal networks behind most illicit
international activity have had devastating impacts on
many communities. Their ever-expanding reach,
sophistication and resources make confronting them a
formidable challenge, but they must be confronted. We
must ensure that countries and communities that find
themselves on the front line of this struggle have the
tools and the capacities that they need to do just that.
More coordinated and integrated assistance has an
important role to play in all of this, and New Zealand
hopes that today’s debate foreshadows a substantive
and new step in that direction.
The President: I
representative of Jamaica.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): I have this special
opportunity to speak on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
Let me at the outset thank you, Sir, for having
organized today’s open debate on the theme “Threats to
international peace and security: securing borders
against illicit flows”. We also express appreciation for
the presidential statement S/PRST/2012/16 that was
adopted by the Council earlier today.
As a region that, due in part to its geography, is
faced with the daily challenge of securing large, porous
and remote sea and land borders against illicit flows of
guns and ammunition, illegal drugs and the trafficking
of persons, this matter is of particular relevance and
importance to us. For CARICOM member States, the
illicit flow of guns and ammunition, as well as illicit
drugs, across our borders not only constitutes a crime
and security challenge, but also represents an
existential threat to our present way of life and current

12-31963

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

efforts being undertaken to establish safe, secure and
developed societies for our people.
In recognition of the interlinked nature of
growing levels of crime and violence in the region
fuelled by the illicit movement of drugs, guns and
ammunition, it should be recalled that CARICOM
leaders in 2007 established crime and security as the
fourth pillar of the region’s integration. CARICOM
member States — both collectively, through the
conclusion of the 2011 CARICOM Declaration on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, and individually —
have been undertaking a number of measures to secure
our borders against illicit flows. In recognition of the
potential cross-cutting gains that can be realized
through securing our borders, border management and
security have thus become one of CARICOM’s major
security priorities.
Through the CARICOM Implementation Agency
for Crime and Security, and in collaboration with the
Caribbean Centre for Development Administration,
efforts have been undertaken in various CARICOM
member States to harmonize and standardize policies,
practices and procedures utilized by border security
agencies throughout the region. In addition to the
harmonization of policies, numerous training and
educational programmes are also being undertaken. In
conjunction with our bilateral partners, including most
notably the United States through the Caribbean Basin
Security Initiative, CARICOM Governments have been
actively taking steps to protect our borders and our
societies. Other regional partners that have contributed
to our efforts to secure our borders include the
Organization of American States, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean. I
wish to express appreciation to the Ambassador of New
Zealand for his country’s recent assistance to and
collaboration with CARICOM Governments.
While the major challenges facing our region are
posed by illicit drugs, guns and ammunition, as States
parties to the major international terrorism instruments
and in view of our commitments to the implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
CARICOM member States have also taken steps to
secure our borders against the illicit flows of money
and equipment that could also be used to commit acts
of terror in the region or elsewhere.

12-31963

At the international level, CARICOM member
States have also advocated for greater attention to be
given to the issue of border control as a component of
the broader crime prevention measures, and
specifically to prevent the flows of small arms and
light weapons and ammunition to the region, in
particular within the context of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. CARICOM has also long
advocated that, if we are to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects, we must also address the
questions of ammunition and the cross-border
movement of such weapons.
While Member States have been taking steps at
the national and regional levels to secure their borders,
much more work needs to be done at the international
level. CARICOM is of the view that, given its longstanding experience, the United Nations has an
important role to play in assisting Member States to
improve their capacity in the area of border security
and management, including in facilitating technical
assistance.
While there has been significant attention focused
on stemming the illicit flows of materiel that could be
used to commit acts of terror across borders, similar
high-level focus also needs to be directed towards
stemming the illicit flows of small arms and light
weapons and ammunition. In acknowledging the
distinctions between the different categories of illicit
items that flow across national borders, a more
comprehensive approach to border management and
security by the United Nations will, in our view, prove
to be a more effective approach in the long run. We
believe that greater symmetry in securing borders
against the illicit flows of chemical, biological and
nuclear material, as well as the illicit flows of
conventional weapons, including small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, will significantly
contribute to the goal of international peace and
security.
CARICOM agrees with the proposal outlined in
the concept note (S/2012/195, annex) for an assessment
to be conducted of the different United Nations
structures, with a view to determining the extent to
which they are meeting States’ capacity-building needs
in this vital area, as well as improving the
Organization’s ability to help Member States counter

5

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

illicit flows. At the same time, however, such a review,
and attempts to address this issue in a holistic manner,
should not lead to any contraction in the capacitybuilding programmes and projects currently afforded to
Member States in this vital area.
Finally, we would also urge that, in the context of
such a review, attention be paid to the specific
challenges being faced among countries and regions in
the design and delivery of future projects. In that
context, we would reiterate our fervent hope that, on
the basis of the ongoing discussions between
CARICOM member States and UNODC, that the
UNODC Caribbean regional office will soon be
reopened. CARICOM remains convinced that the
office will play a vital role in assisting countries of the
region to build their capacity to reduce the illicit flows
of guns, drugs and other materiel, including through
strengthened border management and security and, in
so doing, achieve our goals of a safe and secure region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this essential debate.
We also join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue signifies the urgency of the matter.
Illicit cross-border flows are taking place on a massive
scale and have an enormously harmful impact on
security, human rights and social and economic
development, in particular on developing countries. As
such, securing borders against illicit flows must be a
distinct aspect of the overall international peace and
security
agenda.
Secure
borders
means
non-proliferation; it means the compartmentalization of
threats; and it means that threats are localized and their
spread is prevented, making them much easier to
overcome.
The enormity of the threat and its implications
necessitate a multilayered approach. Moreover, the
successful implementation of the strategic decisions
that have been adopted to address the problem cannot
be ensured without the coordinated action and support
of the United Nations agencies and other international
and regional organizations dealing with transnational
crime and, most important, extensive bilateral
cooperation among all countries along the main
trafficking routes.

6

On the national level, for the past decade
Armenia has developed effective multilateral
cooperation in the fight against transnational organized
crime and international terrorism. A network of
bilateral agreements has been established with many
countries. We also work closely with various regional
international partners, such as the Council of Europe,
the European Union, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), NATO and various United
Nations agencies, in such areas as legal reform,
improving national law enforcement capacities, border
control and intelligence systems.
As a member of the CSTO, Armenia actively
participates in its anti-drug operations. That
multinational effort brings together not only member
States, but also representatives from approximately two
dozen States and international organizations. As a
result of those efforts, operations carried out since
2003 have resulted in the confiscation of several tons
of drugs in the CSTO region. Since 2008, those efforts
have had the status of a standing regional anti-drug
operation.
In full compliance with its international
obligations, Armenia has firm control over its borders
and prevents and thwarts any encroachment. In
addition, last February, the working agreement between
the European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union (Frontex) and
the National Security Council of the Republic of
Armenia established deeper cooperation between the
relevant bodies of Armenia and Frontex to fight border
crimes and enhance border security.
Secure borders are particularly important in
volatile regions such as the South Caucasus, where
still-unresolved conflicts have become a convenient
excuse for the accumulation of enormous amounts of
weaponry, very often in violation of existing treaties
and agreements. Illicit flows of armaments, drugs and
terrorist groups and terrorist activities remain a matter
of concern in the most global sense. Despite the twodecades-long blockade of Armenia and the difficulties
and challenges that has created, fighting illicit crossborder flows, and more specifically drug trafficking,
Armenia, in cooperation with its partners, has spared
no effort in applying preventive measures.
Armenia believes that prevention is the best
defence against the spread of illicit cross-border

12-31963

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

trafficking, which could also undercut the foundations
for recruiting under any pretext. Through education,
awareness-raising and improved legislation and
implementation mechanisms, we can multiply the
effectiveness of our efforts. In that respect, we pay
great attention to the training and retraining of the
officials working in the Government agencies dealing
with counter-terrorism. We would like to express our
gratitude to the United States and other partner
countries for assisting us in that regard.
In conclusion, I cannot but agree with the
statements made by previous speakers to say that no
country can counter these problems alone. Their scope
and magnitude require even greater levels of
innovation and effective regional and international
cooperation. We would therefore support the proposal
for a diagnostic assessment by the Secretariat aimed at
the evaluation and enhanced coordination of our joint
efforts in this critical area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Organized groups and
networks conduct ruthless, illegal activities in search
of the highest possible profit from smuggling narcotic
drugs, arms, minerals, toxic waste, counterfeit products
and even human beings. Such crimes undermine
development, ruin lives and threaten societies. Many
transnational criminals are moving between licit and
illicit markets and taking advantage of safe havens and
using corruption and violence as tools to reach their
goals of maximum profit. The cocaine flow from Latin
America that is reaching West Africa and heading
towards Europe is one example of how criminals
exploit porous borders and weak customs and police
control.
The challenge is to crack down on such criminals
without hampering or reducing the legal trade. We
must ensure that our hunt for criminals does not end up
hurting us all, because that is what will happen if we
impose general, rigid and time-consuming controls at
borders for all goods and all people. It is therefore of
great importance that a border strategy include
measures for detecting illicit flows before they enter
actual border areas. That will require close cooperation
and an international exchange of intelligence among
law enforcement and customs agencies. The Schengen
cooperation of European countries is a tested example
whereby borders are generally open but controls and

12-31963

arrests can take place at points along transportation
routes. That avoids choke points and delays, which
damage lawful trade and productivity.
The Secretary-General’s renewed focus on the
issue of transnational organized crime and the
establishment of the United Nations System Task Force
on Transnational Organized Crime and Drug
Trafficking are steps in the right direction. We expect
that the Task Force will contribute significantly to
strategic responses with regard to United Nations
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
development
activities. It has the potential for helping Member
States to develop border management strategies that
are conducive to developing the legal trade while
strengthening their hand in dealing with illicit flows.
The strengthened focus on transnational
organized crime in the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Delivering justice: programme of action to
strengthen the rule of law at the national and
international level” (A/66/749), which will be
discussed at a high-level meeting of the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, is another step
towards highlighting the need for effective law
enforcement cooperation among countries. Close
cooperation with other United Nations bodies, such as
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
Security Council working groups, should serve to
strengthen the United Nations in supporting States.
International cooperation at the regional level — such
as with the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, which are
supported by the United Nations and the international
community — could be models to build on.
The International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) has a key role in helping Member States
to meet the threats stemming from transnational
organized crime. INTERPOL’s I-24/7 communications
network and its databases of stolen passports and
documents are core elements of border management.
The World Customs Organization has a high level of
competence in measures related to border control, and
it should be a strong partner for the United Nations in
building effective strategies.
We need stronger political commitments from
Governments in all regions in order to move forward.
Law enforcement cooperation is important, but there
must also be sufficient focus and investment to tackle
organized crime and terrorism.

7

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, Norway proposes that the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the Task Force
on Transnational Organized Crime, INTERPOL and the
World Customs Organization come together with the
aim of working out recommendations to improve
measures to strengthen border management.

terrorism, organized crime and other destabilizing
factors. We challenge the attempt to merge various
illicit flows with different and distinct illegal activities.
We stress the need for separate issues to be dealt with
in different and specific ways, within the framework of
national policies and laws.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

It is essential to recall that it is the purview of
sovereign States to determine and implement border
security measures. In that regard, we reiterate the
principles
of
sovereign
equality,
political
independence, territorial integrity and non-interference
in matters that fall within the exclusive domestic
domain of States, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations.

Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to say,
respectfully, that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
has chosen to take part in this debate even though we
believe that the subject at hand does not belong on the
Security Council’s agenda. We caution that this is an
attempt to continue to “securitize” the United Nations
and usurp the competencies of other organs.
We are concerned by the attempt to address the
issue of illicit flows under such different and unrelated
headings — which are handled in quite a variety of
ways within United Nations bodies — as illicit drug
trafficking, conventional arms, smuggling, terrorism
and its funding, materials associated with weapons of
mass destruction, conflict minerals and human
trafficking. It should be emphasized that not every
illegal border event is a threat to international peace
and security.
There is no denying that the global consumerist
and speculation-driven capitalist system — which
punishes the world’s poor and vulnerable while feeding
the unbridled quest for short-term, immoral financial
gain — is the root cause of illicit transborder flows.
Some experts recognize that such crimes are the
Achilles’ heel of capitalism. The decadent capitalism of
today — brutal, inhuman and nature-despoiling — is
the systemic basis of transnational crime. A system that
ever more concentrates wealth, without any regard to
ethics, is a Petri dish for such crimes.
Despite the grave economic and financial crisis,
attempts are made to resuscitate the system through
inhumane neoliberal policies that deepen the inequality
gap in the world. The system and its drivers have no
regard for democracy, nations, culture, ethical values
or sovereignty. Illicit flows are part of the quest for
financial gain without regard to fundamental human
values.
An automatic link is alleged between illicit flows
and the proliferation of nuclear and conventional arms,

8

Article 15 of the Constitution of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela stipulates that
“The State is responsible for establishing an
overall policy on land, island and maritime
borders, to preserve territorial integrity,
sovereignty, security, defence, national identity,
diversity and the environment, in keeping with
cultural, economic and social development and
national integration.”
In Venezuela we have a constitutional and
legislative framework, legitimated by the sovereign
will of the people as expressed in referendums, which
allows no means of decision-making other than
approval or rejection by the people themselves through
constitutional
mechanisms.
They
cannot
be
circumvented by any multilateral initiative or by the
Security Council.
My country has always taken a strong position
against the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons. Thousands such weapons have been
confiscated in Venezuela, as never before in our
nation’s history. Venezuela acknowledges the problem
posed by the manufacture and illicit trade in such
weapons in all its aspects in many regions of the world.
We agree with the need to establish controls, in
particular by producer countries, so that the supply of
such weapons is limited to Governments and their
authorized bodies, in accordance with international
law, in particular the right to self-defence, enshrined in
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of effectively
implementing the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

12-31963

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

My country is concerned about the transfer of
weapons to non-State actors without the authorization
of Governments. The illicit transfer to subversive
elements and illegal armed groups, which threatens the
legitimate peace and stability of Governments, has
already led to the proliferation of illegal weapons in
various regions and is destabilizing neighbouring
countries.
Today’s neocolonialist and imperialist wars and
policies seeking to plunder the natural resources of
developing countries are causing people more poverty,
inequality and suffering. That is producing diasporas
that are particularly vulnerable, and therefore
susceptible to becoming involved in illicit cross-border
flows. Meanwhile, the security agencies of imperialist
Powers often defend, protect and finance major
national or international drug barons and terrorist and
criminal networks in order to promote their subversive
agendas against sovereign nations.
If we truly want to reduce or combat the tragic
consequences of cross-border illicit flows, it would
suffice to put an end to the voracious appetite of
neoliberalism, its transnational companies and the
imperialist and colonialist policies that give rise to
poverty, and to stop economic, political and social
inequalities in the world.
In conclusion, we would like to state that it is
auspicious that the vast majority of countries
participating in today’s debate have reaffirmed that,
under the principles of equality, political independence
and territorial integrity, only sovereign States are
competent to draft and implement measures on the
security of their borders.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United States
delegation for convening this open debate.
Today’s debate is certainly of special importance
to all States throughout the world, in particular those of
North Africa and the Sahara and Sahel regions, since
border security is a major challenge for all of them.
Trafficking in all kinds of goods across the borders of
those countries is rooted far back in history. Many
people in those countries live off illegal trading carried
out by organized groups. However, it must be said that
trafficking has now become an alarming phenomenon

12-31963

that genuinely threatens the security of those States,
Libya first and foremost among them. The activities of
illegal organized groups are no longer limited to
trafficking in drugs or persons; they are deployed as a
major weapon in the competition among traffickers.
A ministerial meeting of the States concerned
held in my country last March produced the Tripoli
plan of action on cooperation among the countries of
the region, which was subsequently submitted to the
Secretariat for publication as an official document of
the Security Council and the General Assembly. We
regret the fact that, to date, the plan has not still been
issued.
What we have seen take place in Mali in recent
days is truly alarming. The declaration of the Azawad
State in the north not only means the ethnic division of
that African country, but also constitutes a real threat to
the security of all States in North Africa and the Sahel
and Sahara regions. We are all aware that extremist and
terrorist armed groups have coalesced in the areas
controlled by those separatists, who were trained and
provided with weapons and funds by the Al-Qadhafi
regime. Al-Qadhafi recruited thousands of mercenaries
from the four corners of the world in order to help him
to suppress the Libyan people, who had risen up
against his regime. He spent money on them, armed
them to the teeth and even went as far as granting them
Libyan citizenship.
After the collapse of his regime, those same
mercenaries fled and took weapons and money with
them to neighbouring African States. They are
currently working with the last remaining supporters of
the Libyan regime, in particular with Al-Qadhafi’s son
Saadi, who is living in Niger, so as to generate anarchy,
murder and instability in Libya and neighbouring
countries. In fact, they are cooperating with Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, as well as with extremist
groups in desert areas. They have also made public
their plans to destabilize the region. The interview
given to the Al-Arabiya network by Al-Qadhafi’s son
on 10 February is clear proof of that. A journalist who
recently visited Niger met with Saadi Al-Qadhafi and
some of his close military supporters also indicated the
same thing, stating that Al-Qadhafi had stated that he
was planning to establish an Islamic State in the
region.
Securing borders in that very sensitive region is a
basic national responsibility. It also requires that States

9

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

of the region and the international community make
efforts to prevent terrorism, trafficking and illegal
migration. It is our hope that the competent bodies of
the United Nations will accord due importance to these
problems. It is also our hope that the United Nations
will support the Tripoli plan of action, which was
adopted by the countries of the region, by providing
assistance in the consolidation of institutions and
capacity-building in the countries concerned, because
security in that region, the Sahel and Sahara and North
African countries, is a fundamental pillar of
international security.
Libya, whose people defeated Al-Qadhafi and his
regime, cannot on their own protect their lengthy
borders against illicit cross-border movements,
particularly clandestine migration and illicit trafficking
in weapons and drugs. To that end, we are striving to
promote closer cooperation with our neighbours and
are mobilizing all our potential to address that threat.
We therefore call on all States and international
organizations to cooperate with the Libyan authorities
in pursuing Al-Qadhafi’s sons and his die-hard
supporters and mercenaries, because they are the main
factors of instability in the region. They must be
arrested and brought to justice. We hope that all States
that are hosting on their territory senior officials of the
Al-Qadhafi regime realize that they are hosting time
bombs that could blow up at any time on their own
territory, with very negative consequences for their
stability followed by serious repercussions on their
neighbouring countries.
Border control and the prevention of illegal
cross-border trafficking is the joint responsibility of
neighbouring States. It requires the promotion of
cooperation and coordination as well as the exchange
of information and experience so as to ensure common
security.
The President:
Mr. António.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mr. António: At the outset, allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your country’s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
having invited the African Union (AU) to be a part of
this important discussion on the critical issue of
securing borders against illicit flows.
The developments taking place on various
continents today, particularly on the African continent,

10

bring into focus the ever-present danger of
uncontrolled borders and the attendant challenges of
illicit activities that include the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons, terrorist networks and human
and drug trafficking, as well as piracy, especially off
the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Guinea.
The question of border security has been high on
the agenda of African leaders, who are determined to
ensure that borders play a constructive rather than a
destructive role in promoting unity, peace, security and
stability on the continent. Accordingly, the African
Union adopted a border programme that is undergirded
by a number of political and legal instruments, aimed
at guiding further action in the management of border
issues in Africa. The programme also focuses on the
centrality of the principle of the respect of borders
existing on achievement of national independence, as
enshrined in the Charter of the then Organization of
African Unity (OAU); the resolution adopted by the
first ordinary session of the OAU Assembly of Heads
of State and Government, held in Cairo in July 1964;
and article 4 (b) of the Constitutive Act of the African
Union.
The goal of the AU border programme is to
comprehensively address border issues with respect to
both delimitation and demarcation, as well as crossborder cooperation, with the overall objective of
contributing to the prevention of conflicts and the
promotion of integration.
The crises we are currently witnessing in Mali
and in other parts of the Sahel region of Africa, in
Guinea-Bissau and between the Sudan and South
Sudan; piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of
Guinea; and the increased scale of activities by
terrorist and criminal groups such as the Lord’s
Resistance Army are manifest threats to peace, stability
and sustainable development. Indeed, this was clearly
recognized and addressed by the African Union Peace
and Security Council at its meeting held yesterday at
the ministerial level in Addis Ababa. The Ministers
considered the report of the AU Chairperson, which,
inter alia, highlighted the fact that Guinea-Bissau had
become a hub for drug trafficking, posing a serious
threat to regional security and stability.
In the case of Mali, the report, while pointing out
that the situation is a serious violation of one of the
fundamental principles of the African Union, notably
respect for the borders existing at the time of

12-31963

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

independence and the unity and territorial integrity of
Member States, also noted the increase in the number
of attacks by armed groups including Harakat Ansar
ed-Din al-Salafiya (Ansar Eddine), Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) and the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO). Most notable is
MUJAO, a dissident branch of AQIM that brings
together elements of different terrorist and criminal
groups from the region, including Boko Haram.
According to the Chairperson’s report, the prevailing
situation in Mali has provided AQIM with greater
latitude to pursue its terrorist activities, including the
kidnapping of hostages for purposes of collecting a
ransom.
Regarding the situation between the Republic of
the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, the
African Union, through its High-level Implementation
Panel, has continued to facilitate negotiations between
the two parties on post-referendum and post-secession
arrangements. Unfortunately, and as noted by the AU
Chairperson in his report, the relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan have deteriorated sharply in
recent weeks, with intense fighting between the armies
of the two countries, mostly in and around Heglig. The
AU Chairperson further noted that the current
situation, which also calls into question respect for the
AU principle on pre-existing borders, had poisoned
relations between the two countries, generating a
humanitarian crisis, undermining the viability of both
States, further jeopardizing the security of the entire
region and further testing the universally accepted
objective of two viable States living side by side in
peace.
The illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
continues to pose serious threats and challenges on the
continent and calls for a strengthening of the capacity
of African countries to implement subregional and
continental legally binding instruments such as the
Bamako Declaration on small arms and light weapons,
among others.
Mr. President, these ongoing situations on the
continent are the best illustration of the relevance of
your country’s initiative to inscribe this critical issue
on the agenda of the Security Council this month — an
issue that, we believe, can be tackled only through
concerted regional and international efforts, including
by building on existing regional and international
mechanisms and instruments.

12-31963

The African Union stands ready to cooperate for
the realization of this objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Savinykh (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus has always ensured a high level of
protection for State borders. Belarus is a reliable
barrier to illegal migration, the movement of terrorists
and the transit of weapons, drugs and their precursors.
Given its geographical location, Belarus has
significantly expanded the resources and efforts that it
devotes to protecting State borders. The effectiveness
of those measures can be felt fully by other countries in
the region.
An example of that work was the recent
disruption of a network of trafficking in women,
undertaken jointly with INTERPOL and British law
enforcement agencies. A broad series of measures was
also implemented, alongside Ukraine, to ensure
security around the European Football Championship.
Belarus is also cooperating productively with the
Collective Security Treaty Organization to protect
common borders. In this context, Belarus could be
called a regional exporter of security.
In order to safeguard security along its entire
border, the Republic of Belarus is taking steps to
ensure that separate parts of the border no longer
receive unequal treatment in terms of protection. To
this end, we are redeploying resources to staff and
equip the southern border control. That is extremely
important because Belarus lies on the main transport
routes not only between the East and the West but also
between the North and the South.
I would like to support and respond to the
interesting and important idea expressed by the
delegations of the United States of America and
Norway. I call attention to the work of the Committee
on Trade of the United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe. The Committee’s work on trade standards
and information and communications technology
infrastructure development has allowed us to promote
transparency in all international trade exchanges and
decrease the related financial and temporal costs. We
see a genuine possibility of concluding this work in the
near future in the Eurasian Economic Commission,
which has begun its work this year as the executive
body of a common economic space for Belarus,
Kazakhstan and Russia.

11

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

The Economic Commission for Europe plans,
through the Committee on Trade, to discuss the future
possibility of establishing a universal, pan-European
system for supporting and monitoring trade operations.
Such a system would enhance the transparency and
security of all trade flows, removing excessive
bureaucratic obstacles to business.
Belarus intends to continue to act as an effective
guarantor of the security of borders in the interests of
the entire region. We note that the expenses involved in
this area continue to rise. In this connection, and also
given the need to ensure capacity-building for border
protection in light of rising threats, we appeal to our
partners to offer practical cooperation and support for
protecting our borders.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): My delegation shares
concerns about the significant work that still needs to
be done in the area of preventing illicit flows across
borders. Addressing this problem is of particular
relevance to Botswana, as it is to the African continent
as a whole. We therefore thank the United States
delegation for convening this open debate during its
presidency of the Security Council.
Botswana believes that the concerted efforts of
the international community are required to address the
problem of illicit cross-border flows, including of
small arms and light weapons, weapons of mass
destruction, human trafficking, particularly trafficking
in women and children, drugs, illicit minerals and
wildlife trophies, terrorists, fugitives and illicit
financial transfers. My delegation views such activities
as serious threats that undermine efforts aimed at
achieving
sustainable
economic
and
social
development.
Transnational organized crime and terrorism are
global in nature, and we believe that any meaningful
effort to counter such activities should involve giving
special attention to improving border control,
immigration and customs security. Botswana supports
stronger and more robust cooperation to prevent and
combat illicit flows at the national, regional and global
levels. We also support a comprehensive approach
which we believe would save both time and costs in the
global effort to stem illicit flows.

12

My delegation strongly believes that the
international community should join efforts in
prioritizing border control in the implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We look forward
to consideration of this subject during the United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action, which
will be held in August 2012.
Botswana also places a high premium on the
conclusion of an arms trade treaty in July 2012 as an
effective and balanced, legally-binding instrument of
the highest possible common, international standards
for the transfer of conventional arms. We will support
an arms trade treaty, the implementation of which shall
include closer international cooperation and assistance
in the prevention of illicit flows across borders.
Botswana appreciates the assistance it has
received from the United Nations system, as well as
from bilateral partners, towards the strengthening of its
border control, immigration and customs security. We
therefore look forward to the report of the SecretaryGeneral later this year, which will provide a
comprehensive assessment of the United Nations
efforts to assist Member States to counter illicit flows.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my delegation adds its voice to
the opinions expressed in the letter sent yesterday by
the Chairman of the Coordinating Committee of the
Non-Aligned Movement to the President of the
Security Council.
The Security Council is debating this issue at a
time when Syria is under terrorist attack, enabled by
the trafficking of arms and fighters who seek to
destabilize and damage security, destroy public and
private property, and undertake terrorist and sabotage
operations against civilians and the military alike. My
country has sent dozens of letters to the SecurityGeneral and the Council, in which it has underlined the
threat posed by the trafficking of arms and combatants
across borders with neighbouring countries to the
stability and security of Syria.
Yesterday, we sent a letter to the Council
containing the names of a number of detainees of Arab

12-31963

S/PV.6760 (Resumption 1)

nationalities, most of whom carried out terrorist acts in
Syria, while others trafficked weapons into Syria. They
all entered Syria illegally through borders with
neighbouring States. Investigations have shown that
most of those detained belong to Al-Qaida and have
been given fatwas calling for extremist acts and
practices. The Security Council should send a clear
message to those who stand behind such acts, States
and groups alike, to cease and desist.
My delegation today heard the statement by the
representative of Israel. In this context, I would like to
state that such accusations and lies cannot replace the
evident truth. That is clear to all, as Israel is the main
source of instability in the region because of its
continuing occupation of Arab land and the Syrian
Golan.
It is indeed shameful for the representative of
Israel to accuse others instead of apologizing to the
international community for an abhorrent history of
aggression, including the Israeli army’s use of millions
of cluster bombs against Southern Lebanon on the very
same day that the Council adopted resolution 1701

(2006) demanding an end to Israeli aggression against
Lebanon.
It is well-known that the main traffickers of
conventional weapons in the world, particularly illicit
weapons, are retired Israeli military officers working
for Israeli weapons manufacturers and industries. It is
clear that the Israel representative’s statement
contradicts his country’s actions, since Israel’s
involvement in the illicit trafficking of weapons across
the globe encourages international terrorism and
protects drug traffickers and secessionist movements
around the world. Indeed, international gangs led by
some Israeli religious figures are now trafficking
children’s organs.
Finally, acts of international aggression,
occupation and piracy by Israeli cannot be hidden from
the international community.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

12-31963

13
