S/PRST/2005/34

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 July 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5229th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 July 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Briefings by
Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council”, the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to peace and security
and that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable regardless of their
motivations, whenever and by whomsoever committed. The Security Council
reiterates its condemnation of the Al-Qaida network and other terrorist groups
for ongoing and multiple criminal terrorist acts, aimed at causing death,
destruction of property and undermining stability. The Security Council also
reaffirms that proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as
well as their means of delivery, constitutes a threat to international peace and
security and recalls its grave concern about the risk posed by non-State actors
that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means of delivery.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on all Member States to become
parties to all 12 International Conventions against terrorism, and in this
context drew attention to the Treaty Event being held in New York in
September, and encourages Member States to take that opportunity also to sign
the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The Security
Council calls on Member States to cooperate on an expedited basis to resolve
all outstanding issues with a view to adopting the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism.
“The Security Council urges all States to cooperate to bring to justice, in
accordance with the principle of extradite or prosecute, the perpetrators,
organizers and sponsors of acts of terrorism. Recent events, as condemned by
the Security Council in resolution 1611 (2005) and S/PRST/2005/29, stress the
urgency and necessity of redoubling efforts to combat terrorism.
“The Security Council welcomes the briefings by the Chairmen of the
Al Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), the Counter Terrorism Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
on the work of the three Committees. The Security Council reaffirms the
importance and the urgency it attaches to the implementation of the provisions
05-43236 (E) 200705

*0543236*

S/PRST/2005/34

of the resolutions relevant to the three Committees as well as the fulfilment of
the mandates of the three Committees. The Security Council therefore strongly
encourages Member States as well as the respective Committees to redouble
their efforts to seek ways to further strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), in accordance with the
provisions of these and other relevant resolutions.
“The Security Council reaffirms its call for enhanced cooperation among
the three Committees, as well as their respective group of experts, in
monitoring States’ implementation of the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, with due respect for their different mandates, including
through enhanced information sharing, coordinated response to late
submission of States’ reports to the three Committees, and other issues of
relevance to all the three Committees. The Security Council also invites the
three Committees to continue cooperation with the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).
“The Security Council urges Member States to redouble their efforts to
implement the provisions of the resolutions relevant to the three Committees.
While reaffirming that the responsibility for implementing the provisions of
these resolutions rests with the States, the Security Council encourages States
to seek the necessary assistance to ensure that the necessary capacity to
implement the resolutions is available.
“The Security Council reiterates that relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations can play a crucial role in supporting the goals of
these resolutions, raising awareness of their importance, and helping their
members implement them. The Security Council encourages such
organizations, as or when proposed by the relevant Committee, where
appropriate, to provide the necessary technical assistance. Moreover, the
Security
Council
encourages
its
Counter-Terrorism
Committee,
Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee, and, when appropriate its 1540
Committee, as well as relevant organizations, to enhance cooperation with a
view to identifying, promoting, and developing, as appropriate, best practices
to provide clarity and guidance to States on implementation of the provisions
of the relevant resolutions.
“The Security Council encourages Member States in a position to do so
to make technical assistance available on a priority basis.
“The Security Council invites the three Committees to continue reporting
on their activities at regular intervals and, where appropriate, in a coordinated
manner.”

2
