S/PV.7511

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7511th meeting

Tuesday, 25 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Ramoškaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Díaz de la Guardia Beuno
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2015/655)
Letter dated 21 August 2015 from the Panel of Experts on South Sudan
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2206 (2015) addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2015/656)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-26387 (E)
*1526387*

S/PV.7511

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the Secretary-General on South Sudan, and to update
the Security Council on events since its finalization.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(S/2015/655)
Letter dated 21 August 2015 from the Panel
of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to Security Council resolution
2206 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2015/656)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, and Mr. Stephen O’Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
On behalf of the Council, I would like to welcome
Ms. Løj, who is joining us at this meeting via video
teleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/655, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/656, which contains the
text of a letter dated 21 August 2015 from the Panel
of Experts on South Sudan established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2206 (2015) addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Løj, Mr. O’Brien and Ambassador
Cristián Barros Melet, Permanent Representative of
Chile, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Løj.
Ms. Løj: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to present the latest report (S/2015/655) of

2/8

25/08/2015

Following the partial signing of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development-plus peace agreement, on
17 August, international and regional partners urged
the President to sign the agreement by the end of the 15day deadline and called on all parties to immediately
cease all hostilities. Upon his return from Addis
Ababa, President Salva Kiir commenced intensive
consultations with various constituencies. Yesterday,
the President chaired a pivotal leadership meeting
attended by senior Government officials, members
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM)
National Liberation Council, its Political Bureau and
its secretariat, ministers, governors, chairpersons of
independent commissions, as well as the Speakers and
Deputy Speakers of the National Legislative Assembly
and the Council of the States. A mini-summit has
been called for tomorrow, where the Government of
the Republic of South Sudan is expected to sign the
proposed agreement — as it stated — “in the interest
of peace”.
Despite that hopefully positive development, the
security situation on the ground has been volatile
and tense. Fighting in the Greater Upper Nile region
has remained intense, and a further escalation of
hostilities in southern Unity state has had increasingly
severe consequences for the civilian population.
Major offensives conducted by the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) and its allied militias into
Opposition-held areas have led to further deterioration
of the security and humanitarian situations since April,
and have resulted in numerous reports of grave human
rights violations. Most recently, on 19 August, fighting
occurred between SPLA and Opposition forces around
Leer town, with both sides trading accusations of
having initiated the attack.
In Upper Nile state, heavy fighting between the
SPLA and the SPLM/Army in Opposition, along with
its allied Shilluk militias, has centred around the state
capital Malakal, which has changed hands several
times since April. Both sides remain in close proximity
to each other along the banks of the Nile River, with
numerous skirmishes taking place in Malakal and in
the northern town of Melut. I am disappointed that the
parties have not observed the cessation of hostilities or
the ceasefire that they agreed to in Addis Ababa.
The Bahr el-Ghazal and the Equatoria regions also
witnessed further deterioration in the security situation,
15-26387

25/08/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7511

with low intensity fighting between armed groups.
Between 29 July and 2 August, tensions escalated in
Yambio county, Western Equatoria state, with the
occurence of clashes involving SPLA, national police,
local youth, a community defence group and Dinka
youth. Over 5,000 civilians were briefly displaced.

conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In particular, UNMISS has scaled up its protection-ofcivilians efforts in Unity xtate by projecting a security
presence in previously inaccessible areas. However,
capacity and resource constraints and deliberate
obstruction by the parties have limited those efforts.

On the domestic political front, on 16 August, the
four elected governors of Central Equatoria, Upper Nile,
Warrap and Western Equatoria states were dismissed,
and the caretaker Governor of Northern Bahr el-Ghazal
state was also replaced. On 20 August, the five newly
appointed caretaker Governors were sworn into office
by the President. Shortly after he was relieved of his
position, the Western Equatoria state governor was
arrested at his residence in Juba, but was later released.
On 21 August, the Speaker of the Western Equatoria
state Legislative Assembly was killed in an ambush in
his state; further details of his killing are not yet known.

I would like to thank our military and police
personnel for their gallant efforts to protect civilians
in an increasingly difficult environment. I would urge
troop- and police-contributing countries, along with
other Member States, to help equip and accelerate the
deployment of UNMISS personnel and resources and
give them the additional resources they need.

The escalation of fighting has sparked further
displacements. Civilians from conflict-affected counties
in southern Unity State have fled to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) protection-ofcivilians site in Bentiu, while new internally displaced
persons from the west bank of the Nile have arrived at the
UNMISS base in Malakal. UNMISS is now providing
protection to over 200,000 internally displaced persons
at six protection-of-civilians sites. The Bentiu site has
experienced the largest recent increase in internally
displaced persons, up by 140 per cent since late April,
while the population at the Malakal site has grown by
almost 50 per cent just since mid-July. The escalation of
fighting also sparked violent tensions between Dinka,
Nuer and Shilluk internally displaced persons within
the Malakal site.
The large influx of internally displaced persons
into UNMISS bases during the reporting period and
the resulting rise in political, ethnic and tribal tensions,
as well as criminal activity in the camps, underscores
once again the unsustainability of these protection
sites for the longer term. As mentioned in my previous
briefing to the Council, in May (see S/PV.7444), more
attention must be paid to preventing the sites from
becoming attractions for those looking for the services
available therein, rather than for those in need of
physical protection.
To that end, UNMISS has further expanded
its reach outside of the sites through short, long and
dynamic air and integrated patrols, in order to increase
security for the local population while also facilitating

The humanitarian situation in South Sudan is
dire. Over 2.2 million people remain displaced.
Over 4.6 million people are already facing crisis and
emergency levels of food insecurity. The situation in
Unity state is particularly alarming, as prevailing
insecurity prevents humanitarian access to displaced
communities. On 14 August, the World Food
Programme commenced food air drops to Wau Shilluk,
in Upper Nile state, which has significantly reduced the
number of civilians arriving at the UNMISS protection
site in Malakal.
UNMISS has continued to provide force protection
to road and barge convoys and other activities to enable
humanitarian agencies to meet the primary needs of
those at risk. Yet the delivery of humanitarian assistance
is being severely challenged by land, riverine and air
movement restrictions and the heightened risk of being
caught in crossfire.
With respect to the human rights situation in
South Sudan, I am deeply shocked by the parties’
utter disrespect for human life. UNMISS continues
to receive reports of gross violations of human rights
and humanitarian law committed by all parties to the
conflict. On 29 June, UNMISS released a human rights
flash report documenting human rights violations that
were perpetrated as fighting escalated in the Greater
Upper Nile region in April and May. Reported violations
include indiscriminate killings, rape and other sexual
violence, abductions of civilians and the destruction
of civilian objects, property and livelihoods. The
deliberate targeting of innocent civilians, including
women, children and the elderly, must stop immediately,
and the culture of impunity must end.
I am also concerned by the recent restrictions placed
on press freedom in the country, including through the

15-263873/8

S/PV.7511

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

detention of, threats to and violence against journalists.
Although the circumstances around the recent killing of
Peter Moi, a journalist of the New Nation newspaper, are
still unclear, the event raises serious concern. I urge a
swift and thorough investigation into the incident. Noting
that the Government has made repeated commitments
to press freedom, it is important that they match words
with action. I strongly encourage the Government to
implement the Media Authority, Broadcast Corporation
and Right of Access to Information Act, which was
signed into law in December 2013. Ensuring the safety
and security of members of the press and swiftly
investigating incidents of violence and intimidation
against journalists are critical.
As I have noted in previous briefings to the
Council, UNMISS continues to face serious obstacles
to its operations, including grave obstructions by
both parties to its freedom of movement. That limits
the Mission’s ability to protect civilians and monitor
the human rights situation, while also delaying and
interrupting the movement of life-saving humanitarian
aid to the most vulnerable. I would like again to urge all
parties to allow unhindered freedom of movement for
Mission and humanitarian operations.
Following the hopefully successful conclusion to the
peace talks, we must bear in mind that implementation
will have significant resource implications. The
agreement includes a number of important tasks for
the Mission and several implied tasks that will require
UNMISS support. In orienting the Mission to assume
those functions, we must be careful that resources are
not diverted from key mandated tasks, particularly the
protection of civilians. The four pillars of the current
mandate of UNMISS will continue to be necessary and
critical to creating an environment in which peace can
take root.
As we welcome hopefully the signing of the
agreement by the Government, I would reiterate
my call to the leaders of South Sudan to place the
interests of their people above their personal ambitions
and implement the peace agreement in good faith.
While we will all do everything possible to support
implementation, I must remind the Council that this
agreement, albeit very important, is only a first step.
Peace, stability and prosperity will not come to South
Sudan overnight. The process will require concerted
and sustained efforts from both national stakeholders
and international partners.

4/8

25/08/2015

Focus will also need to be drawn to the range of
intercommunal and other conflicts, which in some
states prove to be just as violent as the political struggle.
We must devise ways to support the South Sudanese
people to address the drivers of conflict as we lay the
foundation for longer-term peace and development.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the
commitment of the entire United Nations family on
the ground to work closely with the African Union,
regional and international partners and, not the least,
the people of South Sudan to make that vision a reality.
The President: I thank Ms. Løj for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council
following my visit to South Sudan from 22 to 25 July.
It was my first visit to South Sudan as the Emergency
Relief Coordinator. My objective was to evaluate the
humanitarian situation first-hand and to address critical
concerns affecting our operations in South Sudan.
During my visit, I had the opportunity to meet
with President Salva Kiir and the Minister for Cabinet
Affairs, Mr. Elias Lomuro. I also met with Ambassadors
from the region and with donor Member States. I also
was able to visit civilians directly affected by the
conflict in the Juba protection-of-civilians site, as well
as those in Bentiu and Nyal in southern Unity state. I
witnessed the consequences of over 20 months of brutal
conflict on the lives of men, women and children. It
was a very deeply harrowing experience.
The overall humanitarian situation continues to
sharply deteriorate. As of today, over 2.2 million people
have been displaced due to the conflict, an increase of
200,000 since the beginning of this year. More than
1.6 million are displaced internally and over 616,000
people have fled to neighbouring States. Almost
200,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) are now
seeking refuge in United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) bases, as compared to 121,000 just
four months ago. Severe food insecurity is affecting
4.6 million people this year, as compared to 3.8 million
at the height of the lean season last year. While the
World Food Programme (WFP) and its partners
have reached more than 2.3 million in 2015, severe
hunger will be a threat well into next year, especially
if fighting continues. There is no doubt that we will
continue to see higher than usual food insecurity in the

15-26387

25/08/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

conflict-affected states. In those states, displacement,
the inability to plant crops now and the destruction
of livelihoods has just been too severe and has left
people unable to meet their own most basic needs.
Host communities, such as those in Nyal as I saw, are
generously giving up their own resilience to those to
whom they are giving sanctuary as they flee or die
and wade through the currently saturated chest-high
swamps to safety, however temporary, before the
fighting again catches up with them.
The lives of more than a quarter million children
are at risk from rapidly worsening malnutrition. In half
of South Sudan’s states, one in three children suffers
acute malnutrition. The situation for children in the
protection-of-civilians sites is particularly concerning.
UNICEF reports that global acute malnutrition is
higher inside the Bentiu protection-of-civilians site,
at 12.9 per cent, than for new arrivals, at 1.6 per
cent, which could be attributed to overstretched basic
services and outbreaks of disease that can contribute
to malnutrition. Large spikes in malaria across South
Sudan have also raised the possibility of a second
consecutive season with exceptionally high numbers
of malaria cases and preventable deaths, which, as we
know, particular affect children under 5 and pregnant
mothers.
The situation is particularly alarming in areas
directly affected by armed conflict, in particular in
Unity and the Upper Nile states. I was able to see that
for myself during my visit to Bentiu and Nyal. I am
very concerned about the atrocities that continue to
be reported. The scope and level of cruelty that has
characterized the attacks against civilians suggests
a depth of antipathy that goes beyond political
differences. Allegations include rampant killing, rape,
abduction, looting, arson and forced displacement, and
even such horrific acts as burning of people inside
their own homes. There is evidence of deliberate ethnic
targeting of, and reprisals against, women and girls.
According to information received from Unity state,
hundreds of women and girls have been abducted, and
hundreds more have been subjected to sexual violence,
including gang rape. For example, a survivor from
Koch county reported how she was dragged out of
her tukul and gang-raped alongside her neighbour by
Government soldiers in front of her 3-year-old child. In
another instance, a witness from Rubkona county said
that she saw Government forces gang-raping a breastfeeding mother after tossing her baby aside.

S/PV.7511

Those who can flee from the unspeakable violence
hide in the hard-to-reach swamp lands, while some
others make the long journey by foot to the Bentiu
protection-of-civilians site in search of safety. In Nyal, I
met many women and children who had been separated
from their husbands and other family members. One
woman had just arrived after walking for several days
from close to Leer with her seven children to seek
safety among fellow Nuer in Nyal. The host community
in Nyal was very welcoming, but the food and resources
they were sharing with those arriving were running
quite low. While insecurity has made it difficult for
humanitarian staff to maintain a presence in southern
Unity state, we are making all possible efforts to reach
the displaced people, and host communities in urgent
need of assistance. To further boost those efforts, I
recently approved over $5 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund for survival kits that
contain food, seeds, mosquito nets and other essential
items. We have reached over 33,000 people with the kits
so far.
I am concerned about civilians being attacked at
distribution sites in southern Unity state. We have had
to halt the provision of assistance in some instances
where people did not dare to come out of hiding to
receive life-saving aid. The attacks are inhumane
and illegal, and the international community should
reiterate its call on all parties to the conflict to meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law
to protect civilians.
While needs are increasing, our ability to reach
people in a timely manner is hampered by severe
restrictions. During my visit, I was able to discuss
the ban on barge movement on the Nile and the use
of Malakal Airport with President Kiir and Minister
Lomuro. I am pleased that the Government of South
Sudan then moved to lift those restrictions at the
beginning of August, but I remain deeply concerned
about access restrictions to neighbouring Wau Shilluk
from Malakal. More than 16,000 people have arrived in
the Malakal protection-of-civilians site since mid-July,
primarily because humanitarian assistance to Wau
Shilluk has stopped. Humanitarian staff are still being
prevented from delivering aid to Wau Shilluk from
Malakal, but they have at least been able to fly in aid
from Juba, reaching 20,000 so far. That is neither costeffective nor the best way to ensure that all needs are
met. We therefore need to continue to call on authorities
to facilitate the safe, rapid and unimpeded access of

15-263875/8

S/PV.7511

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian organizations and supplies to all persons
in need of assistance within South Sudan, in line with
international humanitarian law.
I am very concerned about the security of
humanitarian workers in South Sudan. At least 29
humanitarian workers have been killed since the
beginning of the conflict, including, sadly, the recent
confirmation of the three WFP workers. Many more
have been wounded or abducted, and they have often
been ethnically targeted. There has also been a worrying
trend of robberies of non-governmental organization
compounds in Juba, with 24 such robberies in July
alone. That is unacceptable. I raised that concern in my
meetings with the Government of South Sudan, but I
again wish to recall parties’ obligations to protect and
respect humanitarian personnel and supplies.
Despite the increasingly difficult operating
environment, I am glad to report that in 2015
humanitarian workers have so far reached more than
2.3 million people with food and livelihood assistance,
and more than 1.6 million people with water, sanitation
and hygiene services. Health workers have seen more
than 1.1 million patients in conflict-affected states, and
more than half a million people have received critical
items, such as tarpaulins, blankets and cooking sets,
while more than 200,000 children have been provided
with child-friendly spaces. The cholera outbreak,
which resulted in 1,644 cases and 45 deaths, has been
largely contained. Challenges remain, including the
need to scale up the response fast enough to meet the
ever-increasing needs, especially in places such as the
Bentiu and Malakal protection-of-civilian sites, where
people continue to arrive by the hundreds on a daily
basis.
To help address the humanitarian challenges I
have mentioned, I believe the international community
should address the following four priority areas.
First and foremost, the people of South Sudan
are looking for lasting peace. A first step would
be a credible cessation of hostilities, which would
give people breathing space and allow humanitarian
workers to deliver assistance to those currently cut
off from life-saving aid by insecurity. As a second
step, a durable peace agreement would allow people
to consider returning home and rebuilding their lives.
But we must be realistic: a peace agreement that is not
inclusive and does not bring an end to the fighting will
ultimately fail the people of South Sudan.

6/8

25/08/2015

Secondly, the call on the parties to the conflict to
protect civilians must be reinforced. Over the past four
months alone, and despite the best efforts of UNMISS
and humanitarians, an untold number of civilians,
among them many women and children, have died cruel
deaths, were wounded or lost their livelihoods. The
Government needs to do more to protect civilians and
prevent or stop violations of international humanitarian
law. While we work towards peace, we must ensure
that, even if current developments lead to a political
change, the United Nations continues to put protection
at the centre of its focus as well. We also need to put
an end to the prevailing impunity for violations of
international humanitarian law committed by all
parties to the conflict and for violations and abuses of
human rights law.
Thirdly, anyone with influence on the parties
should ensure that humanitarian response efforts are
not impeded and that all South Sudanese in need of
assistance can be reached in a principled and costeffective manner. Continued pressure and action on the
parties to the conflict to abide by their commitments is
crucial.
Finally, we need adequate funding for the
humanitarian operation. Only half of the requirements
of the 2015 Humanitarian Response Plan have so far
been met. I am concerned that, without timely and
sustainable funding, we will not be able to deliver
on our promise to enable the people of South Sudan
to realize their basic right to be safe and to live with
dignity and free from want.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Barros Melet.
Mr. Barros Melet (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to brief the members of the Security Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan, and to highlight the
main findings of the interim report of the Panel of
Experts (see S/2015/656), based on the Coordinator’s
presentation of the report and the Committee’s
deliberations on 20 August, as well as the work of the
Committee and Panel since my previous briefing in the
Chamber, on 14 May (see S/PV.7444).
On 31 July, the Panel of Experts conveyed its
interim report to members of the Committee. In its
report, the Panel observed that, since the adoption of

15-26387

25/08/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

resolution 2206 (2015), the situation in South Sudan
had deteriorated precipitously, posing a significant
threat not only to the country’s citizens but also to the
peace and security of the entire region. In the light of
such severe deterioration, the Panel recommended that,
in order to achieve the objectives set forth in resolution
2206 (2015) and alter the expectations of the warring
parties, designations undertaken by the Committee
must include those decision-makers with the ability to
either perpetuate or end the war, as well as those who
benefit economically and politically from conflict and
others who are responsible for serious crimes under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The Panel also observed that the supply of arms
and ammunition to all parties in the conflict had
contributed to prolonging and escalating the war. In
that connection, it recommended that the Security
Council impose a complete and general arms embargo
on South Sudan. The Panel reported on the procurement
of heavy weaponry by the Government — particularly
the acquisition of greater air, riverine and land mobility
capacity — which would allow Government forces to
overcome the logistical challenges of the rainy season
and continue fighting in the coming months, thereby
substantially impacting the dynamics on the ground.
The Panel noted that the humanitarian situation
in South Sudan was one of only four level-3 systemwide emergencies in the world, and the only one in
Africa. The Panel also reported that the obstruction
of humanitarian assistance and of peacekeeping
operations had escalated since the adoption of resolution
2206 (2015); that humanitarian workers and United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) personnel,
alike, were regularly attacked, assaulted, harassed,
detained, intimidated and threatened; and that, in May,
humanitarian actors had reported the same number of
access-related incidents as the preceding two months
combined.
The Panel reported that all parties to the conflict
had been targeting civilians as part of their military
tactics, thereby contravening applicable international
humanitarian law, as referenced to in resolution 2206
(2015). The Panel asserted that, since the offensive
in the greater Upper Nile region began in April, the
intensity and brutality of the violence aimed at civilians
were hitherto unseen, even in what had already been,
without a doubt, an exceedingly violent conflict. The
Panel further reported that scores of civilians had

S/PV.7511

been killed, maimed, tortured, burned alive inside
their homes, displaced, raped and abducted, and that
children had been recruited and used as part of the war
effort. The Panel indicated that it was investigating the
chain of command pertaining to those serious crimes.
In that regard, the Panel recommended that,
following its presidential statement of 24 March
(S/PRST/2015/9), the Security Council urge the African
Union to publicly release the report of its commission
of inquiry on South Sudan without further delay and
independent of the outcome of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development process, as that would
provide insight regarding those responsible for the
violations.
During the Committee meeting on 20 August, the
Coordinator of the Panel noted that, by every measure,
the situation in South Sudan had deteriorated further
since the Panel submitted its interim report to the
Committee. He reported that no area of South Sudan
remained unaffected by conflict and that the war
continued to metastasize and manifest beyond the areas
of most intense fighting between Government and
Opposition forces in the states of the Greater Upper Nile
region. The Coordinator also stated that developments
in recent days, including President’s Kiir’s dismissal of
the Governors of Central and Eastern Equatoria states
and the arrest and detention of the latter, had exacerbated
an already volatile situation, further fuelling a brewing
insurgency in those areas.
On the humanitarian situation, the Coordinator
stated that over 70 per cent of the country’s 12 million
people now required humanitarian assistance according
to the latest United Nations figures. Food insecurity
remains at emergency levels — the second most-severe
level just short of famine — in widespread areas of the
Greater Upper Nile region. The Coordinator reported
that just under 200,000 internally displaced persons
were now sheltering in United Nations protection-ofcivilian sites, up nearly 40,000 since mid-July — that is
a one third increase in just over a month.
The Coordinator also noted that the deterioration
in the economic situation was commensurate with that
of the security and humanitarian situation, and that the
Panel had begun investigating the financing channels
used by individuals in both the Government and the
Opposition, with a view to prosecuting war crimes and
the individuals and entities that were profiting from the
continuation of the conflict.

15-263877/8

S/PV.7511

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Coordinator observed that the Panel had taken
note of the fact that the outcome of 17 August was only
the most recent of at least a dozen times since early
2014 that one or both parties had failed to adhere to an
internationally endorsed deadline for progress towards
ending the war. He expressed the view of the Panel of
Experts that, should all the parties sign an agreement, the
prevailing issue would be not only the implementation
of that agreement and an end to the violence, but
also the promotion of national reconciliation and a
durable and inclusive political settlement for South
Sudan, which would include ensuring accountability
for serious crimes committed throughout the war. In
the opinion of the Coordinator, the role envisioned for
sanctions in resolution 2206 (2015) in order to achieve
an inclusive and sustainable peace in South Sudan will
be just as critical, if not more so, during that period
than it is today.
The Coordinator also underscored the Panel of
Experts’ recommendation that, in so far as resolution
2206 (2015) reiterates that there is no military
solution to the conflict and the reported acquisitions
and attempts to change the balance of power on the
ground decrease the incentives for a solution to the
violence — incentives that are necessary not only for
an agreement but for adherence and implementation
thereof, including adherence to a ceasefire — makes it
necessary for the Council to impose an arms embargo
on South Sudan.
In their deliberations concerning the Panel of
Experts’ interim report on South Sudan, most delegations
welcomed the report and its recommendations. Some
delegations did not support the recommendation
concerning the report of the African Union’ commission
of inquiry on South Sudan. One delegation stressed
the need to further study the recommendation on the
imposition of an arms embargo, and did not support the
recommendation on options for criminal accountability
and transitional justice in South Sudan.
The Committee took note of the only
recommendation of the Secretariat, namely, that it
consider the possibility of additional designations of
individuals and — given the severe deterioration on
the ground and the threat that the war in South Sudan
poses to international peace and security and to achieve
the objectives established by the Council in resolution
2206 (2215), namely, inclusive and sustainable peace
in South Sudan — that such designations include those
decision-makers who have the capability either to

8/8

25/08/2015

perpetuate or end the war, but who reap the economic
and political benefits of the conflict, and/or others, who
are responsible for serious crimes under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Since my previous briefing in the Chamber on
14 May, the Committee held an exchange of views on
22 May with the Panel of Experts regarding its work
plan and methodology. On 19 June, the Committee
held its second formal meeting with the representatives
of South Sudan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya, the
Sudan and Uganda on the implementation of resolution
2206 (2015). In their remarks, the participating States
of the region highlighted a number of challenges in
implementing the sanctions measures, such as porous
borders, and expressed concern with regard to the
deteriorating humanitarian and security situation in
South Sudan.
On 26 June, the Panel of Experts submitted its first
monthly report pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015).
Committee members look forward to receiving the
next monthly report, at the end of this month, and to
maintaining close, continuous engagement with the
Panel over the course of its mandate. On 1 July, the
Committee approved the inclusion of six individuals on
the list making them subject to the travel ban and assets
freeze set out respectively in paragraphs 9 and 12 of
resolution 2206 (2015).
As I mentioned under the item “Other matters”
during the Committee’s consultations on 20 August,
I plan to visit South Sudan during the month of
November, and will inform members of the Committee
of the details of my planned visit in due course.
In conclusion, I would like to assure members of
the Council that, as Chair of the Committee, I will
do my utmost to ensure that the Committee makes a
significant contribution to the efforts of the Council,
UNMISS and other international partners to bring an
end to the ongoing violence that threatens South Sudan
and to set the country on a path of reconciliation,
durable peace and sustainable development.
The President: I thank Ambassador Barros Melet
for his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-26387
