Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

of asking the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development to send a mission of experts to study
the situation and the possibilities of economic development in the Trust Territory of Somaliland under
Italian administration;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
study of the question and on the basis of the conclusions of the 1954 Visiting Mission to Trust Territories
in East Africa and the report of the Bank, if the plan
for the mission referred to in the preceding paragraph
is carried out, to endeavour to decide on practical
measures for financing the economic development plans
for Somaliland and to report to the General Assembly
at its next session;
4. Expresses the hope that, in the meantime, the
Administering Authority will continue unremittingly in
its efforts to further the economic development of the
Trust Territory.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

856 (IX). Form of the annual report of the
Trusteeship Council to the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 433 (V) of 2 December 1950
on the annual reports of the Trusteeship Council,
Recalling its resolution 789 (VIII) of 9 December
1953 on the control and limitation of documentation,
Having taken note of the conclusions of the Council
on this question as contained in its report 14 covering
the period from 22 July 1953 to 16 July 1954,
1. Approves, on a trial basis, the proposals of the
Trusteeship Council concerning the form of its report
to the General Assembly to the effect that a comprehensive report on a given Trust Territory should
be presented by the Council only every third year
coinciding with the Council's examination of the report
on the Territory by a visiting mission, and that the
Council should submit a shorter report in the intervening years, giving only an account of the developments
and progress made during the year under review but
including such background materials as would enable
the Assembly to appreciate the significance of important developments, the comments and observations of
Member States and the conclusions and recommendations of the Council ;
2. Requests, however, that in view of the time-limit
set for the attainment by 1960 of independence by the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration, the Council annually submit a comprehensive
report on that Trust Territory.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
857 (IX). Report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 22 July 1953 to
16 July 1954
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report15 of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 22 July 1953 to
16 July 1954;
14

15

Ibid., Supplement No. 4.
Ibid.

2. Recommends that the Council, in its future deliberations, take into account the comments and suggestions made in the course of the discussions of its report
at the ninth session of the General Assembly.
512th plenary meeting,
14 Decimber 1954.

858 (IX). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the objective of self-government or independence
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952
by which it invited the Administering Authority of
each Trust Territory, other than Somaliland under
Italian administration, to include in each annual report
information concerning measures taken or contemplated
towards self-government or independence and, inter
alia, the estimated period of time required for such
measures and for the attainment of the ultimate objective,
Recalling further its resolution 752 (VIII) of 9
December 1953 by which it requested the Trusteeship
Council to include in its next and succeeding reports
to the General Assembly a separate section dealing
with the implementation of resoluticns 558 (VI) and
752 (VIII), specifying the various measures taken or
contemplated towards self-government or independence
and stating in each case its conclusions and recommendations in the light of these resolutions,
Considering that one of the most effective means of
assisting the peoples of the Trust Territories to achieve
the objectives set forth in Article 76 b of the Charter
is to provide them with an opportunity to obtain
experience in the work of government and administration by participation in representative bodies with
adequate powers to carry out such work,
1. N ates with satisfaction that, in response to the
request of the General Assembly, the Trusteeship Council has included in its report covering the period from
22 July 1953 to 16 July 1954 a separate section 16 dealing with the attainmerit by the Trust Territories of the
objective of self-government or independence;
2. N ates, however, that the Council has not formulated in this report any conclusions or recommendations on the measures taken or contemplated towards
self-government or independence ;
3. Expresses the hope that the Council will include its conclusions and recommendations on this
question in its next and succeeding reports to the
General Assembly ;
4. Recommends that the Council instruct its visiting missions to give special attention in their reports
to the Council to the question of attainment by the
Trust Territories of self-government or independence
in the light of resolutions 558 (VI) and 752 (VIII)
and of the present resolution;
5. Recommends to the Administering Authorities
that, as a means to facilitate an approximate determination of the date on which the populations of the Trust
Territories would be prepared for self-government or
independence, they should intensify their efforts to the
utmost to bring about the establishment of new
representative organs of government and administration
1s Ibid., p. 279 et seqq.

32

General Assembly -

in the Trust Territories, with increasing participation therein by :ndigenous elements of those Territories,
or to develop on the same basis organs of that type
already in existence ; that they should ensure that the
nature and_ powers of these organs reflect the special
status conferred on the Trust Territories by Chapter
XII of fhe Charter and by the Trusteeship Agreements; and that they should hasten the attainment of the
objectives set forth in Article 76 of the Charter,
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
859 (IX), Hearings of petitioners from the Trust
Territory of the Cameroons under French
administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 655 (VII) of 21 December
1952 and 758 (VIII) of 9 December 1953,
Having granted oral hearings 17 to petitioners, representatives of organizations in the Trust Territory of the
Cameroons under French administration,
1. Takes note of the statements of the petitioners,
representatives of organizations in the Trust Territory
of the Cameroons under French administration;
2. Decides to transmit to the Trusteeship Council
the statements of the petitioners for its study;
3. Recommends to the Council:
(a) To continue to give appropriate attention to the
matters raised by the petitioners ;
(.b) To request its next visiting mission to study
these matters ;
(c) To report accordingly to the General Assembly
at its tenth session.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
860 (IX), The Togoland unification problem and
the future of the Trust Territory of Togoland
under British administration

Ninth Session

Territory has been such that, at the same time as the
Gold Coast assumes full responsibility for its own
affairs, the people of Togoland under British administration will have reached a stage of development when
the objectives of the International Trusteeship System
will have been substantially achieved and that the
Trusteeship Agreement should therefore be terminated,
Considering that, in accordance with Article 76 b
of the Charter, the future status of the Territory should
be determined in the light of its particular circumstances
and of the freely expressed wishes of its peoples,
1. Decides, in view of the eventual revision or termination of the Trusteeship Agreement, that steps
should be taken, in the light of the particular circumstances of the Trust Territory, to ascertain the wishes
of the inhabitants as to their future, without prejudice
to the eventual solution they may choose whether it be
independence, unification of an independent Togoland
under British administration with an independent Togoland under French administration, unification with an
independent Gold Coast, or some other self-governing or independent status;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to take into
account the views expressed in the Fourth Committee
at the ninth and previous sessions of the General Assembly, to consider what arrangements should be made
in pursuance of the above decision and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its tenth session ;
3. Further requests the Trusteeship Council to
dispatch a special mission to the Trust Territories of
Togoland under British administration and Togoland
under French administration to make a special study
of these problems and tc, submit its report thereon
in time for the Council to report to the General Assembly at its tenth session;
4. Urges in the meanwhile that in the greater interests of the United Nations those directly concernei
will lend their utmost co-operation in the full an
early implementation of its recommendations containe
in General Assembly resolution 750 B (VIII) of 8
December 1953.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 750 (VIII) of 8
December 1953,

NOTE

Noting the special report of the Trusteeship Council
in document A/2669 18 of 23 July 1954,
Noting the new situation described in the statement 19
of the United Kingdom Government to the effect
that the Gold Coast will assume full responsibility
for its own affairs within a measurable period, and
that it will thereafter be no longer possible for the
Administering Authority to administer the Trust Territory in accordance with articles 4 and 5 of the present
Trusteeship Agreement,
Noting also the view 20 of the Administering Authority that the progress of the inhabitants of the Trust

ELECTION OF A MEMBER TO THE COMMITTEE OF INFORMATION FROM NoN-SELF-GoVERNJNG TERRITORIES

17 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 442nd, 443rd and 446th meetings.
1 s Ibid., Annexes, agenda items 35 and 52.
19 Ibid., document A/2660.
20 Ibid.

In accordance with the terms of resolutions 332
(IV) and 646 (VII) of the General Assembly, the
Fourth Committee was called upon to fill the vacancies
in the membership of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories created by the
ex~iration of the terms of office of Ecuador and Indonesia.
l n consequence of the reduction of one Administrative Member (Denmark) in the membership of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories resulting from the adoption of resolution
849 (IX) above, one vacancy only remained to be
filled, and the Fourth Committeee, on behalf of the
General Assembly, at its 433rd meeting on 15 N ovember 1954, elected PERU to fill that vacancy.
