A /73/PV.63

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

63rd plenary meeting

Thursday, 20 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Korneliou (Cyprus),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/73/L.63)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.63.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of Mexico, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.63, entitled “Judgment of
the International Court of Justice of 31 March 2004
concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals: need
for immediate compliance”.
On 31 March 2004, the International Court of
Justice issued its judgment in a case filed by Mexico
concerning the violation of the 1963 Vienna Convention
on Consular Relations and due process rights in more
than 50 cases involving Mexican nationals sentenced
to death in the United States. The Court found that the
United States had violated its obligation to provide the
requisite consular information and allow Mexico to
exercise its right to consular assistance in accordance
with the 1963 Convention.

Accordingly, the Court ordered the review
and reconsideration of 51 cases involving Mexican
nationals cited in the judgment. It has been almost 15
years since that judgment was handed down and, to
this date, it has yet to be complied with. In response
to that non-compliance, Mexico again appealed to the
International Court of Justice in 2008, and subsequently
sent three letters to the Security Council, in 2014, 2017
and 2018, to make it aware of the violations. To date,
Mexico has not received a response to those letters
from the Security Council.
Over the ensuing 14 years, Mexico has sought
enforcement of the ruling in cooperation with the
State Department and other United States authorities.
Despite those efforts, which the Mexican Government
recognizes and appreciates, six Mexican citizens were
executed in the State of Texas in violation of the Court’s
order to review and reconsider their guilty verdicts and
sentences. The most recent execution took place barely
a month ago. Such actions cause additional harm to the
Mexican State.
Given the circumstances, every effort having
been exhausted and in accordance with Article 10 of
the Charter of the United Nations, the Government of
Mexico has decided to seek recourse at the General
Assembly. Non-compliance with judgments issued
by the International Court of Justice — the principal
judicial organ of the Organization — is not merely a
concern at the bilateral level but, rather, a violation of
the rule of international law that has a profound impact
on the United Nations system as a whole.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45547 (E)

*1845547*

A/73/PV.63

For those reasons, Mexico has introduced draft
resolution A/73/L.63 under sub-item (a) of agenda item
125, “Strengthening of the United Nations system”.
The text of the draft resolution is legal and technical.
In order to further simplify the text and avoid political
considerations, however, I would like to formally
propose a draft revision to delete operative paragraph
2. We would request that the General Assembly take
action on the text as orally revised.
Lastly, I reiterate the willingness of the Government
of Mexico to continue to cooperate with the authorities
of the United States of America in honouring the
Avena decision.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.63, as orally revised.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
The United States believes that it is inappropriate that
Mexico has brought this bilateral matter to the General
Assembly. We are also disappointed that Mexico failed
to consult with the United States prior to circulating
draft resolution A/73/L.63. We will vote against it. Our
vote should not be interpreted as a repudiation of our
international obligations regarding consular notification
and access. On the contrary, the United States continues
to take very seriously its international obligations with
respect to consular notification and access.
We will vote against the draft resolution to affirm
that the General Assembly is not the appropriate venue
for addressing this issue. The United States continues to
take steps with respect to the Avena judgment, and we
have engaged in close and extensive consultations with
Mexico. The United States notes that the United States
Supreme Court has held, in Medellin v. Texas, that the
Avena decision of the International Court of Justice
does not constitute directly enforceable federal law
and that United States obligations could be discharged
through the adoption of federal legislation.
Draft resolution A/73/L.63 will not alter the force
of the Supreme Court’s decision as binding upon the
United States Government. Accordingly, legislation that
would facilitate actions consistent with the judgment in
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United
2/12

20/12/2018

States of America) in the United States was included in
the President’s fiscal year 2019 budget request.
The State Department has engaged directly with
the relevant State authorities in the United States,
urging them to take the necessary steps to give effect
to the Avena decision. The United States has closely
consulted with Mexico on its efforts to implement the
Avena judgment and has kept Mexico informed of its
efforts. Mexico’s decision to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.63 was unfortunate. We call on all delegations
to vote against it.
Mr. Luna (Brazil): I wish to reaffirm Brazil’s
unwavering support for the International Court of
Justice and its role in the strengthening of the rule of
law at the international level. The Court plays a key role
in promoting a culture of peace, tolerance and justice,
thereby advancing the goals of the United Nations.
The duty to comply with decisions of the International
Court of Justice is an obligation established in Article
94, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations
and in Article 59 of the Court’s Statute, which is also
an integral part of the Charter. Therefore, the General
Assembly has an unquestionable competence to discuss
situations of non-compliance with the Court’s decisions.
One of the fundamental features of international
adjudication is the separation of the adjudication phase
from that of post-adjudication. While adjudication
typically involves a bilateral issue, post-adjudication is
characterized by the existence of a binding decision of
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. That
the Court’s decisions should be fully and expeditiously
complied with is a matter of interest to all who are
committed to building an order based on international
law.
Moreover, I wish to put on record our understanding
that the situation of non-compliance before us does not
relate to international peace and security, and thereby
does not qualify as an important question for the
purposes of Article 18, paragraph 2, of the Charter.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/73/L.63, entitled “Judgment of
the International Court of Justice of 31 March 2004
concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals:
need for immediate compliance”, as orally revised. A
recorded vote has been requested.
18-45547

20/12/2018

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, Guyana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Jamaica, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Myanmar, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam
Against:
Israel, Liberia, Marshall Islands, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Algeria, Armenia, Australia, Bahrain,
Barbados, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Chad, Colombia,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Czech Republic, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
France, Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Mali, Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Poland, Qatar, Romania, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Suriname,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu,
Zimbabwe
[Subsequently the delegations of Lesotho and
Yemen informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]

A/73/PV.63

Draft resolution A/73/L.63, as orally revised,
was adopted by 69 votes to 4, with 66 abstentions
(resolution 73/257).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Slovakia has been a
long-standing supporter of the International Court of
Justice — the cornerstone of the peaceful settlement
of disputes among States. We are convinced that the
role of the Court as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations is indispensable, both for strengthening
international law and preventing conflicts. As one of
the Member States that has accepted the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court, Slovakia wishes to reiterate
that the judgments and decisions of the Court are
binding upon parties and shall be complied with and
implemented in good faith.
We understand that the case in question relates to
compliance with the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations, which is a multilateral treaty of central
importance for maintaining friendly relations among
States. We wish to emphasize the obligation of all
States to comply fully with their obligations under
international treaties and to ensure respect for the rights
of individuals accorded by article 5 of the Convention,
on consular protection.
We are fully aware of Article 94, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations, which enables a party to a
dispute to have recourse to the Security Council should
the other party fail to perform the obligations incumbent
upon it under a judgment rendered by the Court. We
also note that the General Assembly is empowered,
under Article 10 of the Charter, to discuss any matters
within its scope, including the Statute of the Court. The
subsidiary nature of that competence is underlined by
the Charter, which, in Article 12, paragraph 1, provides
that recommendations by the General Assembly may
be made only provided that the Security Council is not
exercising its functions in respect of a given situation.
Bearing in mind that subsidiarity provided for in
the Charter, we assume that the General Assembly may
take steps regarding non-compliance with the Court’s
judgments only in very specific circumstances and if
strict conditions — not met in the present case — are
fulfilled. Furthermore, we are of the view that dispute

18-455473/12

A/73/PV.63

settlement generally, and the implementation of the
judgments and decisions of the Court specifically,
represent an obligation that is primarily owned inter
partes, which means by the parties to the dispute. That
is also reflected in the principle that the parties to a
dispute settle their dispute by peaceful means of their
own choosing.
In the context of those considerations, we wish to
point out that resolution 41/31, which was recalled in
resolution 73/257, was unique and of a different order
given that the principles of non-intervention and the
prohibition on the use of force were central in that case.
Due to our reservations with regard to its procedural
aspects, Slovakia abstained in the voting on resolution
73/257.
Mr. Elshenawy (Egypt): Egypt considers that the
International Court of Justice — as reflected in Articles
92 and 94 of the Charter of the United Nations — is the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations and that
every Member State should undertake to comply with
the decisions of the Court in any case to which it is
a party.
Egypt respects the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations, of 24 April 1963, and the judgment of the
International Court of Justice of 31 March 2004 in the
case concerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals
(Mexico v. United States of America). Egypt calls for
full and immediate compliance with the judgments of
the International Court of Justice.
Mr. Racovita (Romania): At the outset, please
allow me to stress that Romania strongly opposes the
use of the death penalty in all circumstances and has
been an active advocate for the full and immediate
implementation of moratoriums in all retentionist States.
We highlight the important role of the International
Court of Justice in the peaceful resolution of inter-State
disputes and the requirement that all Member States
comply with its judgments and decisions. That
notwithstanding, we would like to refer to the provisions
of Article 94 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the possibility that Member States may appeal to the
Security Council rather than the General Assembly,
should any party to a case fail to comply with judgments
of the International Court of Justice, while not entirely
dismissing the latter option.
On those grounds, the delegation of Romania
decided to abstain in the voting on resolution 73/257.
4/12

20/12/2018

Mrs. Weiss (Israel): At the outset, it is important
to stress that the State of Israel truly values its bilateral
relationship with Mexico, as it does with the United
States. We look forward to further strengthening our
close ties with both countries. Furthermore, our vote
today is without prejudice to the substantive matters
that are the subject of any past or ongoing dispute and
does not relate to the substantive issues raised in the
decision of the International Court of Justice in the
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United
States of America) case.
My delegation voted against resolution 73/257
because Israel does not want to intervene in what
we regard as a bilateral issue that should be resolved
between the two sides. Therefore, we believe that
recourse to the General Assembly is inappropriate and
unwarranted in such circumstances.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
My country’s delegation abstained in the voting on
resolution 73/257, while nevertheless reaffirming our
commitment and dedication to, and respect for, the
judgments of the International Court of Justice, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Our abstention today should not be interpreted
as attributing any lesser importance to the judgments
of the International Court of Justice or the obligation
of States to respect international law as the basis
on which the Court issues its rulings. We wish to
reiterate that cooperation is necessary to guarantee
the implementation of all judgments and decisions of
the International Court of Justice. Respecting those
judgments is in the interests of all parties to a dispute,
and we underscore the importance of respecting
international law in all inter-State legal disputes.
Mr. Scott-Kemmis (Australia): Compliance with
the judgments of the International Court of Justice — the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations — is of
critical importance. It is essential for the maintenance
of the international rules-based order, it is a pillar of
the United Nations system and, under the Charter of the
United Nations, such compliance is a legal obligation
for Member States.
The importance and confidence that Australia
places in the International Court of Justice is reflected by
our acceptance of the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction.
For Australia, obligations under the Vienna Convention
on Consular Relations, including States’ rights to
consular access and communication, are vital. Parties
18-45547

20/12/2018

must comply with those obligations at all times. We
are conscious that, in the case addressed by resolution
73/257, the parties accept that it is their obligation to
comply with the Court’s decision.
Furthermore, we understand that the United States
Government has engaged consistently and at senior
levels with the United States state in question with a
view to achieving compliance with the International
Court of Justice ruling. We understand that draft federal
legislation has been conceived that, if agreed, would
be a path to compliance with the Court’s decision. It is
our understanding that that bill remains under active
consideration. Australia acknowledges the frustration
felt by the Government and the people of Mexico at
the lack of progress on that important issue, but we
also take note of the ongoing good-faith efforts by the
relevant party.
For those reasons, Australia decided to abstain in
the voting on resolution 73/257.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): The situation
at the heart of resolution 73/257, which the General
Assembly just adopted, relates to the non-fulfilment
of a decision of the International Court of Justice in
a case between Mexico and the United States. In that
regard, France wishes to reaffirm its adherence to the
obligation incumbent upon Member States to comply
with all decisions of the International Court of Justice
in all disputes to which they are a party, in accordance
with of the Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, Member States should respect the
procedure set out in Article 94, paragraph 2, of the
Charter, which states that
“if any party to a case fails to perform the
obligations incumbent upon it under a judgment
rendered by the Court, the other party may have
recourse to the Security Council”.
Finally, France believes that States have a duty
to comply with other obligations, in particular those
resulting from the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations.
France also underscores its opposition to capital
punishment in all cases and circumstances, and calls
on all retentionist States to put in place moratoriums
with a view to abolishing it.
Mr. Park Young-hyo (Republic of Korea): My
delegation believes that international obligations

A/73/PV.63

regarding consular notification and access should
be fully respected. We greatly appreciate the United
States taking steps to draft federal legislation in order
to facilitate actions consistent with the judgment in the
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United
States of America) case. At the same time, my delegation
is concerned that Mexico did not hold any substantive
consultations with Member States, including the United
States, prior to circulating the resolution 73/257.
We hope that the two parties to the Avena case will
continue to closely consult each other in an effort to
implement this International Court of Justice judgment.
Mr. Tang (Singapore): I take the floor to explain
my delegation’s abstention in the voting on resolution
73/257, which the General Assembly just adopted.
As a small State, Singapore is deeply committed
to multilateralism and upholding international law. We
wish to reaffirm and underscore our support for the
international rules-based system and the obligation of
States to abide by decisions and awards of international
courts and tribunals in cases to which they are a party.
Our abstention today in no way detracts from that
long-standing and well-known position of Singapore.
Our abstention today also should not, and must not, be
interpreted as diminishing the undertaking enshrined
in Article 94, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United
Nations.
We regret, however, that resolution 73/257 was
presented at a very late stage and that delegations were
not afforded sufficient time or opportunity to engage
in consultations on it. For that reason, my delegation
abstained in the voting.
Ms. Shikongo (Namibia): Namibia wishes to take
this opportunity to explain its vote on resolution 73/257,
just adopted.
Namibia fully supports the international system
and places the highest consideration on the judgments
of the International Court of Justice, having itself been
a recipient of some of its judgments. Namibia further
urges all Member States to comply with the judgments
of the International Court of Justice. Finally, Namibia
urges all Member States to resolve bilateral issues
between themselves.
For those reasons, Namibia abstained in the voting.
Mr. Nguyen (Viet Nam): Viet Nam voted in favour
of resolution 73/257. Viet Nam supports the rule of law

18-455475/12

A/73/PV.63

at all levels, compliance with international law, the
rulings of international judicial institutions and the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means. At the same
time, we reaffirm that the issue of the death penalty
falls within the sovereign jurisdiction of the State and
that its application should be based on strict compliance
with national legislation.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 125.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Draft resolution (A/73/L.72)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.72.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.72, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”,
on behalf of approximately 40 sponsors.
The United Nations is the principal Organization
dealing with matters relating to peace, justice and
development, while the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is the principal
organization dealing with activities to achieve the
comprehensive prohibition of chemical weapons, in
accordance with the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
For instance, the OPCW operates first by verifying
the destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles;
secondly, by preventing the re-emergence of chemical
weapons through inspections; and, thirdly, by promoting
the peaceful use of chemistry. In doing so the OPCW
contributes to the promotion of peace, disarmament,
international cooperation and the realization of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
6/12

20/12/2018

The Kingdom of the Netherlands — with The
Hague as the legal capital of the world — is proud to
host the OPCW. My delegation has had the honour to
coordinate the negotiations on the draft resolution on
this topic since 1977, and to biennially submit it to the
General Assembly for its consideration.
Today’s draft resolution is procedural in nature and
an effectual update of resolution 71/250, of 22 December
2016. It acknowledges the important contribution of the
OPCW to the realization of the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the ongoing cooperation between
the OPCW and the United Nations. We would like
to express our sincere appreciation to all delegations
that participated in the negotiations. It is their spirit of
compromise and willingness to engage in constructive
dialogue that ultimately led to the draft resolution that
is before the Assembly today.
Although a vote has been requested, it is still
our hope that the draft resolution can be adopted by
consensus. We firmly believe that we have achieved the
best possible balance in representing the various views
that were expressed. We therefore invite delegations to
support the draft resolution in the spirit of compromise
and cooperation.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.72, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have become co-sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.72: Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan, Montenegro, New
Zealand, Norway, the Republic of Korea, Samoa, San
Marino, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine and the United States of America.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested. A separate, recorded vote has been requested
on operative paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/73/L.72.
A recorded vote was taken.
18-45547

20/12/2018

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cambodia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Mali, Mongolia, Pakistan,
Philippines, Thailand, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam
Operative paragraph 6 of draft resolution A/73/L.72
was retained by 114 votes to 11, with 19 abstentions.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution A/73/L.72, as a whole.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/73/PV.63

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Belarus, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Mali, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/73/L.72, as a whole, was
adopted by 142 votes to none, with 12 abstentions
(resolution 73/258).

18-455477/12

A/73/PV.63

[Subsequently, the delegation of Brunei Darussalam
informed the Secretariat that it had intended
to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ghaniei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I take
the floor to explain the position of my delegation with
respect to resolution 73/258, on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which was
just adopted.
Essentially, this resolution is expected to focus on
the cooperation between the two organizations. At the
same time, that should be done by confining the scope
of the resolution only to topics that are covered by the
agreements between those organizations. However, the
resolution goes beyond those areas and includes issues
on which the members of the OPCW have divergent
views. That is an attempt to politicize a purely
procedural resolution, which needs to be avoided.
It is worth noting that, during the informal
consultations, we called for avoiding the inclusion
of contentious issues. Nonetheless, unfortunately,
that concern was not met. That left us with no choice
other than to vote against operative paragraph 6 of the
resolution and to abstain in the voting on the resolution
as a whole.
We remain hopeful that the next version of
this resolution in the coming years will not include
contentious issues, which would therefore enable us to
adopt it by consensus.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic has been a State
party to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction since
2013. We acceded to the Convention based on our
rejection of all uses of chemical weapons, and since
then have fulfilled all of our obligations under it in
an exemplary and unprecedented manner, especially
given the complex and difficult circumstances that our
country has endured.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its strong
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons and
8/12

20/12/2018

weapons of mass destruction anywhere and in all
circumstances, given that their use would constitute a
crime against humanity and an immoral act that cannot
be justified for any reason.
My delegation sought to reach consensus on
resolution 73/258, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, because it is a procedural and
technical resolution that has always been adopted by
consensus. However, Syria emphasizes that since 2014
certain countries have been seeking to politicize aspects
of the resolution by including contentious issues, which
is the reason for having had to put it to a vote in the
first place. Those States have clearly and deliberately
exploited the resolution by introducing controversial
elements, focusing on Syria as a selective target, as has
been done with other resolutions that target specific
States, contrary to the spirit of cooperation between the
United Nations and other international organizations.
My delegation would like to stress that it was fully
prepared to join the consensus on resolution 73/258,
despite having strong reservations with regard to
paragraphs 6 and 7.
First, paragraph 6 of resolution 73/258 makes
reference to the decision adopted at the fourth special
session of the Conference of States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention, an unacceptable
and illegitimate decision that was unable to achieve
consensus — it was supported by only 82 of the 193
States, reflecting less than half of the States parties
to the Convention. It was adopted only as a result of
certain parties resorting to blackmail, pressure and
intimidation tactics.
Our reservation on the adoption of that resolution
is based on its incomplete nature and the fact that it
is inconsistent with the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. It sets a dangerous precedent by
mandating a scientific and technical organization to
conduct criminal and legal investigations to determine
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons, which
clearly goes beyond the competence of the international
body concerned with maintaining international peace
and security.
Secondly, with regard to paragraph 7 of resolution
3/258, regarding the fact-finding mission, Syria
welcomed the establishment of that mission and
cooperated fully by providing the facilities necessary
to carry out its activities and by immediately alerting
18-45547

20/12/2018

the Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to deploy the factfinding mission whenever terrorist groups carried out
toxic chemical attacks.
However, the mission did not comply with its
mandate or the provisions of the Convention. It did
not exercise the professionalism and independence
required for the successful realization of its work. The
mission did not comply with the conditions required
for carrying out investigations into cases of the use of
chemical weapons. It carried out remote investigations
and refused to undertake visits to alleged attack sites,
under various pretexts. It relied on open sources
of information, which, of course, originated from
terrorist groups and their handlers. It tested samples
that were neither collected directly from attack sites
nor legally proven to be viable. It heard eyewitnesses
from the breeding grounds of armed terrorist groups
and viewed pictures and videos produced by the White
Helmets — an arm of terrorist groups.
We therefore have reservations about the working
methods of the fact-finding mission, based on our
serious and genuine concerns about the implementation
of its mandate. That situation has created division
among States members of the OPCW and caused
considerable discord among them, preventing its reports
and recommendations from being adopted.
My delegation reiterates its commitment to the
provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and to achieving its universality. We underscore our
deep conviction that we must seek the elimination of
all weapons of mass destruction, particularly in the
Middle East region, in order to ensure regional and
international peace and security.
Ms. Guardia González (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Cuba would like to give
its explanation of vote regarding resolution 73/258,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”.
As a State party to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, our
country supports the continued cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. A resumption of
the adoption by consensus of this resolution would
benefit the cooperative relationship between the two

A/73/PV.63

organizations, re-establishing the traditional unity
among States on this issue. During consultations on
the resolution, we called for contentious issues not be
included. We cannot support States being specifically
singled out when it comes to such a generic issue. We do
not consider it constructive that the resolution includes
references to decisions adopted by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons without the
consensus of its member States.
Any attempt to undermine the unanimous support
of the Organization in favour of the OPCW must be
rejected. We must preserve the purpose and nature of
the resolution.
Mr. Nguyen (Viet Nam): My delegation wishes
to explain its position on resolution 73/258. Viet
Nam reiterates its policy condemning the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances. As a State party to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, Viet Nam supports the full implementation
of the Convention and the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, as well as all
efforts aimed at the non-proliferation and disarmament
of chemical weapons.
We deeply regret that paragraph 6 of the draft
resolution was changed at the last minute. We would like
to recall that the decision at the fourth special session
of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention was adopted with 82 votes in
favour out of the 193 States parties to the Convention.
It is our view that the activities relating to investigation
and attribution should be carried out carefully in an
objective, transparent and comprehensive manner by a
competent mechanism such as the Security Council.
Ms. Premchit (Thailand): Thailand supported
resolution 73/258 to reaffirm its support in principle
for cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). It is increasingly important that we renew
our commitment to and support for all efforts to
uphold our obligations in implementing the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction, as we witness the alarming trend of
more frequent use of chemical weapons.
Nevertheless, Thailand abstained in the voting on
operative paragraph 6, which takes note of the report

18-455479/12

A/73/PV.63

of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention on its fourth special session and the
decision of the Conference at that session on addressing
the threat from the use of chemical weapons. Thailand
recognizes and respects the adoption of that decision. At
the same time, we share the concern of many Member
States and States parties to the Convention about how
the implementation of that decision would take shape.
Inclusive dialogue, transparency and a cooperative
spirit are needed on the future design of the relevant
mechanism and delivery of that decision, with a view to
ensuring that such a mechanism fits and complements
the mandates and objectives of the OPCW. Thailand
believes that that process requires all States parties to
the Convention to be engaged in such deliberations,
with the principles of transparency, inclusiveness and
impartiality as their guideposts. Only then can we
ensure that the Chemical Weapons Convention moves
forward successfully and that international peace and
security is maintained.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (n)
of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution (A/73/L.71)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.71.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): It is a great honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document A/73/L.71,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations”, under
sub-item (q) of agenda item 128. I would like to make
three points.
10/12

20/12/2018

First, the establishment of ASEAN, 51 years ago,
was an exercise to deepen regional integration and
economic cooperation. Thanks to ASEAN, a region
that was once marked by confrontation and conflict has
been transformed into a region that operates on the basis
of consultation and consensus. ASEAN has played an
indispensable role in bringing about peace, prosperity
and growth to South-East Asia. Our combined
population today stands at 630 million people. Sixty per
cent of that population is under 35 years old. ASEAN
is forecast to become the fourth-largest economy in the
world by the year 2030.
ASEAN has tremendous potential as a regional
organization. To maximize that potential, ASEAN is
redoubling its efforts towards economic integration,
deepening cooperation to address security threats and
implementing innovative ideas to bring our cities and
peoples closer together. For example, we launched
the ASEAN Smart Cities Network this year — a
collaborative platform to synergize the development
of smart cities across the ASEAN region and create
innovative urban solutions that will bring tangible
improvements to our peoples’ lives.
Secondly,
ASEAN’s
efforts
for
regional
integration have been complemented and amplified
by the international community. ASEAN’s rapid
transformation could not have been effected without
the support of the international community, particularly
our 10 dialogue partners. ASEAN recognizes that
closer collaboration with our external partners is
necessary to tackle the challenges of an increasingly
interdependent and interconnected world. On our part,
the ASEAN member States will continue to build
strategic trust and mutual confidence through open
lines of communication in order to maintain an open,
inclusive and ASEAN-centric regional architecture.
Thirdly, the relationship between ASEAN and
the United Nations is mutually reinforcing. The
United Nations provides the multilateral rulesbased framework that allows regional organizations
like ASEAN to flourish. At the same time, ASEAN
contributes to global peace and security and sustainable
development by strengthening habits of cooperation
and respect for international law at the regional level.
Today ASEAN stands united as a regional organization
that is committed to the promotion and protection of
international law and the strengthening of the rulesbased multilateral system. Most recently, ASEAN
leaders reaffirmed the importance of multilateralism
18-45547

20/12/2018

and close cooperation with the United Nations, during
the meeting with Secretary-General António Guterres
in October.
ASEAN has introduced the draft resolution today
to welcome the expanding relationship and deepening
partnership with the United Nations. Since ASEAN first
presented the biennial resolution in 2002 (resolution
57/35), the relationship between the United Nations
and ASEAN has advanced significantly. We have
updated the resolution to reflect the progress made in
the implementation of the Plan of Action to Implement
the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership
between ASEAN and the United Nations (2016-2020),
including in areas such as peacekeeping operations,
cybersecurity and disaster management.
The draft resolution is simple, straightforward and
not contentious. I take this opportunity to thank all
delegations for their constructive participation in the
informal consultations, as well as their flexible and
pragmatic approach, which enabled ASEAN to produce
a text that is balanced and substantive. We request all
Member States to kindly lend their continued support
to the draft resolution by adopting it by consensus.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.71.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Bangladesh.
Mr. Kazi (Bangladesh): As an immediate
neighbour of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) to the east, Bangladesh attaches
high importance to its multidimensional relations with
that regional organization. We recognize and value
ASEAN’s proactive contribution to promoting peace,
security and stability in the region. In the same vein, we
continue to expect ASEAN to meaningfully cooperate
with the United Nations in addressing some of the most
critical challenges facing the Organization and the
wider region.
The illicit trafficking of methamphetamine
from Myanmar — an ASEAN member — is already
wreaking havoc across South-East Asia and Oceania.
The Rohingya humanitarian crisis, also originating in
Myanmar, is overwhelming in its gravity and magnitude

A/73/PV.63

and poses a host of immediate and long-term challenges
to peace and security in the region. Bangladesh has
made efforts to contain the wider regional impact of
the crisis for now, but cannot take responsibility for
possible fallout from the crisis in the wider regional
context over a longer period. ASEAN has a critical role
to play in that regard, which should extend to facilitating
and supporting initiatives at all the relevant multilateral
forums, including the United Nations.
We therefore regret that the ASEAN member States
did not accept the inclusion of any generic references to
that issue, let alone the Rohingya humanitarian crisis
itself, in draft resolution A/73/L.71. We would expect
ASEAN to demonstrate the maturity and pragmatism to
take responsibility for an issue that should be a salient
feature of its cooperation with the United Nations.
In the spirit of our traditional good-neighbourliness,
Bangladesh will join the consensus on the draft
resolution, which we had the pleasure of co-sponsoring
in 2016.
We thank the Singaporean delegation for its
constructive role as ASEAN Chair this year. We
look forward to a similar level of engagement and
responsiveness from the incoming Chair.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.71, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become co-sponsors of
draft resolution A/73/L.71: Algeria, Angola, Australia,
Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Morocco,
Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Slovakia,

18-4554711/12

A/73/PV.63

Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
the Sudan, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.71?

12/12

20/12/2018

Draft resolution
(resolution 73/259)

A/73/L.71

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (q) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

18-45547
