A/RES/74/184

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 December 2019

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 77
Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fifty-second session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 18 December 2019
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/74/423)]

74/184.

Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of international
trade,
Recognizing that effective insolvency regimes are increasingly seen as a means
of encouraging economic development and investment, as well as of fostering
entrepreneurial activity and preserving employment,
Noting the significance of enterprise groups, whether formed domestically or
internationally, to international trade and commerce in an increasingly globalized
world economy,
Recognizing that, where the business of an enterprise group fails, it is important
not only to know how the group will be treated in insolvency proceedings, but al so to
ensure that such treatment facilitates, rather than hinders, the fast and efficient
conduct of the insolvency proceedings,
Aware that very few States, if any, have a comprehensive regime for the
treatment of enterprise groups in insolvency, includin g effective mechanisms for
coordination and cooperation in cases of insolvency involving enterprise groups, the
development of a group insolvency solution and the cross-border recognition and
implementation of that solution in multiple States,

19-22344 (E)

090120

*1922344*

Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law

A/RES/74/184

Recalling its resolution 52/158 of 15 December 1997, in which it expressed its
appreciation to the Commission for the adoption of the Model Law on Cross -Border
Insolvency of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 1 which
deals with cross-border coordination, cooperation and recognition in relation to
insolvency proceedings concerning a single debtor, and its resolution 65/24 of
6 December 2010, in which it expressed its appreciation to the Commission for the
adoption of part three of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 2 which deals with the treatment of
enterprise groups in insolvency, 3
Recognizing the need for a generally acceptable model law that would focus on
insolvency proceedings relating to multiple debtors that are members of the same
enterprise group, thereby extending the provisions of the Model Law on Cross -Border
Insolvency and part three of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law,
Convinced that the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency, 4 adopted by the
Commission at its fifty-second session, fulfils that need and is expected to contribute
to the establishment of fair and internationally harmonized legislation on enterprise
group insolvency that respects national procedural and judicial systems,
Convinced also that the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency provides
for the fair and efficient administration of enterprise group insolvencies, the
protection and maximization of the overall combined value of the assets and
operations of enterprise group members affected by insolvency and of the enterprise
group as a whole, the facilitation of the rescue of financially troub led enterprise
groups and the adequate protection of creditors and other interested persons,
including debtors,
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for finalizing and adopting the Model Law on Enterprise
Group Insolvency 4 and its guide to enactment;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the text of the Model Law,
together with its guide to enactment, to Governments and interested bodies;
3.
Recommends that all States give favourable consideration to the Model
Law when revising or adopting legislation relevant to insolvency, bearing in mind the
need for internationally harmonized legislation governing and facilitating instances
of enterprise groups in insolvency, and invites States that have used the Model Law
to advise the Commission accordingly;
4.
Also recommends that all States, when revising or adopting legislation on
enterprise group insolvency, also make use of part three of the Legislative Guide on
Insolvency Law of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law , 2 on
the treatment of enterprise groups in insolvency, 3 as well as part four of the
Legislative Guide, 5 addressing the obligations of directors of an enterprise in the
period approaching the insolvency of that enterprise, 6 whose additional section, 7
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/52/17),
annex I.
2
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.12.V.16.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17),
chap. V.
4
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), chap. VI, sect. A, and annex II.
5
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.13.V.10.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17),
chap. V, sect. B.
7
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/74/17), chap. VI, sect. B.
1

2/3

19-22344

Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law

A/RES/74/184

adopted at the fifty-second session of the Commission, addresses the obligations of
directors of enterprise group companies;
5.
Further recommends that all States continue to consider the
implementation of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency 1 and of the Model
Law on Recognition and Enforcement of Insolvency-related Judgments, 8 both of the
Commission;
6.
Requests the Secretariat to ensure close cooperation and coordination with
international organizations active in the field of insolvency law reform to ensure the
consistency and alignment of that work with all texts of the Commission in the area
of insolvency law, including the Model Law on Enterprise Group Insolvency, the
Model Law on Recognition and Enforcement of Insolvency-related Judgments and
part four of the Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law, as amended by the Commission
at its fifty-second session.
51st plenary meeting
18 December 2019

__________________
8

19-22344

Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17), annex III.
3/3
