United Nations

S/PV.5052

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5052

nd meeting
Wednesday, 6 October 2004, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rammell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Benmehidi
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Akram
Mr. De Venecia
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Mr. Danforth

Agenda
Justice and the rule of law: the United Nations role
Report of the Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2004/616)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-53759 (E)

*0453759*

S/PV.5052

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Justice and the rule of law: the United Nations role
Report of the Secretary-General on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and postconflict societies (S/2004/616)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belarus, Burundi, Canada, Costa Rica, Fiji, Finland,
India, Indonesia, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland and
Uganda in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Juan Méndez,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Director of the
International Centre for Transitional Justice.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Méndez to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 1 October 2004 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2004/793, and

2

which requests that the Security Council invite the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
open debate on “Justice and the rule of law: the United
Nations role”.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before the report of
the Secretary-General – whose presence here this
morning I very warmly welcome – on the rule of law
and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies, document S/2004/616.
At this morning’s meeting, we will first hear an
introduction by the Secretary-General of his report.
Thereafter we will hear a briefing by Mr. Juan Méndez,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Director of the
International Centre for Transitional Justice.
In the afternoon, we will hear a briefing by Mr.
Mark Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme.
I should like very briefly to say, in welcoming
this debate, that this is an initiative that we launched
just over a year ago. I think that there has been
significant interest in this issue and that there is a
developing consensus. I hope that we are going to have
a very constructive debate today, building on the work
of the Secretary-General’s report and taking these
critically important issues forward. I am certainly very
pleased to be here to witness these proceedings.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
and invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Mr. President, let me
start by warmly welcoming you to New York and to the
Security Council and expressing appreciation for your
having convened this open debate. It could not be more
timely.

S/PV.5052

A few weeks ago, in the General Assembly, I said
that reintroducing the rule of law, and ensuring
confidence in its impartial application, is an essential
part of resuscitating societies shattered by conflict.
That principle lies at the heart of the report before
the Council today — a report that reflects the
coordinated efforts of more than a dozen United
Nations departments and agencies, based on our own
experience over decades of involvement in this field.
The report reviews the tools at our disposal to
help administer transitional justice and rebuild the rule
of law in conflict and post-conflict societies — from
national justice systems to the support given by United
Nations peace operations; from the International
Criminal Court to ad hoc international and mixed
tribunals and truth commissions; from public-sector
vetting to reparations for victims.
As the report points out, the work of the United
Nations in this field has taught us many lessons.
The first is that, to be successful, peace-building
activities must reflect international norms and
standards. But that does not mean that we should
uncritically import or impose foreign models. One size
does not fit all. Our support needs to be carefully
tailored to the context and based on national
assessments, national participation and national needs
and aspirations.
Secondly, we must be provided with the resources
needed for a sustainable investment in justice. These
resources must help build local capacity, but simply
providing technical assistance is not enough. We must
also help foster and sustain political will at the national
level. We should therefore support domestic reform
constituencies and facilitate national consultations on
justice reform and transitional justice.
Thirdly, we cannot forget the political context.
Peace and stability can prevail only if the causes
of conflict are addressed in a legitimate and fair
manner — causes such as ethnic discrimination, gross
disparities in the distribution of wealth and social
services, abuse of power, and the denial of the right to
property or citizenship. Indeed, justice, peace and
democracy are mutually reinforcing. In fragile postconflict settings, our efforts must advance on all three
fronts. That requires strategic planning, careful
integration and sensible sequencing.

Fourthly, our approach to justice must be
comprehensive. We must address the police, courts,
prisons, defence lawyers and prosecutors, and we must
be sensitive to the needs of civil society, including
those of victims, women, children and minorities.
Fifthly, where transitional justice is concerned,
the best approach is usually not an “either/or” choice
between prosecutions and truth commissions. Instead, a
nationally determined combination of mechanisms will
generally work better — including, where appropriate,
traditional justice mechanisms.
In some cases, international or mixed tribunals
have been set up to address past crimes. Those
tribunals have helped bring a measure of justice to
victims, held at least some perpetrators to account, and
helped remove extremist elements from power. They
have also enriched the jurisprudence of international
criminal law. But they have been expensive, and they
have not contributed adequately to building sustainable
national capacities for the administration of justice.
The report notes that the establishment of the
International Criminal Court offers new hope for a
permanent reduction in the phenomenon of
impunity — a hope that will grow stronger with each
new ratification of the Rome Statute.
The recommendations of the report are grouped
together in section XIX. I hope it will serve as a
practical aide-memoire for the Security Council, to
help it pay due attention to the rule of law and
transitional justice as it addresses the conflict and postconflict situations before it.
I have not forgotten my own responsibilities and
those of the United Nations departments, agencies,
funds and programmes. The United Nations system is
working on important new tools to help strengthen our
capacities to support the rule of law and transitional
justice. Those include a justice sector mapping guide,
support for the development of model transitional
criminal codes and policy guidance for domestic and
hybrid prosecutions. The United Nations system will
continue to work in the coming months to implement
the recommendations in the report that are directed at
us.
We are ready to play our part and trust that the
members of the Council are ready to play theirs.

3

S/PV.5052

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement, which I believe starts this debate off
very effectively.
I now give the floor to the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, and
the Director of the International Center for Transitional
Justice, Mr. Juan Méndez.
Mr. Méndez: I am honoured to represent the
International Center for Transitional Justice (ICTJ) to
address the important issues raised by the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies. Several
of my colleagues participated last week in a workshop
convened by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva to discuss
the tools that the United Nations must develop to be
better prepared to implement transitional justice
approaches. We are pleased to see that new approaches
are already moving from general policy to operational
design. The further stage of the Security Council’s
participation in the debate highlights the transcendental
nature of the doctrine adopted by the United Nations
on this subject and embodied in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The ICTJ was founded on the premise that
societies in transition from dictatorship to democracy
or from conflict to peace can find solutions to common
problems by analysing experiences in different
countries at different times. Official denial of mass
crimes and an effort to condemn their victims to
oblivion is often a feature of those transitions. To
overcome them, some States have established truthtelling mechanisms to uncover the truth about and
preserve the memory of past abuses. Atrocities are
often met by de jure or de facto impunity, but there can
be no transition to a more humane, just, and democratic
order unless impunity is broken through prosecution,
trial, and eventual punishment. Little or no effort is
made to recognize the inherent dignity of victims; the
remedy for that is a policy of reparations that restores
the respect that societies owe to their most vulnerable
members. Additionally, there is often a risk of abuses
being repeated, especially if perpetrators are allowed to
remain in positions of power.
Transitional societies must therefore reform their
institutions and exclude perpetrators of human rights
crimes from newly reconstituted institutions. Finally,
societies that are still torn by underlying conflicts of a

4

social, political, or ideological character, should
consider conscious efforts to achieve reconciliation.
Reconciliation should be viewed as the ultimate object
and condition of the legitimacy of efforts to achieve
transitional justice.
The problems that I have just described impose
international law obligations on States undergoing
transitions to remedy those violations. Although those
obligations are universal, the policy mechanisms to put
them in effect must allow for national customization
and experimentation. Each society must find the set of
tools and policy schemes suitable to the circumstances
of its own transition. We, the international community,
should avoid adopting initiatives that seem to work in
other contexts, without a broad consultation with
national stakeholders. We support the report’s
emphasis on national assessments and consultation
processes designed to increase local legitimacy and
ownership, thereby assuring a lasting legacy of
tolerance and democratic values.
National ownership will reduce the risk that the
work of the United Nations in this area will be
perceived as a foreign imposition that runs roughshod
over the richness and capabilities of local cultures. The
inclusion of a commitment to transitional justice in
peace agreements and United Nations mandates should
not lead to premature decisions to apply untested
models. The United Nations must invest from the start
in outreach, public education and dissemination of the
principles of transitional justice, as well as in the
application of rule of law principles to the reform of
State institutions. We recognize that the United Nations
needs to increase its reservoir of expertise and
capacities, and we hope that in so doing it draws on the
wealth of knowledge that is present in civil society
organizations, democratic Governments and academic
institutions.
The Security Council can play a large role in
enhancing the legitimacy of this evolving doctrine. In
some cases it will be necessary to create international
judicial instruments to provide redress to the victims of
mass atrocities. When such tribunals are created under
Chapter VII of the Charter, there is an explicit
obligation on the part of all Member States to
cooperate with their investigations, detentions and
evidence-gathering. On the other hand, even when not
acting under Chapter VII, the Security Council could
explicitly mandate cooperation with mixed or hybrid
courts and with the International Criminal Court,

S/PV.5052

which would help to clarify the scope of the
obligations of third-party States to cooperate with those
institutions. More significantly, however, it would
signal that the international community is not so much
interested in imposing its will on war-torn states, but
that it recognizes that the restoration of justice and the
rule of law is a common enterprise in which all States
must play a part.

however, should be encouraged at all times, and we
may have to forgo immediate justice as long as we
preserve the ability to address past wrongs in the
future. These thorny questions are context-specific and
cannot be resolved in an abstract debate. Yet, we
believe it is important for future peace-making to end
the easy resort to blackmail embodied in the promise of
loose amnesties and other rewards for atrocities.

There is an increasing consensus among legal
practitioners that truth and justice are not mutually
exclusive alternatives. The temptation to establish a
truth commission as a substitute for accountability
should be resisted, however. The report’s rejection of
amnesty for international crimes such as genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity is to be
commended. We must also recognize that punishment
without a full exploration of the facts and of historical
and political responsibilities is equally inadvisable.

We applaud the call in the Secretary-General’s
report for the universal application of principles of
gender equality to all aspects of transitional justice and
the rule of law. At the ICTJ we are embarking upon a
review of mechanisms and approaches to transitional
justice to determine the degree to which they have been
gender-sensitive in design and operation, and how
similar exercises can be improved from that
perspective. We endorse the report’s call for the
collection of documentation on best practices. In that
regard, we would like to draw attention to the
Moroccan Equity and Reconciliation Commission. Not
only is it a highly promising process, but it also serves
as a fascinating example for non-governmental
organizations and Governments throughout the Middle
East, North Africa and elsewhere. For that reason,
Governments’ handbooks, databases and tools must
exist in multiple languages. We also encourage the
development of a standard set of benchmarks to
evaluate different transitional justice initiatives. The
number of successful prosecutions and convictions, for
example, is a definite consideration; yet institutions
should also be evaluated by examining whether they
have built the local capacity to deal with justice
effectively in the present and in the future.

For those reasons, we should embrace a policy
that assigns proper priorities to truth-seeking and truthtelling, as well as to bringing perpetrators to justice.
The United Nations has played a major role in
supporting the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
Sierra Leone, which submitted its final report to the
President of Sierra Leone just yesterday. It has also
been central to the operations of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone. While the relationship between those
institutions has not been without its difficulties, there
is an increasing recognition that courts and
commissions can complement each other’s work.
There is also a long-standing debate as to whether
the requirements of transitional justice objectively —
as well as subjectively — complicate peace processes
by creating disincentives for parties to a conflict to
renounce violence. Those of us who approach the
problem from a human rights perspective must humbly
recognize that the prospect of being prosecuted for war
crimes is not likely to persuade combatants to resolve
the conflict by peaceful means.
For that reason, it is not so much that we object to
peace agreements that are premised on impunity, but
that we must insist that we can do better. A peace
settlement that rejects impunity is a legal and moral
imperative, but it must also address the grievances that
gave rise to the conflict in the first place. That is why it
is important to resist the blackmail of those who
threaten to continue to fight and commit atrocities
unless they are given immunity. Ceasefires and truces,

Finally,
we
commend
the
report’s
recommendation that the United Nations review its
own structures and resources in this field. The United
Nations already has an extensive track record on these
issues. It will need additional resources and better
coordination to address the challenges this report so
eloquently identifies.
The President: I thank Mr. Méndez for his
statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to request that all
speakers from now on limit their statements to no more
than five minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the

5

S/PV.5052

texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now extend a warm welcome to the Speaker of
the House of Representatives of the Philippines, His
Excellency The Honourable Jose De Venecia.
Mr. De Venecia (Philippines): I would like to
thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing this meeting on the important topic of
justice and the rule of law. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report, issued
in August, on “The rule of law and transitional justice
in conflict and post-conflict societies” (S/2004/616).
Nations typically emerge from civil conflicts
traumatized by their collective memory of genocidal
crimes, horrendous abuses of human rights and
mindless social violence. It is often the case that very
few in those societies emerge untouched by the
humanitarian disasters set off by the collapse of
political order, the rule of law and the mechanisms of
justice. It therefore becomes extremely difficult to
reverse the collapse of the State and restore its
legitimate authority.
Well-meaning outsiders often assign the highest
priority to demobilizing irregular militias and
organizing new security forces to rebuild the peace and
punish the guilty. Historical experience suggests that
raising the issue of past crimes prematurely may only
induce warlords and gang bosses to resist, with force,
being called to account for their past actions, thus
breaking the fragile and tentative peace. Pushing
retributive justice too quickly can be both damaging
and destabilizing to the still-fragile post-conflict State.
Justice must certainly be a key element in any
process of national reconciliation in conflict and postconflict societies. We must emphasize this, even if we
recognize that retributive justice is not always feasible
at the beginning of the process, if only because the
transitional institutions are too weak to exact
retribution.
The Philippine delegation broadly supports the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 64 and 65 of
the Secretary-General’s report. We are confident that
those recommendations will be carried out with both
wisdom and patience, and with the realization that
there are no quick fixes or one-size-fits-all formulas
for restoring the rule of law in post-conflict societies.
The Philippines supports United Nations involvement

6

in rebuilding post-conflict societies because we know
its sole objective is to build sustainable peace, a peace
that will endure even after foreign peacemakers have
left.
We must never forget, however, that the record of
successful State reconstruction thus far is very
insubstantial.
Let me thank a good number of United Nations
delegations for considering the Philippine proposal in
the General Assembly for an inter-faith dialogue in the
United Nations system to promote civilizational
reconciliation at the global level. Reconciliation
always comes easier in an atmosphere of spirituality
and faith.
I recall a statesman memorably saying that the
twenty-first century will be defined by a simple choice
that nations must make: whether to emphasize their
ethnic, ideological and religious differences or their
common humanity. Nations, however, can never make
the right choice as long as their peoples insist “Our
faith must reign supreme”, since that claim can be
affirmed only by the negation of all other faiths. I
believe we must all learn to create space for alternative
faiths if we are to find an alternative to so much
violence and hatred and if we are to respond to the
crisis of values that so pervades today’s planet.
During the last two years, we in the Philippines
have been strenuously promoting the need for global
inter-religious understanding, supporting a dialogue
among civilizations and cultures, specifically
Christian-Muslim dialogue at the regional levels. Such
dialogue should take place not only among political
leaders but also among religious leaders and leaders of
civil society to try to reduce the politico-religious and
ethnic tensions and conflicts that have bedevilled
regions and nations, societies and communities for
hundreds of years and that have now exploded onto the
scene in the first years of the twenty-first century.
I believe the religious sector has the moral
influence to help the Security Council’s efforts,
particularly in conflicts with religious undertones.
Because of its moral authority, the religious sector is
well situated to deal with community-based issues,
such as justice and the rule of law. Not only does it
exemplify international society’s respect for human
dignity and individual worth, but often enough the
religious sector is the only grouping in conflict and
post-conflict societies that continues to function

S/PV.5052

coherently enough to serve as the foundation for
rebuilding shattered communities. The religious sector
could and should become an effective tool in achieving
the international community’s peace-building agenda.
To date the international community has not fully
tapped this sector’s potential.
Last year, our delegation introduced a draft
resolution in the General Assembly proposing the
creation of an inter-religious council or a special
committee in the United Nations to help address the
problem of conflict resolution, reconciliation and the
achievement of justice and the rule of law. Indeed, we
think it would be a good idea for such a special
committee
for
inter-religious
or
inter-faith
understanding — mobilizing for the first time a crucial
but neglected sector, the inter-religious sector — to
engage religious leaders to work with political leaders
and leaders of Government and civil society to
contribute to peace and understanding and help resolve
difficult ethnic and politico-religious conflicts such as
those in Mindanao in my own country, in the Balkans,
in the Middle East, in North Africa, in South Asia and
South-East Asia and other areas of the world. We
believe that the creation of an inter-religious council or
a specific unit on inter-faith understanding in the
United Nations system is an idea whose time has come.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too would like to thank the United
Kingdom for the very useful proposal of holding this
meeting today. The Secretary-General’s report entitled
“The rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies” (S/2004/616) identifies a
number of issues that require thorough consideration
by the Security Council, Member States and organs of
the United Nations, including the Secretariat. In
particular, peacekeeping mandates must be improved.
Many of them simply do not include tasks relating to
transitional justice and ensuring the rule of law or do
not always reflect the actual needs of the States in
which missions are deployed. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern about this.
In that connection, I recall that a number of years
ago in the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization, the Russian Federation made a
proposal to consider the question of the legal basis for
United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we
submitted a document in that regard. We think that

perhaps the Special Committee might now resume
work on our proposal.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General that
one cannot count on the success and stability of
reforms aimed at ensuring the rule of law when such
reforms are imposed from outside and are not based on
local traditions and conditions. The United Nations and
the international community as a whole should not
replace, but rather supplement and promote, national
initiatives, including those in the areas of justice and
law and order.
As members are aware, in the initial stages of
United Nations efforts to ensure the rule of law in postconflict societies, there was an emphasis on
establishing rather expensive international criminal
tribunals. Experience has now enabled us to introduce
a number of corrective measures. For example, now we
have mixed tribunals in which, in addition to
international judges, there are local jurists. That not
only makes it possible to train national cadres in the
law, it also assists in the establishment of national legal
systems to introduce democratic standards of justice
and to enhance the overall level of a society’s
understanding and awareness of the law. Undoubtedly,
one important stage in establishing the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict societies was the
establishment of the International Criminal Court,
which has just begun to consider its first criminal
cases.
Here, I should like to touch upon one other
fundamentally important aspect. Certainly, ensuring the
rule of law and justice must be regarded as a
fundamental goal of United Nations work for peace.
However, that cannot be a goal in, of and by itself. In
an attempt to provide justice in a number of cases,
excessive zeal becomes a hindrance to peace,
complicating the attainment or implementation of
peace agreements. In such cases, one should make
more active use of alternative mechanisms — truth and
reconciliation commissions, for example.
The Secretary-General is currently working with
Member States to reach an agreement on the
formulation of a list of experts to provide assistance to
post-conflict countries. Such a list would include
experts to assist in organizing transitional justice, reestablishing a justice system that has been destroyed
and ensuring the rule of law. It is understood that such
specialists would be made available to the United

7

S/PV.5052

Nations when necessary. We support that proposal, and
we are prepared to work with the Secretariat to reach
such an agreement.
In general, Russia agrees with the contents of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/616) on
strengthening the role of the Organization in
establishing justice systems and ensuring the rule of
law in conflict and post-conflict societies. In that
connection, I should like to make the following point:
there is one view on the need to establish a new
coordinating structure within the United Nations on
issues relating to the rule of law and transitional
justice. We do not reject that idea; we are prepared to
study it. But at the same time, we feel that increasing
the number of bureaucratic mechanisms does not
always lead to enhanced functioning and effectiveness
of the system. We therefore urge the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security — which the
Secretary-General
has
asked
to
submit
recommendations on matters covered in the report —
to focus on finding ways to improve coordination
within existing mechanisms.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): The Secretary-General’s
report on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2004/616) is, in
our view, a landmark document. It represents a
significant step forward in conceptualizing the rule of
law and transitional justice and in explaining their
relevance to the work of the United Nations.
I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later today by the representative
of the Netherlands, on behalf of the European Union.
At the same time, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the many members of the Secretariat who
were involved in drafting the report for an outstanding
job.
Germany wholeheartedly welcomes this report
and pledges to work with the United Nations to
translate its vision into concrete action. We will do that
as a Security Council member, as a member of the
General Assembly and of other relevant bodies of the
United Nations system, as a State party to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court and as a
donor country that is now already devoting a
significant part of its assistance programmes to the
promotion of judicial and non-judicial governance
structures.

8

But let us be clear on one important point: the
Secretary-General’s report, as thorough and thoughtful
as it may be, is only the beginning of a long-term
agenda. Important and often difficult questions remain
unresolved. Here, I am referring to policy questions
such as the proper sequencing and timing of measures
to promote peace, justice and reconciliation; to
institutional questions such as the cooperation between
the United Nations — notably the Security Council —
and the International Criminal Court (ICC); and to
resource questions. With regard to the latter, action by
the United Nations must be complemented by
assistance that States make available to each other if a
State is in need of certain capacities, materials or
expertise. The Council will urge Member States that
are able to do so to contribute national expertise and
materials.
In that context, I would like to draw the attention
of members to the Justice Rapid Response Initiative, an
initiative that a number of countries from all parts of
the world — including Germany — have launched over
the past few months. The starting point of that
initiative was the realization that in post-conflict
situations, it is likely that a State may be willing, but
not entirely able, to take the necessary steps to
investigate and prosecute some of the worst crimes —
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide —
owing to a lack of expertise and resources. The
response to that dilemma may be that States possessing
the required expertise or resources coordinate to
provide, on short notice, cost-effective expertise and
resources as necessary. Such expertise and resources
could be used either to enhance the capabilities of
States not fully able but willing to prosecute such
crimes or to augment the capacities of international
justice institutions, notably the ICC. Under either
scenario, such Justice Rapid Response capabilities
would be deployed only upon request.
The Governments and civil society experts who
have worked together over the past few months to
elaborate the Justice Rapid Response Initiative are
convinced that offering effective assistance to States
possessing plenty of political will but limited resources
would be an important element to give true meaning to
the idea of local ownership. The Justice Rapid
Response Initiative is still a work in progress. States
that may be interested in participating in the further
refinement of the initiative are welcome to join it.

S/PV.5052

Allow me to devote the conclusion of my
statement to one specific issue and to make this part of
my statement on behalf also of Finland and the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. That issue concerns the
institutional structures necessary to implement the
report’s extensive to-do lists.
Indeed, while the report explains the challenges
and the future agenda for United Nations action in the
field of the rule of law and post-conflict transitional
justice, it does not directly address the question of
which institutional changes would be necessary to
enable the United Nations to better cope with the
strengthening of justice and the rule of law. The report
merely entrusts the Executive Committee on Peace and
Security to make proposals for enhancing the United
Nations system arrangements for supporting the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies.
Currently, the work of the United Nations in the
field of the rule of law and transitional justice is
divided among eleven departments and agencies within
the system. Cooperation between the various actors is
maintained through a Focal-Point Network, with a
largely coordinating role. No office dedicated to the
issue has yet been established. The current arrangement
does not support the development of common policies
and comprehensive strategies, nor does it allow for the
accumulation of institutional memory, best practices
and lessons learned.
Finland, Jordan and Germany believe that there is
a need to create a new entity within the United Nations
Secretariat, to enable the United Nations to operate
more effectively in this cross-cutting area. Therefore,
Finland, Germany and Jordan have elaborated a nonpaper outlining possible models for the future
organization of the rule of law and transitional justice
activities within the United Nations system. We hope it
will provide a starting point for discussions in the
Executive Committee on Peace and Security on this
issue. We remitted our non-paper to the Secretariat in a
high-level démarche on 29 September. On 1 October,
we sent the non-paper to all permanent missions, for
your information.
Common to the models contained in the nonpaper is the assumption that effective mainstreaming of
any theme requires some institutional centre of gravity
within the United Nations system. Mainstreaming

cannot simply rely on occasional or periodic meetings
or exchange of information.
The non-paper seeks to promote an entity
responsible for all the policy work carried out by the
United Nations in the area of the rule of law and
transitional justice. From the beginning, it would have
for its consideration and action numerous tasks
highlighted in the report, such as reviewing best
practices, developing proposals and overall policies for
United Nations action; helping plan comprehensive
national strategies; coordinating the efforts with actors
from outside the United Nations system; updating and
supplementing related United Nations material such as
guidelines and manuals; directing the setting up of
databases and web-based resources; creating and
maintaining up-to-date rosters of experts; planning
comprehensive training programmes for United
Nations staff and other matters.
The non-paper also argues that core operations of
the new entity should be funded from the regular
budget, whereas operational activities would continue
to be financed from the budgets of the implementing
department and agencies.
We would like to emphasize that our non-paper
does not intend to present ready-made solutions.
Rather, it wishes to assist the Executive Committee on
Peace and Security in its task to come forward with
proposals of its own. We would be grateful if you, Mr.
President, would see our distribution of the non-paper
to permanent missions as an effort to draw your
attention to a matter that in our view, needs urgent
attention, and as an attempt to set out possible ways to
approach the matter.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to welcome
you, Sir, to the Security Council to preside over this
important meeting, which has been organized by the
United Kingdom presidency. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his clear statement today and for his report
on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict
and post-conflict societies.
The need for justice and the rule of law is selfevident, particularly in conflict societies. Those
principles are critical for the realization of social and
economic justice and for the implementation of
political,
economic,
cultural,
religious
and
environmental rights. They are an essential means for
the realizations of human aspirations for peace,
equality and justice.

9

S/PV.5052

I have a few comments on the subject.
First, each conflict situation is unique and has its
own dynamics. We agree with the Secretary-General
that pre-packaged solutions are ill-advised and that we
must eschew one-size-fits-all formulas. Secondly, we
support the recommendation that needs related to
justice and rule of law should be integrated into any
international or United Nations involvement in postconflict societies. Thirdly, we recognize the importance
of building national capacities in independent national
institutions. Fourthly, we support the promotion of
good governance and national institution-building,
particularly national judicial capacity-building.
Fifthly, we believe that use can be made of
indigenous and informal traditions for the
administration of justice and settlement of disputes, if
they are consistent with international laws. Sixthly, we
fully support the need for ending impunity for crimes
against humanity. Seventh, justice, peace and
democracy are mutually re-enforcing and should be
simultaneously promoted. Eighth, reconstruction,
economic revival and employment generation also
create a wider stake in the preservation of the rule of
law.
Ninth, the need for ending impunity for financial
crimes is also important. The international community
should
strengthen
and
improve
cooperative
mechanisms to ensure that looted money or other assets
acquired through corruption and other unlawful means
are returned to the countries of origin.
Justice and the rule of law is vital for the
establishment and maintenance of order, peace and
stability, both at the intra-State and inter-State levels.
The international community today could also be
regarded as a conflict society. Thus, national rule of
law strategies must be complemented by the
international rule of law.
The Secretary-General made a powerful
statement in opening the general debate of the General
Assembly this year. I would like to quote three
sentences from his statement at the Assembly’s 3rd
meeting
“The rule of law is at risk around the
world ... Every nation that proclaims the rule of
law at home must respect it abroad; and every
nation that insists on it abroad, must enforce it at
home. ...

10

Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it.”
The United Nations must build its capacity to
uphold the rule of law, both at the national and — even
more importantly — the international level. The
international judicial system should be strengthened to
promote adherence to the principles of the United
Nations Charter and international law. The
international judicial bodies which have been
established so far are, we believe, a good start. But we
should seek to promote and further the international
judicial systems, in the context of the measures being
considered, to create a United Nations system
responsive to the realities of the twenty-first century.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First I would like to note the skill of the Council’s
presidency this month — the United Kingdom — on
proposing for the theme of this debate, for the second
consecutive year, the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies.
In the context of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/616), which we have examined
closely, my delegation would like to highlight a
number of points that we regard as particularly
important. I would like first to congratulate the
Secretary-General and to thank him, not just for his
introductory statement this morning, but also for his
important address at the start of the General Assembly
session this year (see A/59/PV.3), which placed
consideration of and action on law and human rights,
both within and among countries, at the very centre of
the debate on the direction the Organization should
take.
Before I move on to the specific points that I
would like to make in this regard, I would like to note
that Spain fully endorses the statement to be made later
by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of
the European Union.
Creating security and trust among populations in
crisis and in post-conflict situations is indispensable if
we are to consolidate or restore — depending on the
situation — the rule of law and the justice system.
Legal certainty provides a foundation for ensuring
stability — with regard not only to the political system
and the citizenry, but also to economic and social
issues. The United Nations has broad experience,
acquired in the field, in peacekeeping operations. It

S/PV.5052

also has a wealth of contributions from the deliberative
bodies of the Organization, in particular the General
Assembly, which as long ago as 1985 adopted the
Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary
and, subsequently, the Basic Principles on the Role of
Lawyers and the Guidelines on the Role of
Prosecutors. Nor should we overlook the important
contributions made by the Commission on Human
Rights or the advice provided in this respect by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
First and foremost, we must keep in mind that
local actors and local institutions are key in this
respect. We must minimize the risk of United Nations
actions in this area sometimes being perceived as
constituting external interference or as disregarding
circumstances and traditions peculiar to the country in
question. We therefore fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s statement that, in its actions, the United
Nations must not try to direct, but to assist and provide
guidance to, fragmented societies that require outside
assistance for the restoration of conditions in which
their own institutions can function properly.
Furthermore, it is essential to ensure that justice
not be just an abstract idea, but a tangible reality for
citizens, especially victims. In that regard, we believe
that the initiatives put forward by the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia with a
view to establishing mechanisms to provide reparations
for victims should be studied carefully and in a
positive manner. The Victims Trust Fund, set up by the
States parties to the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, is already beginning to operate.
We also look forward to the completion of the
work begun by the Commission on Human Rights
aimed at formulating basic principles and guidelines on
the right to a remedy and reparation for victims of
violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The report of the Secretary-General also refers to
the problems resulting from rule of law vacuums —
when peace operations take place in environments
marked by the effective absence of working criminal
justice systems.
The Brahimi report on peace operations
(S/2000/809) raised the possibility of developing a type
of legal code that could provisionally be applied in

situations such as I have just described, with a view to
filling such vacuums. We are gratified to note that,
over the next few months, the preparation of
instruments that could facilitate the work of the United
Nations in this regard is expected to reach completion.
In the area of international justice, given the
experience of special and mixed criminal tribunals, the
International Criminal Court has a key role in
combating impunity for the most serious crimes of farreaching international importance. The international
community now has at its disposal a permanent,
independent and impartial instrument to ensure justice
in the most significant cases of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law when,
in keeping with the principle of complementarity,
national penal systems are not in a position, for one
reason or another, to address such important issues in a
genuine and effective manner.
We welcome the fact that, in recent days, a
number of countries have ratified the Rome Statute,
and that consequently more than half of the States
Members of the United Nations are now parties to the
Statute. We also welcome the fact that the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the International Criminal
Court have signed an agreement on cooperation and
consultation, with the result that the Court is now part
of the United Nations system.
During the past few years we have sometimes
seen positive results from the application of
complementary measures, which can help to ensure
justice in specific transitional situations. That is
something to which Mr. Méndez also referred in his
opening statement. I have in mind truth and
reconciliation commissions, commissions aimed at
establishing a historical record, national commissions
on human rights, commissions to investigate the
records of administrations, and so forth. Such
mechanisms may be particularly appropriate in a
political and social context by emphasizing the national
character of the process of restoring justice and the rule
of law.
It may sometimes be possible to set up
specialized tribunals or courts. At other times, the
proper functioning and strengthening of national
capacities in the administration of justice might make
such specialized tribunals or courts unnecessary. The
particular formula will depend on the circumstances,

11

S/PV.5052

and the will of the peoples most directly affected will
always be decisive.
The training of local personnel in the area of
justice and the rule of law is a key element — one that
must be worked on at all levels. To that end,
appropriate resources must be mobilized. In this
regard, in coordination with the European Commission,
Spain recently held a workshop on criminal justice
with the assistance of experts from various
international organizations, including the United
Nations and associations and organizations of civil
society. That workshop was designed precisely to
enhance existing capacities in this area — particularly
in connection with crises in post-conflict situations. In
this regard, we must not overlook the potential
contributions of organizations like the Council of
Europe, with its unparalleled experience in the
protection of human rights, judicial cooperation in civil
and criminal matters and the modernization of justice
systems. Then, there is the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, which has been doing
effective work in preventive diplomacy and crisis
management.
In conclusion, let me state that my delegation
fully supports the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General,
particularly in the last chapter, entitled “Moving
forward”. I would also like to make the point that
Spain is ready to cooperate actively in the
implementation of those recommendations. Because of
the far-reaching importance of the subject under
discussion, it would be desirable for the Security
Council to review periodically the progress made in
implementing those recommendations, so as not to lose
the momentum which the United Kingdom initiative
has generated.

post-conflict role of the United Nations in key areas so
as to ensure sustainable peace and decision-making,
especially in terms of designing mandates and exit
strategies. In this regard, the notion of the rule of law
is a fairly recent paradigm in international relations. It
is seen as a limit on the arbitrariness of the State and a
principle
for
regulating
relationships
both
internationally and within each society.
Reconciliation as such is seen as the collective
response of a society emerging from crisis, whose
social fabric has been damaged. It puts an end to the
cycle of violence and lays the foundation for a new
coexistence.
There can be no reconciliation without justice,
and we will continue to repeat this whenever necessary.
Today’s meeting follows two other recent open
debates held in the Security Council. The first — on
justice and the rule of law: the role of the United
Nations — was organized by the delegation of
the United Kingdom in September of last year. The
second — on post-conflict national reconciliation and
the role of the United Nations — was held in January
under my country’s presidency.
In response to specific mandates from the
Security Council after those debates were held, the
Secretary-General prepared the report on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies (S/2004/616), the topic now before us. In my
delegation’s view, this is a very comprehensive report
of great conceptual value, which very clearly describes
the experience of the United Nations in promoting the
rule of law and human rights in conflict and postconflict societies, in addition to giving specific
recommendations.

Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first to express our gratitude to the United
Kingdom for convening this public debate during its
presidency. Our thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral for the report that has been introduced. We
wish to express our appreciation to Mr. Juan Méndez,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, for his
significant contribution. He is a distinguished Latin
American who is well known to us for his unswerving
devotion to human rights.

My country shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral on the key role to be assigned to the rule of
law and the need to continue to take an integrated
approach in which transitional justice is also addressed.
My delegation would like to point out that my country
does have some recent experience in the area of
transitional justice. We also applaud the emphasis on
the establishment of effective national judicial systems,
the observance of international human rights norms,
and the need to support the International Criminal
Court.

My delegation, Sir, sees this exercise as a part of
process in which the Security Council discusses the

As regards reconciliation, it seems to us that the
report may have used too restrictive an approach. The

12

S/PV.5052

report regards reconciliation as an extrajudicial means
of transitional justice. It seems to us that this
viewpoint, based on an instrumental interpretation of
reconciliation, does not reflect the fact that
reconciliation is a process. However, it is also an endresult, which at times may take the form of specific
mechanisms whose real-world application may lead to
changes in interpersonal relations within a society.
Perhaps the report has failed to address
reconciliation from the perspective of the political
response that States, the United Nations and the
Security Council must provide in the post-conflict
reconstruction process, which goes beyond the merely
legal ambit.
Apart from a few specific points, we believe that
the report is positive and we endorse its
recommendations. We believe that, in the current
circumstances, we should focus on determining which
practical recommendations we should adopt in order to
give form to those ideas within the United Nations.
On this point, I would like to briefly refer to two
of the recommendations. We welcome the report’s
emphasis on gender issues and promoting the full
participation of women in the whole process. This
dovetails with what the Security Council adopted in
resolution 1325 (2000), to which I will return shortly.
Then, there is the question of strengthening the
capabilities of the special representatives of the
Secretary-General and of peace operations, so that
there can be information-gathering right from the
outset of a conflict, which will then provide evidence
of serious violations and offences. This would mean
not waiting for the end of a conflict or the beginning of
the post-conflict stage to carry out this process. On
many occasions we have witnessed post-conflict
situations in which issues of human rights and justice
have arisen, but where much evidence, which initially
appeared in the form of mere information, has been
destroyed. Perhaps, with provision for the necessary
legal safeguards, the Council should look at how those
mechanisms — the special representative and
peacekeeping operations — could be used to gather
information, which could then serve as evidence. This
has nothing to do with the subsequent decision as to
whether or not persons identified as allegedly
responsible should be tried.
We trust that the ideas emerging from this debate
will help to give practical form to the role of the

United Nations in the area of the rule of law and
transitional justice in post-conflict situations. This role
should be one of facilitation and not a replacement for
national institutions.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to thank you for convening this open
debate. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his thorough report on this increasingly important
topic regarding justice and the rule of law, and for the
concrete recommendations he has put forward. I should
also like to thank the Chilean delegation for having
organized an Arria-formula briefing together with
representatives of non-governmental organizations who
provided many valuable and insightful comments on
the subject.
Last but not least, I should also like to thank
Special Adviser Juan Méndez for his highly valuable
participation in our meeting.
Brazil fully supports the Secretary-General’s
statement to the General Assembly on 21 September. It
is indeed our major responsibility to instil, uphold and
restore greater respect for the rule of law, not only at
home but also throughout the world. In particular, all
Member States have an unquestionable and overriding
duty to abide by the United Nations Charter and, in the
present case, by international human rights,
humanitarian, refugee and criminal law. May I add that
we took note with interest of the points raised by the
Secretary-General in his report, and specifically when
he comments that
“We must learn… to eschew one-size-fits-all
formulas and the importation of foreign models,
and, instead, base our support on national
assessments, national participation and national
needs and aspirations”. (S/2004/616, summary)
Much can be done by the United Nations in the
domain of the rule of law. Mandates recently adopted
by the Council include important rule of law and
justice components in missions such as those in Côte d’
Ivoire, Liberia and Haiti. In those multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations plays a
major role in formulating and implementing long-term
post-conflict initiatives, not only towards development
and democracy but also in relation to the strengthening
of the rule of law. All of those objectives are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and
contribute to build sustainable peace in war-torn
societies.

13

S/PV.5052

Where an independent and impartial judiciary is
functioning, justice tends to be pursued and done, rules
are fairly applied and, as a result, people trust their
legitimate institutions. In a post-conflict setting, the
cycle of violence can be broken and the recurrence of
conflicts can be effectively prevented.
Adherence to the rule of law entails the
observance of the principles of equality before the law,
separation of powers, democratic governance and
social justice, among other fundamental precepts. The
rule of law must be consistent with international
human rights norms and standards. Respect for human
rights is even more imperative in post-conflict
scenarios, where the protection of persecuted
minorities is urgently needed.
Helping shattered societies to re-establish the rule
of law and address past abuses in order to achieve
reconciliation involves a range of complexities. It is a
critical task that in many settings requires the
engagement of the international community.
On the subject of transitional justice in postconflict societies, some key issues should be
highlighted. We need carefully to consider the
particular rule of law and justice needs in each country.
Local consultation and ownership are very important
elements, especially in that which concerns the victims
themselves.
The dynamic is different in each experience and a
distinct and calibrated combination of mechanisms will
be required. For instance, it is necessary to make the
relationship between courts and truth commissions
conform
to
specific
situations.
Reparations
programmes to victims of gross violations of human
rights are also an essential element, as are vetting
processes. At the same time that we take into account
the rights and needs of victims, we must recognize and
respect the rights of accused persons.
True reconciliation requires a delicate balance
between the values of justice and peace. Together with
democracy, those values are indeed mutually
reinforcing imperatives, as mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General, and it is possible to promote all
three in fragile post-conflict settings. To do so, the
sensible timing and sequencing of the implementation
of transitional justice processes need to be borne in
mind.

14

Brazil has wholeheartedly supported the
establishment of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) as a permanent and independent tribunal to
promote the rule of law and to ensure that the gravest
and most heinous international crimes do not remain
unpunished. Now that the ICC is starting its work and
is becoming able to provide long-term and robust
deterrence, the confidence we have placed in its
effectiveness should be borne out. Ultimately, the full
credibility of the Court is directly proportional to its
universality. We therefore encourage all States that
have not done so to accede to or ratify the Rome
Statute at the earliest opportunity. Today, the ICC
counts nearly 100 States parties.
We welcome the fact that the report rejects any
endorsement of amnesty for genocide, war crimes or
crimes against humanity, and ensures that the United
Nations does not establish or directly participate in any
tribunal for which capital punishment is included
among possible sanctions.
We must give serious consideration to the
Secretary-General’s recommendations, such as setting
up a roster of transitional justice experts and
guaranteeing that they receive appropriate predeployment training. But we can achieve tangible
results only with the necessary financial resources and
highly qualified personnel for a solid investment in
justice and in the rule of law, which requires a viable
and sustainable funding mechanism.
Brazil has always favoured a comprehensive
approach that underscores the developmental nature of
the rule of law in order to enhance the provision of
support to countries for national capacity-building, a
primary strategy in strengthening the rule of law.
On my delegation’s initiative, on behalf of the
Common Market of the South, and with 141 sponsors
in total, the General Assembly adopted in 2002
resolution 57/221 on the strengthening of the rule of
law. On that occasion, we all recognized the role
played by the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) in supporting national efforts
to strengthen the institutions of the rule of law. We all
expressed our deep concerns about the scarcity of
means at the disposal of OHCHR for the fulfilment of
its tasks. The United Nations system, in particular
OHCHR, should be given more resources to work with
countries to strengthen national human rights
institutions and to provide assistance, inter alia, in

S/PV.5052

programmes related to the training of police,
prosecutors, judges, lawyers and prison officers.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania fully associates
itself with the statement to be made shortly by
Ambassador Van den Berg of the Netherlands on behalf
of the European Union. I shall therefore confine myself
to brief remarks of a complementary nature.
I wish at the outset to thank the United Kingdom
for carrying forward this extremely important and
timely initiative. Our commendation goes also to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for making the rule of
law a priority topic for the proceedings of the fiftyninth session of the General Assembly, as well as for
his comprehensive and inspiring report, which offers a
good platform for further discussions within and
outside the Council.
Romania
has
an
especially
immediate
understanding of the importance of justice and the rule
of law in building a democratic society, as it is a
country that dealt quite successfully — judging by the
annual report delivered this very day by the European
Commission — with the challenge of an accelerated —
political and economic transition. In all modesty, we
stand ready to share with those interested the recipe,
with all its strong points and its shortcomings and
lessons learned. One important ingredient in that
respect is how to handle the constantly evolving
requirements of making the law actually rule the land.
Romania strongly supports the central role played
by the United Nations, both as a promoter of the
universal principles of justice and the rule of law and
as an active participant in their concrete
implementation. Embedding justice and rule of law
components in the terms of reference for United
Nations missions and assisting war-torn societies to put
in place adequate reforms in that regard should become
a permanent priority of the work of the United Nations.
Nevertheless, real progress in achieving effective,
genuine justice and the rule of law depends largely
upon local actors. Multilateral and bilateral assistance
should be considered only as supporting elements in
ensuring that justice and the rule of law are effectively
widespread throughout the region or country
concerned, thereby fostering solid prerequisites for
sustainable local ownership. The fundamentals of
justice and the rule of law have to be lived and
practised locally.

Achieving national reconciliation has often
proved to be one of the biggest challenges in efforts to
ensure lasting peace in conflict-shattered societies. It
therefore makes sense in such cases to capitalize on the
virtues of the general concept of transitional justice,
with due account being taken of cultural specifics and
the traditions of the countries and societies concerned.
Atrocities and injustices brought about by civil
wars and State repression can easily fuel new cycles of
violence. Impunity may undermine trust in legal
systems, thereby encouraging further crimes. While
welcoming the important role played by ad hoc
international criminal tribunals in helping countries
and peoples to come to terms with past abuses, we
believe that in many cases similar results could be
achieved at lower costs if judicial mechanisms were
established at the national level and strengthened with
international support. As rightly pointed out in the
report of the Secretary-General, easier interaction with
local populations, closer proximity to evidence and
witnesses and greater accessibility to, and for, victims,
are indisputable advantages in that regard.
Of course, where States are unable or unwilling
to prosecute and bring to justice those responsible for
the most serious crimes, the complementary
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
an institution that reflects universal aspirations to the
rule of law and global justice, should be resorted to. I
wish to take this opportunity to reiterate Romania’s
firm commitment to the goals and principles of the
Rome Statute of the ICC, as well as to express our
strong belief that the Court will live up to expectations
and provide an effective means of bolstering the rule of
law and dealing a decisive blow to the culture of
impunity.
A wider range of non-judicial mechanisms such
as truth commissions must of course supplement
criminal justice and reparation programmes for
victims. The latter aspect should be afforded greater
consideration, as reparations programmes can
contribute substantially to the promotion of national
reconciliation. Quite often, the prejudice resulting from
conflicts is not only confined to the level of those
directly affected, but has more profound implications
at the levels of community and society. We are indeed
dealing with serious collective trauma when, for
instance, conflicts inflict damage to, or destroy,
cultural or religious patrimony, tearing apart the values
that make up and hold together a given community. In

15

S/PV.5052

such cases individual compensation should be
accompanied by broader restoration and reconstruction
and programmes.
There is one additional concern that I would like
to bring to the fore of this discussion at the United
Nations regarding the importance of justice and the
rule of law, in the hope that it will be possible to
integrate it into the further pursuit of the theme
proposed by the United Kingdom. We must not lose
sight of a phenomenon that may sometimes be more
worrisome than even the challenges of building or
rebuilding a viable administration of justice in postconflict situations. That phenomenon is the
proliferation of areas in our world where there is a
complete absence of law.
We have improved our capacity as an
international community to address and manage even
the most intricate and complicated conflict and postconflict situations. But we do so in most cases when
we have before us a conventional set of interlocutors to
deal with. However, we do not seem to know what to
do with regard to self-styled republics and territories
where there is no recognized authority to be held
accountable by world opinion. There are numerous
such black holes today, and they exist, unfortuantely, in
most areas of our planet. The reluctance, uneasiness or
inability of the international community to tackle such
problems casts a shadow over the valuable work done
to avert more conflicts and tensions than ever before.
Eventually, that makes our work incomplete and is a
glaring example of unfinished business.
In closing, I would like to express Romania’s full
support for the conclusions and recommendations set
out in the report of the Secretary-General, as well as
our full readiness to contribute to their implementation.
We would also like to commend you, Mr. President, for
the draft presidential statement on this subject. We look
forward to building upon it further during the Council’s
future deliberations.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to organize this public meeting on the matter
of the re-establishment of the rule of law and the
administration of transitional justice in societies in the
midst of conflict, which is at the very heart of the work
of the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for providing us with a report on the
role of the United Nations in establishing justice and

16

the rule of law in post-conflict societies and on
national reconciliation.
Justice and the rule of law are very closely linked
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council is therefore intimately involved
in this matter, which is also associated with the
prevention of conflict.
Experience has shown that United Nations peace
operations — such as those in Timor-Leste, Haiti and
Liberia, for example — can sometimes have direct
responsibility for the administration of judicial services
and police and penal systems, thereby helping to
strengthen judicial institutions, train judges, ensure that
courts function properly and provide advice to hostcountry institutions responsible for ensuring respect for
the law. United Nations peacekeeping operations
increasingly include a civilian component assigned to
those matters. Given this historic development and the
increasingly important role played by the United
Nations in this area — often under difficult
circumstances — the establishment of a legal
framework for peacekeeping operations under Chapter
VII seems to us to be necessary.
In addition, we share the Secretary-General’s
view that no institutional reform generally — and in
particular that of an institution charged with
guaranteeing the rule of law — that is carried out
during a period of transition has any hope of lasting if
it is imposed from the outside. The role of the United
Nations and the international community is not to act
as a substitute for local initiatives; rather, it is to
provide them with the necessary support.
In that regard, organizing post-conflict elections
must be strategically planned. Rushing into elections
without proper political and security preparations can
actually be detrimental to the rule of law by bringing
back persons involved in the crisis to begin with or by
encouraging sensibilities that do not actually reflect the
real political situation in a given country, thereby
further damaging the democratic process.
My delegation also believes that the ultimate goal
of reconciliation is not always compatible with
immediate justice, although we must always reaffirm
our commitment to putting an end to impunity.
With regard to international criminal justice,
keeping in mind that it is above all the responsibility of
national judicial systems to determine responsibility

S/PV.5052

for crimes, we should emphasize the important role
played by the international and mixed criminal
tribunals that have come into existence in the last 10
years. The establishment of such institutions is a
significant milestone. We note that, while the two ad
hoc Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
were able to function thanks to their extremely high
budgetary resources, the mixed Tribunals for Sierra
Leone and Cambodia were financed exclusively by
voluntary contributions, which in particular for the
former has led to a financial crisis with a negative
impact on its activities. We therefore have the problem
of mobilizing sufficient resources.
In addition, the International Criminal Court must
see its role strengthened, and the integrity of its
Statutes should be preserved so as to advance the cause
of justice and law and put an end to impunity.
My delegation, furthermore, supports the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on mandates approved by the
Security Council and on measures to be taken within
the United Nations system.
I would not wish to end without noting that reestablishing the rule of law means building the three
pillars — peace, freedom and development — that are
the goals of the United Nations.
Finally, my delegation feels there can be no reestablishment of the rule of law at the national level
when there has been recently such dangerous drifting
off course, undermining the most fundamental
principles of law, including those relating to human
rights and international humanitarian law.
The tragedy of the Palestinian people, with the
complacent silence of the international community, is
indicative of how precarious, if not absent, the rule of
law is at the international level. It also shows a
singularly selective approach to the notion of respect
for human rights.
Mr. Danforth (United States): This subject,
justice and the rule of law, is so quintessentially British
that there is no wonder this month’s presidency chose it
as the subject for open debate.
In the United States, first-year law students study
English common law, and American concepts of law,
government and individual rights, not to mention our
language, literature and basic values, derive from our
British heritage. Some of these points might be

disputed on the other side of the Atlantic, but over
here, Sir, your offspring are eternally grateful.
Today I want to highlight one aspect of the rule
of law, the importance of transparency. Transparency is
a true engine of the rule of law and can promote a
responsive and trusted judicial system in both stable
societies and those scarred by conflict. For the rule of
law to grow in a society, the people must know the law.
The law must be transparent to all citizens. This means
the judicial system, courts, police and prisons must be
open and visible. Making the law available means
educating the citizenry. It means the judges must reach
and publish reasoned decisions and cases. Star
Chambers are incompatible with the rule of law.
The law may seem to require special expertise to
understand, and if the law is not accessible to the
ordinary citizen, if the ordinary citizen cannot know
and trust the law, then the rule of law will be far out of
reach. Knowledge and openness are the best bulwarks
against arbitrary decision-making, whether by courts or
by Governments. The United Nations, in particular,
should marshal its resources effectively to help
societies emerging from conflict to develop their
national judicial capacities in a manner that is
accountable to their citizenry.
However, the rule of law cannot simply be
imposed by international bodies. To make the rule of
law effective, citizens must also know their own
Government. They must understand how it works and
how to influence it. While legal and judicial matters
necessarily involve certain confidences and restraints
on sharing of information, absolute secrecy can
encourage corruption. Transparency is an engine to a
modern economy and a participant in the global
economy. Access to information technologies plays an
important role in open and free societies, both to
stimulate economic activity and to provide citizens
with information to know and monitor their
Government, including their judicial systems.
Therefore, in addressing the problems of
countries that have been engulfed in conflict and are
seeking to build stable, peaceful and prosperous
societies, we should assist them to develop a judicial
system based on transparency and openness.
The Secretary-General’s report on the rule of law
has some valuable insights and recommendations. It
rightly stresses the imperative of respect for the rule of
law in any democratic, peaceful and prosperous

17

S/PV.5052

society. It underlines the importance of fair criminal
justice. It catalogues useful actions the United Nations
Secretariat can take to make itself effective in
promoting the rule of law and helping countries build
the institutions necessary to have the rule of law.
The United States has long supported efforts to
hold responsible perpetrators of atrocities such as
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We
supported efforts to create the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone when countries were not capable or
willing to exercise national jurisdiction. In Iraq, we are
supporting Iraqi-led efforts to create the Iraq special
tribunal. In the Sudan, we have repeatedly urged
greater action to stop the atrocities.
We note, of course, that the report expresses some
views we do not share. The report does not properly
respect national decisions about criminal justice,
particularly sentences a particular society may deem
appropriate.
As this Council and the wider membership of the
United Nations know full well, the United States has
fundamental objections to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) created by the Rome Statute. Our
problems with the ICC concern the rule of law. We
believe the Court should not have jurisdiction over
citizens of States that are not parties to the Rome
Statute. We believe that the Rome Statute does not
reflect due process of law as we understand it, because,
among other things, it allows multiple jeopardy and
does not provide for jury trials, as our Constitution
requires.
We believe the ICC runs a high risk of
politicization and is not accountable. And we believe
the ICC clashes with the international system of the
United Nations Charter. It should come as no surprise,
therefore, that we do not endorse the report’s embrace
of the ICC. We can accept the draft presidential
statement today, because it respects our inability to
support the ICC and does not explicitly or implicitly
endorse the ICC.
I commend the United Kingdom for its historic
leadership on this subject it has brought to the Council
for its attention.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I thank you for organizing this public

18

debate on a very topical issue. Our Council dealt with
this issue last year also. Today’s meeting enables us to
continue our reflections so as to constantly improve the
work of the international community in providing
assistance to post-conflict countries for the promotion
of justice and the rule of law.
For these countries, it is not only a question of
establishing functional national institutions; it is also a
question of learning healthy practices so as to
strengthen the very foundations of the State. Apart
from these two aspects of the question, I would also
like to comment on the relationship between the rule of
law, justice and development and, in particular, on the
potential impact of poverty and the wrong kind of
development on the rule of law and vice versa.
Establishing or restoring the rule of law is absolutely
essential for post-conflict societies. In order to achieve
that goal, measures must be taken to legitimize the
exercise of institutionalized power and to ensure that it
promotes the general interests of society as a whole.
That presupposes a common social vision that reflects
a national consensus, which, in turn, can result only
from inclusive dialogue.
The establishment of democratic national
institutions requires that qualified persons be found to
lead them. Leader support for the democratic ideal and
for its implementation is an important factor which the
international community and the United Nations can
help to consolidate by providing a suitable framework
for the mobilization of international cooperation, in
order to ensure that new institutions learn the good
practices that they need to survive. The United Nations
can thereby contribute to the emergence of a true,
revitalized culture of democracy, which is the best way
of ensuring the rule of law on a lasting basis.
The rule of law does not depend only on a State’s
leaders. It requires also the participation of all sectors
of society. The administration of justice in post-conflict
societies is crucial to restoration of the rule of law,
because it means that rights can be claimed,
compensation for damages can be paid, and human
rights violations that occur in conflict periods can be
punished. It therefore plays an key role in national
integration.
Post-conflict societies can meet the crucial need
to re-establish stability and to prevent another outbreak
of fighting by creating conditions whereby their
citizens can make their interests known and pursue

S/PV.5052

them peacefully and legally, a right guaranteed by a
democratic State.

countries. That represents a real threat to international
peace and security.

In that respect, the administration of justice
through national structures is far preferable and less
expensive. Resort to alternative judicial measures that
are based on moral values is sometimes fully justified.
However, we have to recognize that shortages in the
area of human resources and of infrastructure — a
situation that often faces post-conflict countries —
means that it is not possible to ensure an adequate and
credible justice system.

Let us consider the extent of the devastation in
Haiti after the recent hurricanes and the implications
for the item under consideration today. Those tragic
events, and the reactions to them, make clear the
importance of promoting economic and social rights as
an integral part of the rule of law, not only in postconflict countries but also in countries whose economy
is clearly vulnerable.

In every case, priority must be given, in the
framework of international cooperation, to rebuilding
national capacities in the area of the administration of
justice and to considering alternative judicial methods
that take account of the cultural environment of the
country concerned.
Using international forums — for example, for
very serious crimes that violate international law — is
also fully justified. In that respect, we would stress the
need for ad hoc tribunals to continue to help
strengthen, where necessary, national capacity in the
area of the administration of justice. I would also stress
the need for such structures to have sufficient and
predictable resources, so that the message being sent
by the international community can be a truly
consistent one.
Benin welcomes the entry into force of the Rome
Statute establishing the International Criminal Court,
which is an essential instrument in combating
impunity.
In addition to the issues taken up in the report of
the Secretary-General, special attention should be
given to the dialectical correlation between the rule of
law and economic and social development. While the
rule of law and a functioning justice system are
essential to ensuring the sustainable development of
post-conflict countries, the rule of law, however, can
seem to be an unattainable luxury for countries that are
so poor that most of their people are just managing to
survive one day at a time.
That is the reason for excessive deforestation and
the other negative trends that can be seen in very poor
countries. It is clearly impossible for justice and the
rule of law to prevail in areas of extreme poverty,
which has very serious consequences for the affected

Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
The Secretary-General has promised to make the
strengthening of the rule of law and justice in postconflict societies a priority for this Organization.
France fully supports that resolve and thanks the
United Kingdom for having placed this key issue on
the agenda of the Security Council.
Heeding the recommendation you made, Mr.
President — with which I fully concur — that we limit
the length of our statements, I shall confine myself to
underscoring orally the main points of the statement
that I have prepared. I will circulate it in written form
to delegations so that they may consult it if they so
wish.
The excellent report of the Secretary-General
gives a useful account of the experience acquired and
makes specific proposals for future progress. France
supports the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral, in particular those addressed to the Council.
In our view, the Security Council has a special
responsibility in the area of the restoration of justice
and the rule of law in countries at war or which are
striving to emerge from conflict with the assistance of
the international community.
It seems to us that it is incumbent on the Council
to take into account, right from the outset of peace
processes or operations, the dimension of justice and
the rule of law. We believe that it should also draw on
the experience acquired by the international
community as a whole in that regard; that it should
fulfil its responsibilities, in particular in the area of
combating impunity; and, finally, that it should bolster
its preventive action.
I shall take up briefly each of these points.
First, we should build dimension of the rule of
law into an overall approach to the restoration of

19

S/PV.5052

peace. That, indeed, is what the Security Council
does — perhaps not yet as well as we would wish it to
do, but it has begun to follow that course. I believe that
the action undertaken in Haiti in that regard is a good
example in that respect, because, right from the start —
with the first Council resolution — respect for human
rights, the combat against impunity and the need to
restore the rule of law were affirmed as goals and fully
integrated into measures to restore security.
However, we should have no illusions. The
Organization’s actions must be well thought out; they
cannot be undertaken in haste. For example, as regards
the elections, we believe that everything possible
should be done to ensure that they take place in a
climate of sufficient security and freedom. Indeed,
their credibility is at stake.
Secondly, we need to benefit from the vast
experience that has been acquired on the regional and
national levels. In that regard, it should be noted that
regional organizations have increasingly accumulated
genuine expertise. In Europe, for example, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe and, of course, the European
Union — whose presidency will speak shortly — are
often partners of the United Nations in restoring
sustainable peace, as in Bosnia and Herzegovina or in
Kosovo. We are in favour of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations being
further strengthened in this area.
It also seems to us that the contribution that nongovernmental organizations can make also needs to be
taken into greater consideration and incorporated more
systematically. There are many actors here — the
United Nations and regional and non-governmental
organizations — and the wide range of actors involved
in promoting the rule of law and peace-building means
that we must be careful to ensure the proper
coordination of their efforts to avoid duplication and
lack of clarity. We are in favour of further reflection as
to ways to better dovetail United Nations activities
with those of other international interveners:
international financial institutions, regional and
subregional organizations, as well as non-governmental
organizations and the private sector.
Thirdly, my country feels that it is incumbent on
the Security Council to fully carry out its
responsibilities. We know that a society fractured by
conflict is often incapable — unassisted — of ensuring

20

the dispassionate exercise of justice. However, justice
is vital for reconciliation. We must, therefore, assist in
meeting that need.
It seems to us that as a start, the Organization
should be ready to lend its support in building national
legal authorities, provided, of course, that they are in
conformity with international standards. In that regard,
France concurs with the Secretary-General when he
states that the United Nations could not participate in
any judicial system that might demand the death
penalty.
The so-called mixed tribunals, bringing together
national and international judges, are a very useful
approach in helping a society to put to rest a troubled
past and in rendering proper reparation to the victims.
The Human Rights Chamber of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, established by the Dayton-Paris Peace
Accords, for example, made a key contribution in the
restoration of victims’ rights and, in particular, their
property. That example of a non-criminal court is
worth examining because of the fact that displacements
of populations during a conflict always give rise to
intractable disputes.
France welcomes the ratification by the National
Assembly of Cambodia of the agreement signed on 6
June 2003 between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Kingdom of Cambodia, with a view to
bringing the historical Khmer Rouge leaders of
Democratic Kampuchea to trial. We invite States, as
Cambodia will do, to lend their support to establishing
those special tribunals.
In certain situations when local resolve is
insufficient, only a fully international tribunal can
serve justice. In the past, the Council shouldered its
responsibilities by creating the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda.
Now it should refer to the International Criminal Court
the most serious crimes, if they remain unpunished.
That Court is the instrument par excellence of the
primacy of law and justice. More than half of the
United Nations Member States are parties to its Statute.
It should become universal. That is our hope and that
idea is inherent in its conception. We hope that the
Court will also be a model in terms of access for
victims and reparation, owing, among other things, to
the United Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Gross
and Flagrant Violations of Human Rights chaired by

S/PV.5052

Ms. Simone Veil. Cooperation between the Court and
the United Nations should be exemplary.
Fourthly, we believe that we need to bolster
preventive action and, in that regard, we would like to
express our satisfaction at the appointment of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for the
Prevention of Genocide. It is one of the Special
Adviser’s tasks to draw our attention to any situation
that threatens to degenerate into massive atrocities. It is
also incumbent on the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to draw our attention
to any gravely disquieting situation.
On the subject of prevention, I would like to say
a few brief words on the question of Darfur. An
international commission of inquiry on human rights
violations is preparing to go to the region. We eagerly
await its report and its recommendations on how to
best combat the culture of impunity there. We greatly
hope that the commission of inquiry can be established
as soon as possible.
Here are the focuses that, in our view, the Council
should concentrate on in order to contribute to the
restoration of justice and the rule of law in postconflict situations. The Secretariat should assist us in
that task by implementing the recommendations made
in the report of the Secretary-General without delay. I
would add that the contribution of Germany, Finland
and Jordan to the debate on the internal organization of
the Secretariat is one we feel will be very useful.
It remains for us, the Member States, to fulfil our
part of the mission, in particular by providing the
United Nations with experts that can be rapidly
mobilized, which the United Nations needs to be able
to carry out its activities in the restoration of the rule of
law and justice.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to say that we
are glad to see you chairing today’s meeting. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and for his first report on this issue.
Many countries emerging from conflict today are
faced with the heavy task of reconstruction, restoration
of the rule of law and justice and the stabilization of
public order. All of those issues are important in order
to give people new hope for peace. There is a
universally recognized need for international
mechanisms that will be democratic, harmonious and

consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. That is our common aspiration and
the general course that needs to be followed. In that
regard, today’s meeting is definitely opportune and
timely and will help us to better focus on our
objectives.
Now I would like to concentrate on the following
observations.
First, the restoration of the rule of law and justice
is both a prerequisite for the restoration of peace in
conflict-ridden societies and also a basic safeguard for
ensuring long-term peace. Without the rule of law there
can be no genuine peace. Only political stability, the
progress of the population as a whole, sustained
economic growth and peaceful development will make
it possible to ensure genuine peace and stability.
Therefore, the rule of law and justice must not be built
on fragile foundations. Experience has shown that
promoting the rule of law and justice is not merely a
legal matter, it is also closely bound up with political,
economic and social issues.
Secondly, the origins of conflicts are not always
the same, but they are often associated with poverty
and backwardness in terms of development. The end of
a conflict does not mean the advent of peace. Conflicts
jeopardize the possibilities for capacity-building in
these regions, which often face difficulties in terms of
resources, technology and qualified personnel. The
international community and, in particular, donors need
to assist these regions and actively support them. At
the same time, in granting assistance, we must ensure
that there is full respect for local customs, cultural
traditions and the local legal system. We need to
respect the right of the local population to choose and
to decide. The participation of external parties should
be limited to guidance, rather than direction.
Strengthening local capacities — and not imposing predesigned solutions — should be stressed.
Thirdly, coordination must be enhanced within
the United Nations system, in order to draw on each
other’s expertise, to provide the right level of judicial
assistance and to enhance the capacities of judicial
elements in peace operations. The Secretary-General
has presented a number of recommendations in
paragraph 65 of his report, in particular regarding the
roster of experts. These are measures that should be put
into effect as soon as possible.

21

S/PV.5052

Fourthly, restoring the rule of law is something
that should serve the purpose of securing lasting peace
and security and providing for economic and social
development. It should also serve the fundamental
long-term interests of the local population. In this
process, all parties must respect the United Nations
Charter and the universally recognized norms of
international law with regard to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country in question, and
refrain from interfering in internal disputes and
differences.
By way of conclusion, I would like to quote the
Secretary-General in his address to the General
Assembly: “Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it”
(A/59/PV.3).
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Your presence
here, as you preside over this session, Sir, proves the
importance and relevance of the theme under
consideration today by the Security Council. In fact,
the issue of justice and the rule of law is at the core of
the United Nations activities and focuses the objectives
of the international community on building a world
that is more just, equitable and peaceful.
We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement and welcome the participation this morning
of his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
The Secretary-General’s report before us
(S/2004/616) underlines the essential role played by
justice and the rule of law in the maintenance of peace
and in promoting development and long-term national
reconciliation. We fully share the principled views
expressed in the report that justice, peace and
democracy are mutually reinforcing imperatives and
that the international community should base its
approach on the assessment of specific national needs
and on national ownership of these processes.
The last decade witnessed a number of important
landmarks with regard to transitional justice and the
rule of law, particularly concerning its codification.
The African countries, through their engagement in
peacekeeping efforts and particularly through the entry
into force of the Protocol to the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Establishment of an
African Court on Human and People’s Rights, took a
huge step forward in the fight against impunity on the
continent, in applying international humanitarian law

22

and in the promotion and respect of human rights. It is
our hope that such efforts — along with additional
components of the national healing processes such as
truth and reconciliation commissions — will succeed
in
helping
post-conflict
societies
to
foster
accountability, render justice to victims, discourage
further crimes and contribute to the restoration of
peace by promoting long-term reconciliation.
Despite the significant progress so far achieved,
much remains to be done. It is our conviction that only
the establishment of sustainable democratic societies
will ensure the primacy of justice and the rule of law
on the African continent.
As a country that recently emerged from a long
period of conflict and war, we are deeply committed to
justice and to the establishment of the rule of law as
indispensable prerequisites for a sustained process of
peace and national reconciliation. Our experience has
confirmed that a piecemeal approach to the issues of
the rule of law and transitional justice does not bring
about satisfactory results. Strategies for the
implementation of an effective rule of law must stem
from the grassroots level. They must encompass
popular participation and must be comprehensive in
engaging all of the relevant social, cultural, economic
and judicial institutions.
Our experience has also confirmed that the
financing of reconstruction and peace-building
processes, including the creation of national capacities,
new security and judicial structures, as well as
renovated law enforcement capacities, constitutes a
critical threshold in long-term national reconciliation
and development processes.
In order to address the issues of justice and the
rule of law in a comprehensive and coordinated
manner, a long-term commitment by the international
community is essential, since it is a shared
responsibility to ensure justice for crimes under
international law, which are, after all, crimes against
the international community as a whole. While aware
that the proposition is not to build international
substitutes for national judicial capacities, we see
international cooperation as a fundamental prerequisite
for the effectiveness of justice and the rule of law and
for the consolidation of peace and long-term national
reconciliation.
To conclude, we again welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We endorse his recommendations

S/PV.5052

defining the way forward, contained in paragraphs 64
and 65. We stress the importance of the creation of a
roster of justice and transitional justice experts, and we
fully support the call by the Secretary-General
regarding the need to ensure a viable and sustainable
funding mechanism to provide adequate resources for
restoring the rule of law and establishing transitional
justice, supplemented by appropriate multilateral and
bilateral funding approaches.

Transitional justice is a necessary part of reestablishing
normal
social
frameworks.
The
international tribunals have been an important learning
curve in that context. We certainly hope that future
initiatives will provide more effective, and less costly,
means of accountability for crimes. And, of course, we
share the Secretary-General’s view that the
International Criminal Court offers new hope for a
permanent reduction in the phenomenon of impunity.

The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

In contrast, the rule of law is part of looking
forward and building a stable peace. That is an
essential part of reconstructing post-conflict societies.
But we should also recognize the value of upholding
and strengthening law and order in preventing conflict
and in wider peace support operations. That is a
question not only for the Security Council, but for
other parts of the United Nations system, regional
organizations, individual donors and, of course, nongovernmental organizations and civil society.

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union.
I wish to echo the welcome given by other
speakers to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/616). I certainly hope that we can use its
recommendations to give momentum to our efforts to
improve the international contribution to building
justice and the rule of law. I believe the report reflects
a concerted effort within the Secretariat to bring
together a broad spectrum of expertise to produce, for
the first time, a single, coherent strategy on justice and
the rule of law. That analysis, I think, is excellent. But,
more important, the recommendations are practical and
achievable.
We, as Security Council members, should be
actively looking for appropriate opportunities to take
forward the recommendations which apply to the
Council. In particular, I believe we need to give due
attention to the restoration of and respect for the rule of
law in the support we give to peace agreements and in
the mandate for peace support operations. There is
already much work being done in that area, and we
welcome the initiatives already under way, some of
which have been described today by other speakers, for
example the ideas from Germany, Canada and Sweden
on spreading the norms and standards of international
law. But we hope that the Secretariat can focus on
bringing these together into a complementary and
cohesive effort.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2004/616)
rightly focuses on the establishment of transitional
justice — that is to say, a framework for a society that
needs to reconcile crimes from the recent past as well
as to build an enduring framework for the future. That,
I think, is one of the most important challenges we
face.

I would like to highlight two broad ways in which
the United Nations can take forward the work on the
rule of law.
The first way is to promote international
standards. The United Nations is, critically, in a
position to take an overview of what has worked and
what has not worked in efforts to build the rule of law
in various systems around the world. It can develop
common standards in its own work and, indeed, spread
best practice.
A specific rule-of-law element may not always be
necessary in every United Nations peace support
operation. But it would certainly encourage good
practice to have in place a checklist of the main factors
necessary to build effective judicial and legal
frameworks to be taken into account in each case. The
factors to be considered in United Nations missions
could include, for example, providing advice on
international norms and laws, building frameworks and
regulations for legal institutions, opening accessible
and fair channels of appeal and providing appropriate
training and, critically, the important technical
expertise.
The United Nations itself needs to uphold those
standards too, not just in the programmes and missions
it runs, but also in the management of operations and
the actions of its staff. The responsibility to promote a
fair, free and just society lies with everyone engaged in
the process.

23

S/PV.5052

While the United Nations can take a lead in
promoting international standards, the emphasis must
be on building local frameworks, tools and
mechanisms to support justice, law and order. An
internationally imposed solution is not a durable one.
Capacity needs to be built up through the communities
and States that we aim to support. And that —
capacity-building — is the second area on which I
believe the United Nations needs to focus. Importantly,
we need to strengthen civil society’s capacity to uphold
the rule of law and to protect individual and group
access to a fair judicial system. The relevant United
Nations bodies should consider how best to support
civil society in that area through consensus-building,
outreach and legal assistance.
I want to highlight in particular the role of
women in that respect and to stress the importance of
ensuring that action to restore human rights and the
rule of law in post-conflict situations is undertaken in a
gender-sensitive way. As the Secretary-General’s
report rightly notes, in a post-conflict situation, one of
the major human rights abuses that the international
community will have to face up to is likely to be
gender- and sexual-based violence. That is an issue that
the Council will also consider in the open debate we
will hold on 28 October.
In that context, the United Kingdom was pleased
to participate recently in a conference on gender justice
held by the United Nations Development Fund for
Women in conjunction with the International Legal
Assistance Consortium. The conference produced a
range of interesting recommendations for improved
international action, which I hope all Member States
will consider carefully.
Capacity-building needs to be worked into United
Nations programmes at all stages. At the higher level,
that requires, first and foremost, the political will to
contribute resources and expertise. It also entails
structures within the Secretariat and elsewhere which
are capable both of carrying out planning and
coordination within the United Nations and of building
on the efforts of national donors, regional actors and
non-governmental organizations.
In the field, we need to make sure that there is
coherent and effective integration of justice and ruleof-law elements within United Nations missions. We

24

also need to develop our understanding of when and
how these can have the most impact. That means
developing
adequate
technical
expertise
and
monitoring mechanisms that can be implemented and
compared across various missions.
In his report, the Secretary-General made several
useful and practical recommendations which we would
encourage the Secretariat to take forward rapidly. In
particular, we would like to see implementation of the
very practical “toolbox” ideas. These include the
following.
The first idea is to convene technical-level
workshops on the rule of law and on transitional justice
experiences from around the world. We would suggest
expanding that idea to ensure that we look at how
supporting legal systems can also play a role in conflict
prevention.
The second idea is to establish arrangements for
creating and maintaining an up-to-date roster of
experts. We might consider whether, in time, such a
database could be developed into an interactive
electronic forum where experts and stakeholders could
discuss particular concepts or problems.
And the third, very important, idea is to organize
staff training programmes on the rule of law and on
transitional justice. We would envisage such training
taking a very broad approach, encompassing, for
example,
judges
and
magistrates,
judicial
administration, civil police forces, legal aid workers
and so on.
Many of today’s speakers have highlighted other
practical suggestions for taking this work forward. I
believe that, together, we now need to work up policies
which will provide real structures for societies that
currently exist in a fragile framework of law and order
or even exist in the absence of anything that could
meaningfully be called justice. It is clearly important
that we return to this subject to ensure that we are
implementing the proposals on which we have, I
believe, genuinely found broad consensus.
I would therefore propose that the Council might
return to this subject in approximately six months’ time
to assess progress and, if necessary, to give renewed

S/PV.5052

impetus to this agenda. But, for now, I would strongly
urge members of the Security Council and all those
who are participating in today’s debate to consider how
they can contribute to taking forward these
recommendations. I believe that we have a developing
consensus and that we need to take this agenda
forward.

My game plan was to have all members of the
Security Council make their statements by one o’clock,
and I must say we have accomplished that goal with
one minute to spare. Therefore, I intend, with the
concurrence of members, to suspend the meeting until
3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

25
