A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/224
11 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 100 (f)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/54/588/Add.6)]

54/224. Implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference on the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/122 of 19 December 1994 on the Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States,
Recalling also its resolutions 51/183 of 16 December 1996, 52/202 of 18 December 1997 and 53/189
of 15 December 1998,
Recognizing that small island developing States face special challenges and vulnerabilities of both an
environmental and an economic nature in their efforts to achieve sustainable development,
Recalling the Declaration1 and review document1 adopted at the twenty-second special session of the
General Assembly,
Noting the significant efforts being made at the national and regional levels and the need for them to be
supplemented by effective financial support from the international community,

1

See resolution S-22/2, annex.

00 27205

/...

A/RES/54/224
Page 2

Bearing in mind the over three hundred projects that were presented for financing within the context
of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States 2 at the meeting of representatives of donors and small island developing States held in New
York from 24 to 26 February 1999,3
1. Reiterates the significance of the effective implementation of the Declaration1 and review
document1 adopted at the twenty-second special session of the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the Declaration and review document to the various
organs of the United Nations system and the regional commissions and organizations, taking into account the
areas identified in the review document for priority action, and urges them to take the action necessary for
further implementation and effective follow-up;
3. Calls upon Governments, the regional commissions and organizations and other intergovernmental
organizations to support the efforts of the small island developing States, taking into account those areas
identified in the review document for priority action, and urges them to take the action necessary for the
further implementation of and effective follow-up to the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States;2
4. Calls upon all stakeholders, in particular local communities, non-governmental organizations and
the private sector, to take the action necessary for the further implementation of and effective follow-up to
the Programme of Action;
5. Emphasizes the need for the provision of resources for the further implementation of the
Programme of Action;
6. Urges all relevant organizations to finalize, preferably before the end of 2000, the work on the
development of a vulnerability index, in particular for the small island developing States, which would assist
in defining the vulnerability of those States and in identifying the challenges to their sustainable development,
for consideration by the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly at the appropriate time;
7. Welcomes the acknowledgement by the Committee for Development Policy that the concept of
vulnerability should be included explicitly in the identification criteria for the least developed countries,4 and
notes the ongoing discussions on the new criteria proposed by the Committee;

2

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April-6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
3

See A/S-22/4.

4

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 13 (E/1999/33),
chap. I.C.
/...

A/RES/54/224
Page 3

8. Calls upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to give substantive
consideration in its work to the Declaration and review document, including in its preparations for its tenth
session;
9. Invites the Commission on Sustainable Development to consider in its work programme, as
appropriate, matters relating to the further implementation of the Programme of Action, bearing in mind the
outcome of the twenty-second special session of the General Assembly;5
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session, under the item entitled
“Environment and sustainable development”, a sub-item entitled “Further implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States”;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-fifth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
87th plenary meeting
22 December 1999

5

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second Special Session, Supplement No. 3
(A/S-22/9/Rev.1).
