S/PRST/2013/17

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 November 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7058th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 November 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“After 19 months of a rebellion which has exacerbated the humanitarian
strife in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), the Security
Council welcomes the announcement by the M23 to put an end to its rebellion,
the Government of DRC’s acceptance of this announcement and the cessation
of hostilities between the DRC and the M23. The Security Council condemns
the violence caused by this rebellion, which has resulted in a significant loss of
civilian life, as well as of MONUSCO peacekeepers’ lives, and the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of civilians.
“The Security Council calls for the swift conclusion and implementation
of a final, comprehensive and agreed outcome, in line with the Kampala talks,
that provides for the disarmament and demobilization of the M23 and
accountability for human rights abusers. The Council commends the efforts of
President Museveni and Defence Minister Kiyonga in facilitating the
conclusion of these talks. The Security Council calls for the immediate and
permanent disarmament and demobilization of the M23 combatants, with the
assistance of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), in accordance with
resolution 2098 (2013).
“The Security Council reaffirms its strongest support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) and MONUSCO in the
implementation of resolution 2098 (2013) and urges the continuation of their
efforts. The Security Council welcomes the measures taken by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, the SRSG and MONUSCO in support of a
political solution, in line with a comprehensive strategy for durable peace and
security, and commends the active steps taken by MONUSCO to implement
fully its mandate, in particular the protection of civilians. The Security Council
welcomes the initial steps taken by MONUSCO in its support and lead
coordination role of Security Sector Reform (SSR) in the DRC and urges the
continuation of these efforts. The Security Council acknowledges the
commitment of all troop-contributing countries to MONUSCO to
implementing the full range of the mission’s responsibilities in line with
resolution 2098 (2013).
13-56466 (E) 141113

*1356466*

S/PRST/2013/17

“The Security Council recognizes the significant sacrifices made by
MONUSCO and the troop-contributing countries and expresses appreciation
for their efforts to improve peace and stability in eastern DRC. The Security
Council expresses condolences to the families of the peacekeepers killed in
action while protecting the people of eastern DRC. The Security Council
emphasizes that any effort to undermine MONUSCO’s ability to implement its
mandate will not be tolerated and that those responsible for threats or attacks
against peacekeepers must be held accountable.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern regarding the sustained
regional threat posed by the Forces Démocratiques de Libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), a group under UN sanctions whose leaders and members include
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda and have continued to promote
and commit ethnically based and other killings in Rwanda and the DRC, and
stresses the importance of permanently addressing this threat. The Security
Council stresses the importance of neutralizing the FDLR and all armed
groups, including the ADF, the LRA and various Mayi Mayi groups, in line
with resolution 2098 (2013).
“The Security Council reiterates its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the DRC as well as
of all countries of the region. The Security Council stresses that the
Government of DRC bears primary responsibility for security, protection of
civilians, national reconciliation, peacebuilding and development in the
country. It underlines that the recent achievements of the FARDC in defeating
M23 on the ground must encourage the Government of DRC to sustain efforts
to neutralize FDLR and other armed groups. In that regard, the Security
Council further welcomes DRC President Joseph Kabila’s public reaffirmation
on 30 October that his Government intends to neutralize the FDLR and
stresses the importance of rapid follow through.
“The Security Council further welcomes the 4 November statement by
SRSG Kobler noting MONUSCO’s intention not to allow FDLR and other
armed groups, to take advantage of the changing security dynamics on the
ground and its commitment to act decisively on all attempts to exploit the
situation.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the continuing violence and
abuses of human rights by all armed groups, including summary executions,
sexual and gender-based violence and large-scale recruitment and use of
children, demands that all armed groups cease immediately all forms of
violence and destabilizing activities and that their members immediately and
permanently disband, lay down their arms and demobilize children from their
ranks, and reiterates that those responsible for human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law will be held accountable and
should not be eligible for integration into the FARDC or other elements of
state security forces.
“The Security Council calls upon the Government of DRC to remain
fully committed to establishing a professional, accountable and sustainable
national army, including a Rapid Reaction Force, in accordance with its
commitment to deepen SSR. The Security Council takes note of the statement
of the President of the DRC, Joseph Kabila, of 23 October 2013 in which he

2/4

13-56466

S/PRST/2013/17

indicated that army reform will constitute his top priority, and announced the
pursuit of the electoral process, and his commitment to ensure that the DRC
judicial system will effectively address the cycle of impunity. The Security
Council urges the Government of the DRC to finalize the development of a
comprehensive Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) and
Demobilization, Repatriation, Reintegration and Resettlement (DDRRR) plan.
The Security Council calls on the Government of DRC to consolidate state
authority, make progress on decentralization, rule of law, and further the
agenda of reconciliation, tolerance, and democratization, in line with the PSC
framework and resolution 2098 (2013).
“The Security Council recalls that there should be no impunity for any of
those responsible for human rights abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law in the DRC and the region, and, in this regard, urges the
DRC, all countries of the region and other concerned UN Member States to
bring perpetrators to justice.
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions on women, peace and
security, and reiterates that all actors must strengthen their efforts to combat
impunity for conflict-related sexual violence, to provide all necessary services
to survivors, and to ensure the equal and full inclusion of women at all stages
of conflict resolution, reconstruction and the promotion of peace including
through taking account of the call of the 11 July 2013 Bujumbura Declaration
for ensuring that benchmarks, indicators and follow-up measures of the plan of
implementation for the PSC Framework are gender-sensitive. The Security
Council urges the Government of DRC to expedite the investigation of the
November 2012 mass rapes committed by elements of the FARDC in Minova
and bring the perpetrators to justice.
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions and presidential statements
on children and armed conflict and reiterates that all parties in the DRC must
halt and prevent the recruitment and use of children, protect and consider as
victims those children who have been released or otherwise separated from
armed forces and armed groups, and pay particular attention to the protection,
release and reintegration of all children associated with armed forces and
groups. The Security Council urges the Government of the DRC to continue
implementing the action plan to prevent and end the recruitment and use of
children and sexual violence against children signed on 4 October 2012.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about the ongoing
humanitarian crisis, including the 2.7 million internally displaced people and
the 6.4 million people in need of food assistance and emergency agricultural
aid, and calls upon all parties to allow safe and unhindered access for the
timely and full delivery of humanitarian aid to all civilians in urgent need of
assistance, in accordance with relevant provisions on international law,
including international humanitarian law and the United Nations guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council further expresses
concern with the over 450,000 refugees who have fled from the DRC and calls
upon the DRC and all States in the region to work towards the peaceful
environment conducive to the eventual voluntary return and reintegration of
refugees to the DRC, with the support, as appropriate, of the UNHCR. The
Security Council commends in this regard the support provided by

13-56466

3/4

S/PRST/2013/17

neighbouring countries to refugees from the DRC. The Security Council
encourages the Rwandan Government, United Nations and international
organizations to work together to urgently address the situation of former M23
combatants interned in Eastern Rwanda since March 2013.
“The Security Council notes with concern the regional security
implications of the conflict in eastern DRC and supports in this regard regional
confidence-building measures, including the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism (EJVM), and further calls for the completion of its investigations
on cross-border incidents. The Security Council welcomes the decision of the
ICGLR to grant permanent representation of MONUSCO in the EJVM. The
Security Council expresses concern at shells landing in Rwanda, which
resulted in civilian loss of life, urges the swift conclusion of the EJVM
investigations into this cross-border shelling, commends the restraint shown so
far by Rwanda and urges its continuation. The Security Council further urges
restraint by all other parties.
“The Security Council stresses the need to address sustainably the root
causes of the conflict in eastern DRC and reiterates its support for the
implementation of the commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
region, which is essential to achieving lasting peace and security in the Great
Lakes region. The Security Council calls upon all signatories to fulfil
promptly, fully and in good faith their respective commitments under the PSC
Framework. The Security Council welcomes the 4 November joint Summit of
the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the
Southern-African Development Community (SADC) in Pretoria. The Security
Council commends the engagement of Special Envoy Mary Robinson and
encourages her, in coordination with and with appropriate support from the
SRSG for the DRC, to continue to lead, coordinate and assess the
implementation of national and regional commitments under the PSC
Framework.
“The Security Council encourages the United Nations, the African Union,
the ICGLR, SADC and other relevant international and regional organizations
to continue to work together, with the sustained engagement and support of the
international community, towards the implementation of the PSC Framework,
and the establishment of a broader dialogue among key parties that addresses
the deeper drivers of conflict in eastern Congo.”

4/4

13-56466
