10

General AHembly-Eleventh S-ion

such changes in these allocations as may be necessary
to provide as far as possible for the full utilization
of contributions to the Expanded Programme, provided that these changes shall not in the aggregate
exceed 3 per cent of the total amount allocated to the
organizations participating in the Expartded Programme.
612th plenary meeting,
7 December 1956.

1020 (XI). Report of the Agent General of the
United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency

The General Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 410 (V) of
1 December 1950, 701 (VII) of 11 March 1953, 725
(VIII) of 7 December 1953, 828 (IX) of 14 December
1954 and 920 (X) of 25 October 1955,
Taking note of the report of the Agent General of
the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency1
on the work of the Agency for the period 1 J uly 1955
to 30 June 1956, and of the comments thereon by the
United Nations Commission for the Unification and
Rehabilitation of Korea, 2
Recognizing the particular importance of the
Agency's programme for the relief and rehabilitation
of the Republic of Korea,
Considering the recommendation contained in Economie and Social Council resolution 611 (XXI) of 24
April 1956, relating to submission to the Council of
the reports of the Agent General,
1. Commends the Agent General of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency for the excellent
progress made by the Agency in pursuing its mission of
assisting the Korean people to relieve the sufferings
and to repair the devastation caused by aggression;
2. Commends the Agent General for the progress
he has made in carrying out the desire expressed by
the General Assembly that the approved programmes
of the Agency be expeditiously implemented to the
maximum extent possible within available funds;
3. Expresses appreciation for the valuable and continuing assistance given to the Agency by United
Nations specialized agencies and by voluntary nongovernmental organizations;
4. Decides to amend resolution 410 A (V) of 1
December 1950 as follows:
(a) From paragraph 5 (d) delete the words "and
to the Economie and Social Council" ;
( b) Delete paragraph 13 and renumber the subsequent paragraphs accordingly.
612th plenary meeting,
7 December 1956.
1021 (XI). Currency utilization
The General Assembly,
Having considered the problem of currency utilization,
Recalling that, according to Economie and Social
Council resolution 623 B III (XXII) of 9 August
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Supplement No. 16 (A/3195).
• Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, document A/33'12.

1956, the Technical Assistance Committee and the
Council will consider this problem during the twentyfourth session of the Council,
Decides to refer the records of the debate on this
subject during the eleventh session of the General
Assembly to the Economie and Social Council and to
the Technical Assistance Committee for that purpose.

632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.
1022 (XI). Working Capital and Reserve Fund
of the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance

The General Assembly,
H aving considered the part of the report of the
Economie and Social Council relating to the W orking
Capital and Reserve Fund of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, 8
1. Approves the recommendation of the Economie
and Social Council in resolution 623 B II (XXII) of
9 August 1956 that the regulations concerning the
Working Capital and Reserve Fund be amended as set
forth in the annex to the present resolution ;
2. Decides to amend accordingly section B of General Assembly resolution 831 (IX) of 26 November
1954.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.
ANNEX
Amendments to Economie and Social Council resolutions
521 A (XVII) of 5 April 1954 and 542 B II (XVIII) of
29 July 1954, as approved by the Council in resolution 623 B
II (XXII) of 9 August 1956
A. Replace paragraphs 5 (a), (b) and (c) of resolution
521 A (XVII) by the following text:
" (a) The Working Capital and Reserve Fund shall be
maintained as a continuing operating reserve for the following purposes :
"(i) To make advances against firm pledges of contributions to finance the technical assistance programme as approved by the Technical Assistance Committee; sums so
advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts from contributions are a vailable for the purpose; provided that
advances against pledges shall be reviewed periodically by
the Technical Assistance Committee to determine whether
the advances shall co-ntinue or be repaid from othe~
resources of the programme;
"(ii) Ta improve and facilitate currency management;
"(iii) Ta make · advances to participating ol'gllnizations
to provide working balances in their bank accounts ;
"(iv) To make advances to finance commitments which
may be duly authorized by the Executive Chairman of the
Technical Assistance Board under authority given to him
to meet urgent needs which may arise during the implementation of the annual programme; provided that the
repayment of such advances shall constitute a priority charge
against the resources of the following year;
" ( v) To provide funds to cover forward contractual
commitments and ta meet residual liquidating liabilities;
each participating organization shall limit its forward contractual commitments and residual liquidating liabilities to
its pro rata share of the Working Capital and Reserve Fund,
based on the allocations authorized for the current year;
"(vi) For such other purposes as may be approved by
the Technical Assistance Committee from time ta time;
'Ibid., Eleventh Session, Supp/ement No. 3 (A/3154), chapter III, section VI, para. 239.

Il

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

----------------

"(b) The size of the Working Capital and Reserve Fund
shall be determined from time to time by the Technical
Assistance Committee ;
"(c) The Technical Assistance Board shall report annually to the Technical Assistance Committee on the
advances -outstanding at the end of the period."
B. Replace paragraphs 1 (b) (v) and (vii) of resolution
542 B II (XVIII) by the following text:
"(v) Subject to the confirmation of the General Assembly,
the Technical Assistance Committee shall authorize the
allocation of funds to each of the participating organizations in proportion to their share in the approved over-all
programme. These funds shall be drawn from the net
financial resources, after setting aside the expenses of the
secretariat of the Technical Assistance Board and such
amounts as may be required to reimburse the Working
Capital and Reserve Fund for withdrawals during the preceding year to finance obligations for urgent needs authorized
by the Executive Chairman of the Technical Assistance
Board under paragraph ( vii) below;
" ( vîi) Any extraordinary requests submitted by a Government for modification of the programme received subsequent to the approval of the annual programme by the
Technical Assistance Committee may be approved by the
Technical Assistance Board and reported to the Technical
Assistance Committee at its· next meeting. Should it not be
possible to effect necessary increases and decreases within the
programme of the country concerned, the Executive Chairman
of the Technical Assistance Board may authorize participating organizations to enter into commitments to meet
urgent needs within limits fixed annually by the Technical
Assistance Committee but not to exceed 5 per cent of the
estimated resources for the year. The Technical Assistance
Board shall report to the Technical Assistance Committee
annually, beginning with the session in November 1957 ail
allocations made under this provision, together with' the
circumstances relating thereto. The Technical Assistance
Committee shall review those allocaüons, and make such
recommendations as it deems appropriate."

1023 (XI). lmplementation and expansion of
the programmes of technical assistance

The General Assembly,
Havinq considered chapter III B of the report of the
Economie and Social Council,4 regarding the regular
United Nations programme of technical assistance and
the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance,
Mindful that, under the regular programme of tech?ical assistance, valuabl~ services are being rendered
m the fields of economtc development, social welfare
and public administration,
Convinced that a steady expansion of the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance would contribute
substantially to continuing and new projects in assistance for economic and social development in the
under-developed countries,
N oting with satisfaction the increasing moral and
material support of the Expanded Programme as expressed in the discussions at the eleventh session of the
General Assemblv and as shown in the contributions for
1956 and 1957,
1. Takes note of chapter III B of the report of the
Economie and Social Council ;
2. Invites Governments to give the fullest support
to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance,
~hen they consider their pledges for the coming years,
m order to ensure its continued growth.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.
'Ibid., Supplement No. 3 (A/3154).

1024 (XI). Technical assistance in public administration

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that technical assistance in public administration is one of the most effective means of
accelerating the economic and social progress of the
less developed countries,
Sharing the views expressed by the Secretary-General on this subject in his statement of 25 October
1956, 5
Endorses the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral for increased activity in the field of public
administration under the regular United Nations programme of technical assistance.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.
1025 (XI). International co-operation in the
establishment of national food reserves

The General Assembly,
Having in mind the desirability of achieving the
objectives set forth in its resolution 827 (IX) of 14
December 1954,
Considering that one of these objectives is the
possible use of food reserves for relieving famine and
other emergency situations,
Considering further that many countries may need
to establish or increase national reserves for this purpose, and recognizing that many countries which are
in the early stages of economic development are faced
with special difficulties in establishing a:dequate reserves, such as the fact that levels of consumption in
the Jess developed countries are generally relatively
low,
N oting that Economie and Social Council resolution
621 (XXII) of 6 August 1956 requests the SecretaryGeneral, in consultation with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, to report to the
Council at its twenty-fourth session, inter alia, on the
feasibility, and if feasible the manner, of using food
reserves for meeting unforeseeable food shortages,
N oting furth.er that the Food and Agriculture Organization is engaged at the present time in a special
study of the question of the establishment of national
reserves against emergencies,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing his
report pursuant to Economie and Social Council resolution 621 (XXII) of 6 August 1956, to include, on
the basis of his consultations with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, an
~nalysis of the possibilities and desirability of promotmg, by means of consultations between importing and
exporting Member States, the use of surplus foodstuffs
in building up national reserves to be used in accordance
with internationally agreed principles:
(a) To meet emergency situations ;
( b) To prevent excessive price increases arising as
a result of a failure in local food supplies ;
( c) To prevent excessive price increases resulting
from increased demand due to economic development
"Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/C.2/189.
