General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

160

18. Invites Member States to continue to co-operate
with the Secretary-General as part of the Programme for the
Decade and the preparations for the Conference;
19. Invites the appropriate organs and bodies of the
United Nations system to contribute to the preparations for
the Conference;
20. Expresses its satisfaction to the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. the Special Committee against Apartheid, the United Nations Council for Namibia, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People and the Commission on Human Rights,
through its Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts on Southern
Africa, for their contribution to the implementation of the
Programme for the Decade and invites them to include in
their activities the preparations for the Conference;
21. Decides to consider at its thirty-seventh session the
status of preparations for the Second World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
22. Decides to consider at its thirty-seventh session, as
a matter of high priority, the item entitled "Implementation
of the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination''.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/9.

Importance of the universal realization of the
right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November
1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070 (XXVIII)
of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974.
3382 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 33/24 of 29 November
1978, 34/44 of 23 November 1979 and 35/35 of 14 November 1980, and Security Council resolutions 418 (1977)
of 4 November 1977 and 437 (1978) of JO October 1978,
Recalling also its resolutions 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, 2708 (XXV)
of 14December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973
and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 concerning the use
and recruitment of mercenaries against national liberation
movements and sovereign States,
Recalling further its relevant resolutions on the question
of Palestine, in particular resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 34/65 A to D of 29 November and 12 December 1979 and 35/ 13 A to F of 3
November 1980,
Recalling also the eighth emergency special session of
the General Assembly, on the question of Namibia, and its
resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 ,
Recalling the resolutions on Namibia adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirty-seventh ordinary session, held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 June 1981, particularly resolutions CM/Res. 855
(XXXVII) and CM/Res.865 (XXXVIl), 4
Deeply concerned at the continued terrorist acts of aggression committed by the racist Pretoria regime against the
peoples of Angola, Mozambique, Zambia and other neighbouring States,
• See A/36/534, annex I.

Taking note of the Political Declaration adopted by the
First Conference of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States, held at Cairo from 7 to ,9 March 1977, 5
Considering that the denial of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, sovereignty,
independence and return to Palestine and the repeated acts
of aggression by Israel against the peoples of the region
constitute a serious threat to international peace -and security,
Reaffirming its faith in the importance of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December I960,
Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the speedy granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples as imperatives for the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Reaffirming that "bantustanization" is incompatible with
genuine independence, national unity and sovereignty and
has the effect of perpetuating the powerof the white minority
and the racist system of apartheid in South Africa,
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to comply
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise
of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial
and alien domination,
Reaffirming also that the system of apartheid imposed
on the South African people constitutes an inadmissible
violation of the rights of that people and a constant threat
to international peace and security,
Welcoming the independence of Belize,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity of
the Comoros,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the continued
violations of the human rights of the peoples still under
colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation,
I. Calls upon all States to implement fully and faithfully
the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise
of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial
and alien domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
for independence, territorial integrity, national unity and
liberation from colonial and foreign domination and foreign
occupation by all available means, including armed struggle;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the Namibian people, of the Palestinian people and of all peoples under alien
and colonial domination to self-determination, national independence, territorial integrity. national unity and sovereignty without external interference;
4. Takes note with satisfaction of resolution AHG/
Res.103 (XVIII) adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
eighteenth ordinary session, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27
June I 981, 6 and the decision of its Implementation Committee to organize and conduct a general and free referendum
on self-determination in Western Sahara;
5. Takes note of the contacts made by the Government
of the Comoros and the Government of France in the search
for a just solution to the integration of the Comorian island
of Mayotte into the Comoros in accordance with the resolutions of the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations on this question:
' A/32/61, annex I.
See A/36/534. annex II.

0

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Condemns the policy of "bantustanization" and reiterates its support for the oppressed people of South Africa
in their just and legitimate struggle against the racist minority regime of Pretoria;
7. Further condemns South Africa for its increased
oppression of the Namibian people, for the massive militarization of Namibia and for its armed attacks on the frontline States with the aim of destabilizing their Governments;
8. Also condemns strongly the recent invasion and occupation of part of the territory of Angola by troops of the
racist Pretoria regime;
9. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign States
constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries themselves are criminals, and calls upon the Governments of all
countries to enact legislation declaring the recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their territories, and
the transit of mercenaries through their territories, to be
punishable offences, and prohibiting their nationals from
serving as mercenaries, and to report on such legislation to
the Secretary-General;
10. Strongly condemns the continued violations 9f the
human rights of the peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of the
illegal occupation of Namibia, and South Africa's attempts
to dismember its territory, the perpetuation of the racist
minority regime in southern Africa and the denial to the
Palestinian people of their inalienable national rights;
11. Also condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries
whose political, economic, military, nuclear, strategic, cultural and sporting relations with the racist minority regime
in South Africa encourage that regime to persist in its supression of the aspirations of peoples for self-determination and
independence;
12. Again demands the immediate application of the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa, imposed
under Security Council resolution 418 (1977), by all countries, particularly by those countries that maintain military
and nuclear co-operation with the racist Pretoria regime and
continue to supply related materiel to that regime;
13. Takes note with satisfaction of the Paris Declaration
on Sanctions against South Africa, the Special Declaration
on Namibia and the reports of the technical and political
committees adopted by the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris from 20 to 27
May 1981; 7
14. Demands the immediate implementation of General
Assembly resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981 , on
Namibia;
15. Further calls for a maximization of all forms of
assistance given by all States, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to the
victims of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid
through their national liberation movements recognized by
the Organization of African Unity;
16. Strongly condemns all Governments which do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence
of all peoples still under colonial and foreign domination
and alien subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa and the
Palestinian people;
17. Strongly condemns the ever-increasing massacres
of innocent and defenceless people, including women and
children, by the racist minority Pretoria regime in its desperate attempt to thwart the legitimate demands of the
people;
7

A/CONF.107/8, sect. X and annexes X and XI

161

18. Strongly condemns the expansionist act1v1t1es of
Israel in the Middle East and the continuous bombing of
Palestinian civilians, which constitute a serious obstacle to
the realization of the self-determination and independence
of the Palestinian people;
19. Strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon and the continuous bombardment and destruction
of its cities and villages, and all acts that constitute a violation of its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, and the security of its people, and hinder the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978)
of 19 March 1978;
20. Urges all States, competent organizations of the
United Nations system, specialized agencies and other international organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian people through its representative, the Palestine
Liberation Organization, in its struggle to restore its right
to self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
21 . Demands the immediate and unconditional release
of all persons detained or imprisoned as a result of their
struggle for self-determination and independence, full respect for their fundamental individual rights and the observance of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 8 under which no one shall be subjected to torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
22. Demands the immediate release of children detained
in Namibian and South African prisons;
23. Reiterates its appreciation of the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and foreign
rule continue to receive from Governments, United Nations
agencies and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for
a maximization of this assistance;
24. Urges all States, specialized agencies and competent organizations of the United Nations system to do their
utmost to ensure the full implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support peoples
under colonial, foreign and racist domination in their just
struggle for self-determination and independence;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum
publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the widest possible
publicity to the struggle being waged by oppressed peoples
for the realization of their self-determination and national
independence;
26. Decides to consider this item again at its thirtyseventh session on the basis of the reports that Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations have been requested to submit
concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial territories and peoples.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/10.

Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights, of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
International Covenants on Human Rights,'1 as well as in
'Resolution 217 A (Ill)
Resolution 2200 A ( XXI). annex

0
