S/PV.9011

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9011th meeting

Tuesday, 5 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30935 (E)
*2230935*

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Before we adopt the agenda, I would like to
protest the way in which the newly inaugurated British
presidency dealt with our two requests to convene
a Security Council meeting in connection with the
horrific provocation of the Ukrainian radicals in the
city of Bucha.
On Sunday, 3 April, we first requested that a
meeting be held on Monday, 4 April, at 3 p.m. before
requesting an emergency meeting at 12 p.m. on 4 April,
after our first request was refused. You, Madam,
considered it appropriate to blatantly violate the
Council’s rules of procedure and, for the second time,
issue an authoritarian decision — without coordinating
with anyone else — that it would be better to discuss
this topic today. This outrageous situation is outlined in
the letter addressed to you, Madam, that we circulated
yesterday as an official Council document.
I would like to ask: On what grounds do you
consider it acceptable to act in such an outrageous way,
in contravention of all existing norms and rules? Do
you not know that, in cases where you do not agree
with our proposal, you should convene a meeting and
put forward the issue of the advisability of holding
that meeting to a vote? Our presidency, during which
we did not refuse to convene a single one of the six
meetings on Ukraine, should have served as an example
in that regard.

05/04/2022

his letter on Sunday, and it is the responsibility and
obligation of the presidency to schedule a meeting.
He specifically requested a meeting for a time on
Monday. The presidency’s proposal was to schedule
the meeting either alongside the meeting today — well
within the 48-hour limit that is the convention of the
Security Council — or to hold the meetings sequentially,
one after the other.
I understand that the Russian Federation turned
down both proposals, but I wish to be clear that we
did not reject the request for a meeting. The deferral
proposed was less than 24 hours and, to be clear, we
share the view that this is an urgent situation, and we
have, as I say, offered the Russian Federation either a
separate meeting today or to combine it with this one. So
as far as the presidency is concerned, we did everything
in line with the provisional rules of procedure and with
precedent. We have received no other complaints from
Council members on the subject.
I call on the representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have factual evidence that this was no
less than 24 hours before the meeting that we requested.
That is confirmed in documents; if anyone is interested,
we could provide proof. But I want to express the hope
that what you said today, Madam President, means that
you will not in future refuse requests made by States
members of the Security Council to hold meetings.
The President: The presidency will not refuse to
host meetings in future. I hope that that now closes
that point and we can proceed with the adoption of
the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.

We therefore demand an explanation and a
guarantee that, in the future, you will not challenge
the right of members of the Security Council to
request meetings, as enshrined in rule 2 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure:

Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)

(spoke in English)

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

“The President shall call a meeting of the
Security Council at the request of any member of
the Security Council.”
The President: If I could respond to the points
made by the representative of the Russian Federation,
we did not reject his request for a meeting. We received
2/31

The President: I should like to start by taking this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Her Excellency Mrs. Lana Zaki Nusseibeh, Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates, for her
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of March. I am sure that I speak for all of us
in expressing our deep appreciation to Ambassador
22-30935

Ukraine

05/04/2022

Nusseibeh and her team for the skilful conduct of the
Council’s business last month.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the participation
of His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President
of Ukraine. I would just add that, as per the usual
precedent, the Permanent Representative of Ukraine
will also join the meeting in case of any technical issues.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, to whom I
now give the floor.
The Secretary-General: The war in Ukraine is
one of the greatest challenges ever to the international
order and the global peace architecture, founded on the
Charter of the United Nations, because of its nature,
intensity and consequences. We are dealing with the
full-fledged invasion, on several fronts, of one State
Member of the United Nations, Ukraine, by another,
the Russian Federation — a permanent member of the
Security Council — in violation of the Charter and with
several aims, including redrawing the internationally
recognized borders between the two countries.
The war has led to a senseless loss of life, massive
devastation in urban centres and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. I will never forget the horrifying
images of civilians killed in Bucha, and I immediately
called for an independent investigation to guarantee
effective accountability. I am also deeply shocked by the
personal testimony of rapes and sexual violence that is
now emerging. The United Nations High Commissioner

S/PV.9011

for Human Rights has spoken of possible war crimes,
grave breaches of international humanitarian law and
serious violations of international human rights law.
The Russian offensive has also led to the
displacement of more than 10 million people in just one
month — the fastest forced population movement since
the Second World War.
Far beyond Ukraine’s borders, the war has led to
massive increases in the prices of food, energy and
fertilizers, because Russia and Ukraine are linchpins
of those markets. It has disrupted supply chains and
increased the cost of transportation, putting even more
pressure on the developing world. Many developing
countries were already on the verge of debt collapse
owing to the impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and a lack of adequate liquidity and debt
relief, stemming ultimately from the unfair nature of
our global economic and financial system.
For all those reasons, it is more urgent by the day
to silence the guns. That is why I asked the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Martin Griffiths, to travel to
Russia and Ukraine to press for an urgent humanitarian
ceasefire. Under-Secretary-General Griffiths will
update the Council on the humanitarian situation and
the results of his contacts so far. Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo will also brief the Council on the
political and human rights dimensions.
But as Secretary-General of the United Nations, it is
my duty to call the attention of the Council to the serious
damage being done to the global economy, particularly
to vulnerable people and developing countries.
Our analysis indicates that 74 developing countries,
with a total population of 1.2 billion people, are
particularly vulnerable to spiking food, energy and
fertilizer costs. Debt obligations take up some 16 per
cent of developing countries’ export earnings. In small
island developing States, the figure is 34 per cent and
rising because of increased interest rates and the need
to pay for expensive imports.
In the past month alone, wheat prices have
increased by 22 per cent, maize by 21 per cent and
barley by 31 per cent. Brent oil prices on 1 April were
more than 60 per cent higher than at the same time last
year. A series of events led to that, not only the present
situation. Natural gas and fertilizer prices more than
doubled over the same period. We are already seeing
some countries move from vulnerability into crisis and

22-309353/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

signs of serious social unrest. The flames of conflict are
fuelled by inequality, deprivation and underfunding.
With all the warning signals flashing red, we have a
duty to act.
The Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy
and Finance, which I set up last month, has formulated
some initial recommendations for the consideration
of Member States, international financial institutions
and others. On food, we are urging all countries to
keep markets open, resist unjustified and unnecessary
export restrictions and make reserves available to
countries at risk of hunger and famine. This is not the
time for protectionism. Humanitarian appeals must
be fully funded. People caught up in crisis around the
world cannot pay the price for this war. On energy, the
use of strategic stockpiles and additional reserves could
help to ease this energy crisis in the short term. But the
only medium- and long-term solution is to accelerate
the deployment of renewable energy, which is not
impacted by market fluctuations. That will allow for the
progressive phaseout of coal and all other fossil fuels,
and renewables are already cheaper in most cases.
On finance, international financial institutions
must go into emergency mode. We need urgent
action by the Group of 20 and international financial
institutions to increase liquidity and fiscal space so that
Governments can provide safety nets for the poorest
and most vulnerable. The reform I have been calling for
of the global financial system is long overdue. All those
actions are closely linked with the prevention agenda
and with building and sustaining peace.
The war in Ukraine must stop now. We need serious
negotiations for peace, based on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council is charged with maintaining
peace and doing so in solidarity. I deeply regret the
divisions that have prevented the Security Council from
acting not only on Ukraine, but on other threats to peace
and security around the world. I urge the Council to do
everything in its power to end the war and to mitigate
its impact, both on the suffering people of Ukraine and
on vulnerable people and developing countries around
the world.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
4/31

05/04/2022

Ms. DiCarlo: Since I last briefed the Security
Council on 17 March (see S/PV.8998), the security
situation in Ukraine has seriously deteriorated. The
number of Ukrainian civilians killed has more than
doubled. Ukrainian cities continue to be mercilessly
pounded, often indiscriminately, by heavy artillery
and aerial bombardments. Hundreds of thousands of
people, including children, the elderly and the disabled,
remain trapped in encircled areas under nightmarish
conditions. The devastation wrought on Mariupol and
other Ukrainian cities is one of the shameful hallmarks
of this senseless war.
The horror deepened this past weekend, as shocking
images emerged of dead civilians, some with hands
bound, lying in the streets of Bucha, the town near Kyiv
formerly held by Russian forces. Many bodies were also
found in a mass grave in the same locality. Reports by
non-governmental organizations and media also allege
summary executions of civilians, rape and looting in
the Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Kyiv regions.
Away from the fighting, diplomatic efforts to end
the war, including direct talks between Ukrainian and
Russian representatives, have continued. We commend
the Government of Turkey for hosting those discussions,
as well as the efforts of many others engaging with Russia
and Ukraine to help bring about peace. We welcome the
willingness of the sides to continue engaging to reach
a mutual understanding. That requires good faith and
earnest efforts, and progress in the negotiations should
be translated quickly into action on the ground.
While there has been a reported reduction of
Russian troops and attacks around Kyiv and Chernihiv,
such moves should not be merely tactical, repositioning
forces for renewed attacks on Ukrainian cities and
towns elsewhere. The General Assembly has twice
called for Russian forces to withdraw entirely from
Ukrainian territory and cease all military operations.
We also take note of the reported withdrawal of
Russian forces from around the Chornobyl nuclear site.
The International Atomic Energy Agency reports that
this development will hopefully allow it to conduct an
assistance-and-support mission to provide technical
advice and to deliver equipment, where necessary, as
soon as possible. All nuclear sites in Ukraine must be
fully protected and secured. Military operations in or
around those locations must be avoided.
The numbers tell a tragic, if yet incomplete, story.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), at least
1,480 civilians were killed and at least 2,195 injured
between 24 February and 4 April. OHCHR believes
that the actual figures are considerably higher.
We are gravely concerned by the persistent use
of explosive weapons with a wide impact area in or
near populated areas. Such weapons are causing most
civilian casualties, as well as massive destruction of
civilian infrastructure, including residential buildings,
hospitals, schools, water stations and electricity systems.
OHCHR has received credible allegations that Russian
forces have used cluster munitions in populated areas at
least 24 times. Allegations that Ukrainian forces have
used such weapons are also being investigated.
As noted by the High Commissioner, indiscriminate
attacks are prohibited under international humanitarian
law and may amount to war crimes. The massive
destruction of civilian objects and the high number
of civilian casualties strongly indicate that the
fundamental principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution have not been sufficiently adhered to.
In besieged cities, a significant increase in
mortality rates among civilians can also be attributed
to the disruption of medical care and basic services.
People with disabilities and the elderly are particularly
vulnerable. As of 4 April, the World Health
Organization had reported a total of 85 attacks on
health-care facilities, resulting in at least 72 fatalities
and 43 injuries.
We are seriously concerned about reports of cases
of arbitrary arrests and enforced disappearances of
persons who have been vocal against the Russian
invasion. As of 30 March, OHCHR had documented the
arbitrary detention and possible enforced disappearance
of 22 journalists and civil society members in the Kyiv,
Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhya regions. In regions
under Russian control, 24 local officials have also been
detained, 13 of whom have been subsequently released.
We call for the immediate release of all individuals who
have been arbitrarily detained, including journalists,
local officials, civil society activists and others.
Also as of 30 March, OHCHR had recorded seven
journalists and media workers killed since hostilities
began. Another 15 have come under armed attack, nine
of whom were injured.
Allegations of conflict-related sexual violence
perpetrated by Russian forces have also emerged. Those

S/PV.9011

include gang rape and rapes in front of children. There
are also claims of sexual violence by Ukrainian forces
and civil defence militias. The United Nations Human
Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine continues to
seek to verify all those allegations.
We are also concerned about disturbing videos
depicting the abuse of prisoners of war on both sides.
All prisoners of war must be treated with dignity
and full respect for their rights, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
The many credible allegations of serious violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, from the areas recently retaken from
Russian forces, must not go unanswered. We support
efforts to examine those allegations and to gather
evidence. Ensuring accountability and justice for
acts committed during the war will not be easy, but it
is essential.
We are heartened by the generosity of neighbouring
countries that have accepted millions of refugees and
by the solidarity of the Ukrainian people, who are
hosting their displaced compatriots. With more than
10 million people displaced, either within Ukraine
or abroad as refugees — roughly one-quarter of the
population — the United Nations is gravely concerned
about the heightened risk of human trafficking. Indeed,
suspected and verified cases of human trafficking are
surfacing in the surrounding countries, according to
the International Organization for Migration.
This war is devastating Ukraine now, but it also
threatens its future. Early assessment projections by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
suggest that, if the war continues through 2022, Ukraine
faces the prospect of seeing 18 years of socioeconomic
progress lost. That would set the country and the region
back decades and leave deep, long-term social and
economic fissures.
United Nations agencies, including UNDP,
are working to help preserve Ukraine’s hard-won
development gains. That involves supporting the
Government to sustain essential governance structures
and basic services, including emergency measures to
sustain livelihoods, such as cash-based assistance.
The war in Ukraine has damaged Europe’s
security architecture. Its economic repercussions are
already evident far from the battlefield. The longer
the war continues, the greater is the risk that it will

22-309355/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

further weaken the global institutions and mechanisms
dedicated to preserving peace and security.
The war was started by choice. There is no
inevitability to it or to the suffering it is causing. The
United Nations is ready to do everything within its
means to help bring an end to it.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: As members just heard from the
Secretary-General and from Under Secretary-General
DiCarlo, Ukrainian civilians are paying far too high
a price for this war. I want to speak briefly about
humanitarian needs and what we are doing to meet
them, before I then refer to my recent travels.
As we have heard, at least 1,430 people have
been killed in the past six weeks, among them
more than 121 children, and we know that that is
likely a serious underestimate. Homes and civilian
infrastructure — bridges, hospitals and schools — have
been damaged and destroyed. The current statistics on
displacement tell us that more than 11.3 million people
have been forced to flee their homes, of whom more
than 4.2 million are now refugees in the generous
neighbouring countries that Rosemary DiCarlo
just referred to. In total, more than a quarter of the
population of Ukraine has fled in this extraordinary
short time. Unfortunately, we can imagine that those
numbers will continue to rise until we can find a pause
and some peace.
The ground and air offensives and counteroffensives
are making life nearly impossible for many civilians
in Ukraine. Families, the elderly, women and children
have been trapped by fighting already for too long. For
more than five weeks, the people of Mariupol have been
caught up in fighting, and it is well documented that
Mariupol really is a centre of Hell. Other cities — like
Chernihiv, Sumy and Kharkiv — remain cut off from
essential goods and services.
Perilous conditions are hampering our efforts to
access civilians, or their ability to access us. We restate
here that civilians must be allowed to move to safer areas
without the fear of attacks and at their own choice and
selection. It is vital that all parties to the conflict respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law
to protect civilians and allow impartial humanitarian
organizations safe, rapid and unimpeded access to all
civilians in need wherever they are in Ukraine.
6/31

05/04/2022

As the world watches humanitarian needs soar
in Ukraine, the United Nations and its partner
organizations are making every effort to dramatically
increase our support to affected civilians. As we noted
before in this Chamber (see S/PV.8988), the work of the
6,000 volunteers from the Ukraine Red Cross, together
with local non-governmental organizations in eastern
Ukraine, continue to work tirelessly at the front line of
assistance to communities. The World Food Programme
has reached more than 1.3 million people with cash and
food assistance, and it plans to increase that number to
2.5 million people this month.
Health partners report that more than 180 tons
of medical supplies were delivered in Ukraine, with
another 470 tons on the way. That will address the
health needs of around 6 million people in the months
ahead. I am also pleased — that seems an odd word to
say in the context of Ukraine — that, after much effort,
in the past day another convoy was dispatched from our
humanitarian hub in Dnipro to the far east.
Today food, winter clothing, non-food items,
medicine and hygiene kits were offloaded to the Ukraine
Red Cross and will reach the hands of those most in
need. Following the notification to both parties — a
formal process that we and the International Committee
of the Red Cross are engaged in — four United Nations
convoys in total have provided critical support to people
in some of the cities encircled by war and affected by
ongoing fighting. Several more are planned. Those
are initial steps, but it gives us a basis to now expand,
taking our efforts up to scale and expanding much more
beyond one convoy a day.
I want to join the Secretary-General and the UnderSecretary-General in what they have already said in
expressing my concern about the growing number of
reports we have received of human trafficking and
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse in Ukraine and
the region. As always, the horrific incidents that we are
seeing overwhelmingly impact displaced women and
children more than others. We are bolstering protection
of gender-based violence services through agencies to
provide specialized care for survivors and the wealth of
civil society organizations in Ukraine. Those services
are designed and carried out directly in collaboration
with and through Ukrainian civil society, including, in
particular, women-led organizations.
Today I am addressing the Security Council from
Geneva, having just returned from Moscow overnight.
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

S/PV.9011

As all are aware, the Secretary-General, as he said
earlier, charged me to bring both sides together on
humanitarian grounds to explore both specific and
sustained ways to reduce humanitarian suffering,
including, inter alia but in particular, the pursuit of a
humanitarian ceasefire.

food insecurity. The total number of people around the
world who will not know where their next meal will
come from could be driven to the astonishing number
of 325 million people. That is, by a long distance, the
highest in our recent history and well over double what
it was three years ago.

Yesterday in Moscow, I had long and frank
exchanges with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey
Lavrov, and his Deputy, Sergey Vershinin, and then
separately with Alexander Fomin, the Deputy Minister
of Defence. In my meetings with those senior officials,
I also discussed, in addition to the possibilities of
humanitarian ceasefires, the issue of humanitarian
convoys and safe passage, including the four that I
have already referred to. I outlined possibilities for
building further on that cooperation, sharing specific
suggestions for mutually agreed upon military freezes
to allow for evacuations of civilians and the safe
passage of life-saving aid — in effect, for humanitarian
pauses in different parts of Ukraine to save lives and
bring back a modicum of safety for those living in
those places.

In conclusion, like others, I remind the Council
of what it already knows well, that is, that the world
cannot afford this war, and neither can the people of
Ukraine. And like others, I call on all Council members
and Member States with influence to support all
efforts, from wherever they come from, in the pursuit
of peace and the alleviation of humanitarian suffering.
For the sake of the people of Ukraine, for the sake of
those around the world who cannot afford to bear the
additional burden this war imposes on them and on all
of us, we must, as the Secretary-General said, silence
the guns.

My counterparts in Moscow received those
suggestions and assured me of their intent to carefully
study those ideas, which I left with them. We agreed to
remain in close contact. I came away from the meetings
believing that we have a very long road ahead of us. But
it must be travelled, and we will travel it. Tomorrow
I plan to travel to Ukraine for discussions with senior
authorities from the Ukrainian Government in Kyiv on
Thursday on the same issues and others that they will
undoubtedly present to me, as well as to see first-hand
with our Crisis Coordinator for Ukraine, Amin Awad,
the humanitarian response.

President Zelenskyy (spoke in Ukrainian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank the
President of the Security Council for this opportunity.
I am sure that all the representatives of the States
Members of the United Nations will hear me today.

Thanks to generous donor contributions, mainly
from Governments represented in this Chamber, the
humanitarian response since February has been scaled
up, allowing us to meet the needs of 1.5 million people.
We will need sustained financial support for needs in
Ukraine. And, like the Secretary-General, I want to
stress, as he has done insistently, that funding must
not be diverted from other crises. Afghanistan is but
one example.
As the Council heard from David Beasley last
week (see S/PV.9008), conflict, climate shocks and the
coronavirus disease, compounded by the soaring food
and fuel costs indicated by the Secretary-General, could
push another 47 million people globally into severe

The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine.

Yesterday I returned from our city of Bucha,
recently liberated from Russian troops, not far from
Kyiv. There was not a single crime that they would not
commit there. The Russian military searched for and
purposefully killed anyone who served our country.
They shot and killed women outside their homes when
they were just trying to call to see if someone was alive.
They killed entire families — adults and children — and
they tried to burn the bodies.
I am addressing the Security Council on behalf of
the people who honour the memory of the deceased
every single day, the memory of the civilians who died,
shot in the back of the head, killed after being tortured.
Some of them were shot on the streets, others were
thrown into wells. These people died there in suffering.
They were killed in their apartment houses, blown
up by grenades. These civilians were crushed by tanks
while sitting in their cars in the middle of the road, just
for the Russians’ pleasure. They cut off limbs, slit their
throats. Women were raped and killed in front of their
children. Their tongues were pulled out only because

22-309357/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

the aggressors did not hear what they wanted to hear
from them.
This is therefore no different from other terrorists
such as Da’esh, who have occupied others’ territories
elsewhere. Yet, in this case, it is being done by a
member of the Security Council, destroying internal
unity, borders and sovereign States and violating the
rights of dozens of countries that are defending their
right to self-determination.
The aggressors are pursuing a consistent policy of
destroying ethnic and religious diversity. They inflame
wars and deliberately wage them in such a way as to
kill as many regular civilians as possible and destroy
as many cities as possible, to leave the country where
they deploy their troops in ruins and filled with mass
graves.
Council members have seen this. The aggressors
support hatred at the State level and seek to export it
to other countries through their system of propaganda
and political corruption. They provoke a global food
crisis that could lead to famine in Africa, Asia and
other continents, which will surely end in large-scale
political chaos in many countries, destroying their
domestic security.
Where, then, is the security that the Security
Council needs to guarantee? It is not there, despite
the fact that there is a Security Council. Where, then,
is peace? Where are those guarantees that the United
Nations needs to uphold?
It is obvious that this key global institution, which
must ensure that all aggressors be brought back to
peace, simply cannot work effectively.
Now the world can see what the Russian military
did in Bucha while it occupied that city. But the world
has yet to see what the Russians have done in other
occupied cities and regions of our country. Geography
may vary from place to place, but cruelty is the same
everywhere, crimes are the same and accountability
must be inevitable.
I would like to remind Council members of
Chapter I, Article 1, of the Charter of the United
Nations. What is the purpose of our Organization? Its
purpose is to maintain peace and make sure that peace
is adhered to. And now the United Nations Charter is
being violated, starting literally with Article 1. If that
is the case, what is the point of all the other articles of
the Charter?
8/31

05/04/2022

Today, as a result of Russia’s actions in our country,
Ukraine, the most terrible war crimes we have seen
since the end of the Second World War have taken place,
and they are being committed by Russian troops who
are deliberately destroying Ukrainian cities, turning
them to ashes with artillery and air strikes. They are
deliberately blocking cities, creating mass starvation,
shooting columns of civilians on the road trying to
escape from the zones where hostilities are conducted.
They even deliberately blow-up shelters where civilians
are hiding from air strikes.
They are deliberately creating conditions in the
temporarily occupied territories so that as many
civilians as possible are killed there. The massacre in
our city of Bucha is unfortunately only one of many
examples of what the occupiers have been doing on our
land for the past 41 days, and there are many more cities
and similar places about which the world will has yet to
learn the full truth.
Mariupol,
Kharkiv,
Chornobyl,
Okhtyrka,
Borodyanka and dozens of other Ukrainian communities
are similar to Bucha. I know perfectly well — and so
do Council members — what the representatives of
Russia will say in response to the accusations for these
crimes — what they have said many times before, the
most significant of which were what they said when
their forces shot down the Malaysian Boeing aircraft
over Donbas with their own weapons, or what they have
said during the war in Syria. They will blame everyone
just to justify their own actions. They will say that
there are different versions of what happened, so it is
impossible to establish which one of those versions
is true. They will even allege that the bodies of those
killed were thrown away and that all videos are staged.
But it is 2022 today. We have conclusive evidence.
There are satellite images. And we can conduct full
and transparent investigations. That is what we are
interested in today: maximum access for journalists,
maximum cooperation with international institutions,
the involvement of the International Criminal Court,
complete truth and full accountability.
I am convinced that every State Member of the
United Nations should be interested in this. Why? In
order to punish once for and for all those who consider
themselves privileged and who believe that they can
get away with anything. We must show all the other
potential war criminals in the world how they will be
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

punished. If the biggest one is punished, then all of
them will be punished.
Why has Russia come to Ukraine? I will tell you,
Madam President. It is because the Russian leadership
feels like the colonizers of ancient times. They need our
wealth, our people. The Russians have already deported
hundreds of thousands of our citizens to their country.
They have abducted more than 2,000 children, and they
continue to do so.
Russia wants to turn Ukrainians into silent slaves.
The Russian military is openly looting the cities and
villages that they have captured. This is widescale
looting. They are stealing everything, starting with
food and ending with gold earrings that are pulled out
and covered with blood. We are dealing with a State
that is turning the veto in the Security Council into
a licence to kill, which undermines the whole global
security architecture. It allows them to go unpunished,
so they are destroying everything that they can.
If this continues, countries will have to rely on the
power of their own arms alone to ensure their security,
and not on international law, not on international
institutions. The United Nations can simply be closed.
Are you ready to close the United Nations? Do
you think that the time of international is over? If your
answer is no, then you need to act immediately.
The United Nations Charter must be restored
immediately. The United Nations system must be
reformed immediately, so that the veto is not a licence
to kill. There must be fair representation in the Security
Council of all regions of the world. The aggressor must
be brought to peace immediately. Determination is
needed. The chain of massacres in Syria and Somalia
to Afghanistan, Yemen and Libya should have been
stopped long ago, frankly. If tyranny had at least once
received such a response to the war that it waged, it
would have ceased to exist. If genuine peace had
then been guaranteed, the world would clearly have
changed. There would perhaps then not be a war in my
country against our people — Ukrainian people and
our citizens. However, the world watched and did not
want to see the occupation of Crimea, the war against
Georgia or the seizure of the entire Transnistria from
Moldova and how Russia was preparing the basis for
other conflicts and wars near its borders.
How do we put an end to it? The Russian military
and those who gave them orders must immediately

S/PV.9011

be brought to justice for the war crimes committed
in Ukrainian territory. Anyone who gave criminal
orders and carried them out by killing our people
will be brought before a tribunal, which should be
similar to the Nuremberg trials. I would like to remind
Russian diplomats that Von Ribbentrop did not escape
punishment for crimes in the Second World War. I
would like to remind the architects of Russia’s criminal
policy that Adolf Eichmann did not go unpunished.
None of the perpetrators will escape punishment — not
one.
However, the main thing today is that it is time
to transform this system, the linchpin of which is the
United Nations. To that end, we propose convening
a global conference. We request that this be done in
peaceful Kyiv in order to determine how we are going
to reform the global security system, how we can
establish a guarantee for the recognition of borders and
the integrity of States and how we will fulfil the rule of
international law.
It is now absolutely clear that the objectives set
in San Francisco in 1945, when the international
organization for global security was established, have
not been achieved, and it is impossible to achieve them
without reforms. We must therefore do everything in
our power to pass on to the next generation an effective
United Nations that is able to respond preventively
to security challenges and thereby guarantee peace,
prevent aggression and force aggressors to peace, and
have the determination and ability to punish if the
principles of peace are violated. There can be no more
exceptions or privileges. Everyone — all participants
in international relations — must be equal regardless
of economic strength, geographical area and individual
ambitions. The power of peace, justice and security to
which humankind has always aspired must prevail.
Ukraine is ready to provide a seat for one of the main
offices of the newly updated security system. Just as the
Geneva office deals with human rights and the Nairobi
office that deals with environmental protection, in Kyiv
we can have a United Nations office that specializes in
preventive measures to maintain peace. I would like to
recall our peaceful mission in Afghanistan, where we
Ukrainians evacuated more than 1,000 people from that
country at our own expense. It was the most intense
time, but people needed assistance and, like other
States, Ukraine came to their help. We took in people of
different nationalities and faiths: Afghans, citizens of
European countries, of the United States and of Canada

22-309359/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

alike. We did not distinguish as to who needed help,
whether it was one of our own or someone else. We
saved everyone.
If every time that there was a need everyone in
the world could be confident that help would come,
the world would definitely be safer. Ukraine therefore
has the moral right to propose a reform of the global
security system. We have proved that we help others,
not only in good times but in dark times too. We now
need resolutions from the Security Council for peace in
Ukraine. If it does not know how to take such decisions,
it can do two things. Either it can either remove Russia
as an aggressor and an instigator of war so that it cannot
block resolutions about its own aggression and its own
war and then do all that it can to establish peace. The
other option is for the Council to show how we can
bring about reform or change and genuinely work for
peace. If there is no alternative to the current working
configuration and there is no other way, the next option
would be to dissolve itself all together. I am convinced
that the Council can avoid the third option. Ukraine
needs peace. We need peace. Europe needs peace. The
world needs peace.
Finally, I would kindly urge that participants watch
this short video. I ask that I be given one more minute
of the Council’s time. The video is a testament to what
has replaced the Council’s power because one single
actor can abuse its rights. That is the result of going
unpunished. If possible, please watch this video, since
it is not possible for everyone to come to our country
and see it with their own eyes. I would therefore ask
that they watch this brief fragment.
The President: We will turn to the video once we
have sorted out the technical issues.
I thank His Excellency ⁠M r. Zelenskyy for his
compelling and powerful remarks. Speaking in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom, may I express appreciation to the President
for his leadership in war time and for the extraordinary
fortitude and bravery of the Ukrainian people under
this unprovoked and illegal invasion.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me also start by thanking the United
Arab Emirates and Ambassador Nusseibeh for her
10/31

05/04/2022

successful presidency during the month of March. As
you, Madam President, begin your Security Council
presidency, I want to thank the United Kingdom for
its leadership and for organizing this vital discussion
on Ukraine today. I also want to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks, as well as the other briefers.
I would like to extend a warm welcome to President
Zelenskyy. I was so moved by the address that he made
recently to the United States Congress, and we are truly
honoured by his presence here under the circumstances
that he and Ukraine face today.
Last night, I returned from a trip to Moldova and
Romania. I saw with my own eyes the refugee crisis
caused by Russia’s unconscionable war. I spoke to
refugees who indicated to me their desire to return to
their homes. We have all seen the images on television of
bombed-out buildings. However, what we have not seen
is that behind those destroyed buildings are lives and
families that have been destroyed. I met with women
and children who had fled Ukraine. They had stuffed
their lives into backpacks and left the only home they
had ever known. Those were sobering conversations.
One young woman with whom I spoke came with
her 6-year-old brother, who had autism and is struggling
with cancer. Their single mother helped them escape to
save their lives, but Russia’s war has interrupted the
care that her brother desperately needs. Another woman
with whom I spoke fled with her 8-year-old from Odesa.
The father, whom they had left behind, told them there
was shelling right next to their apartment that very
night. They very well could have died had they not left.
A third woman I met told me that she used to love
to travel but never expected her next trip would be to
flee for her life. When I asked her where she was from,
she started to respond and then stopped, with tears in
her eyes. Then she said, “I’m sorry. I do not know how
to say it — whether I live in Kyiv or whether I used
to live in Kyiv”. She was realizing in the moment just
how dramatically her life had changed because of this
senseless war.
Those are three stories of those of more than
10 million people — 6 million internally displaced
and 4 million who have left Ukraine altogether. Those
4 million people have relied on the big-heartedness of
countries such as Moldova, Romania, Poland, Slovakia,
Hungary, and others across the region and the world,
to welcome and support them and all those leaving
Ukraine in search of safety.
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

Ukraine’s neighbours are bearing the brunt of
Europe’s most significant refugee crisis since the
Second World War. I would like those countries to know
that they have a committed partner in the United States.
That is why the United States announced recently that
we are prepared to provide more than $1 billion in new
funding towards humanitarian assistance for those
affected by Russia’s war in Ukraine and its severe impact
around the world. It is also why we are welcoming to
the United States up to 100,000 Ukrainians and others
fleeing Russia’s aggression. We will continue to assist
humanitarian efforts to help the people of Ukraine and
all those fleeing Putin’s violence.
Nonetheless, as heart-wrenching as the stories I
heard in Moldova and Romania, there are some stories
we will never hear — those of the people we saw in the
images out of Bucha. We have all seen the gruesome
photos of lifeless bodies lying in the streets, apparently
summarily executed, their hands tied behind their
backs. As we work to independently confirm the events
depicted in those images. I would remind the Council
that, based on currently available information, the
United States has assessed that members of Russia’s
forces have committed war crimes in Ukraine. Even
before seeing the images from Bucha, President
Zelenskyy, along with others in the region, reported
that children were being abducted, and we heard him
say that again today. Also being abducted are mayors,
doctors, religious leaders, journalists and all who dare
defy Russia’s aggression. Some of them, according
to credible reports, including by the Mariupol city
council, have been taken to so-called filtration camps,
where Russian forces are reportedly making tens of
thousands of Ukrainian citizens relocate to Russia.
Reports indicate that Russian federal security agents
are confiscating passports and identification cards,
taking away cell phones and separating families from
one another. I do not need to spell out what the socalled filtration camps are reminiscent of. It is chilling,
and we cannot look away.
Every day we see more and more how little Russia
respects human rights. And that is why I announced
yesterday that the United States, in coordination
with Ukraine and many other States Members of the
United Nations, will seek Russia’s suspension from the
Human Rights Council. Given the growing mountain of
evidence, Russia should not have a position of authority
in a body whose very purpose is to promote respect for

S/PV.9011

human rights. Not only is this the height of hypocrisy,
but it is also dangerous.
Russia is using its membership on the Human
Rights Council as a platform for propaganda to suggest
that Russia has a legitimate concern for human rights.
In fact, we will hear some of that propaganda here
today. I know it. I will not dignify those lies with a
response, only to say that every lie we hear from the
Russian representative is more evidence that Russia
does not belong on the Human Rights Council.
One hundred and forty Member States voted to
condemn Russia over its unprovoked war and the
humanitarian crisis it has unleashed upon the people of
Ukraine. Here is my message to all those in the Chamber:
now is the time to match those words with action and
show the world that we can work responsibly. I share
President Zelenskyy’s view that this moment requires
responsible world Powers and global leaders to show
some backbone and stand up to Russia’s dangerous and
unprovoked threat against Ukraine and the world.
The Secretary-General said that confronting this
threat is the Security Council’s charge. It is — and it
is also the responsibility of United Nations leaders and
leaders around the world — every single Member State
with a voice in the General Assembly. No one can be a
shield for Russia’s aggression. Suspending Russia from
the Human Rights Council is something we collectively
have the power to do in the General Assembly. Our votes
can make a real difference. Russia’s participation on the
Human Rights Council hurts the Council’s credibility.
It undermines the entire United Nation. And it is just
plain wrong.
Let us come together to do what is right and do
right by the Ukrainian people. Let us take this step
to help them start to rebuild their lives. Let us match
the courage of President Zelenskyy, who we are so
honoured to have with us today. I would like President
Zelenskyy to know that we stand with the people of
Ukraine as they face down this brutal attack on their
sovereignty, democracy and freedom.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Ambassador
Nusseibeh for having steered our work during the
month of March and to wish the United Kingdom and
you, Madam President, full success in our common
work during this month.
Albania welcomes President Zelenskyy to today’s
meeting. His remarks are painful, and his account on

22-3093511/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

what Ukraine is experiencing under Russian occupation
is revolting. We stand by him and his compatriots — all
Ukrainians — for their heroic resistance and for the
resilience the entire world is admiring. They are not
alone. They have the world on their side because it is
the side of right, justice and, we hope, victory.
Let me thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his very clear and powerful remarks. I also thank
Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Griffiths for
their updates.
This is the fourteenth meeting of the Security
Council on Ukraine since 31 January, while the war of
aggression has entered its second month.
Let us establish a few basic, yet meaningful facts.
Russia has stalled, and its imperial dreams are nowhere.
Taking Ukraine finally proved impossible. Kyiv was
too hard to swallow. The Russian army is in disarray,
but it has not stopped shelling and bombardments. But
all of that is not new, and all of that is not news.
The real news that has horrified the word is what
Russia is leaving behind — the unspeakable horrors,
those soul-crushing images in areas from which
Russia is withdrawing; images of civilians executed
with a bullet to the neck, sometimes with their hands
tied behind their backs or shot dead on their bicycles;
images of mass graves overflowing with corpses;
images of carnage and devastation, including looted
homes; rape and sexual violence — acts usually
attributed only to thugs. They spring from the same
cruel impulses as the bombardment of cities, homes,
hospitals, schools and kindergartens by Russian forces.
Bucha is an open-air graveyard, the notorious facelift
of the Russian aggression.
We have heard time and again: It is not Russia.
Yes, but no. It will be hard, actually impossible, to
convince anyone that the destroyed tanks that clutter
the roads, the mines and booby traps left behind amid
the wreckage and the bodies of civilians killed by
arbitrary executions and lying in the streets amid debris
are staged scenes for propaganda.
Who could believe that Russia aggressed Ukraine
simply to protect civilians, while Ukraine is busy
staging horror movies? Russia may muzzle media
back home, but it cannot fool satellite images and it
cannot blind independent reporters and human rights
non-governmental organizations on the ground.
12/31

05/04/2022

Waiting for Russia to accept and tell the truth is like
waiting for Godot. And he never arrives.
These are facts — hard and sickening proof of the
atrocities committed, the ugly face of this madness.
Such crimes, as documented by Human Rights Watch
and verified by independent and respected professional
reporters, those who are banned for the Russians,
call for answers, thorough investigations, effective
accountability and justice.
Prime Minister Rama called these crimes a terrible
pain and a horrible shame. Russia has an international
obligation to abide by international humanitarian law,
the laws of war, including the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and its First Additional Protocol. Russia has an
obligation to abide by the order of the International
Court of Justice to immediately halt its military activity
in Ukraine.
Unfortunately, Russia has made another choice — to
not respect any of it and to remove the need to abide
by international law. But the law will pursue Russia.
The Russian army and its commanders cannot escape
accountability. The name of the butcher of Mariupol, a
criminal that has reduced an entire city to ashes and has
made its citizens go from three meals a day to barely
three meals a week, is engraved in the ruins of the city.
That is why we will support the call to suspend
Russia’s participation in the Human Rights Council.
General Assembly resolution 60/251, which created the
Council, stipulates that “members elected to the Council
shall uphold the highest standards in the promotion
and protection of human rights”. As we see, Russia’s
standards are nauseating, and its presence there is a
farce and a desecration of the place that is called on to
be the sanctuary of rights.
Russia has announced that it will now shift its focus
to eastern Ukraine. That means that it will concentrate
its brutality there, in what may end up becoming a war
of attrition.
Russia has blocked the renewal of the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, thereby denying the
international community the independent eyes it needs
there. Sadly, that signals more war, further atrocities,
other crimes and even more humanitarian disasters.
This war continues to affect women and children,
in particular. Millions have been displaced, many of
them alone, in search of safety and security. It is heart22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

breaking to see mothers write names and addresses
on the backs of their children so that they can be
recognized in case they end up becoming orphans. We
welcome the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and its partners to deliver
assistance, in support of the people in Ukraine and the
millions of refugees in neighbouring countries.
Let me end on this note. Rarely has the outcome
of a war been so disastrously the complete opposite of
what the aggressor wanted to achieve. Russia’s army
has been defeated by the outgunned and outnumbered
Ukrainian resistance; Russia is isolated like never in
its history; it has become the world’s most sanctioned
country in history. No country has ever seen itself
transform, in a matter of only 10 days, from a global
player into a financial and international pariah to the
point that it is obliged to find comfort in support from
North Korea and Syria.
This aggression and its startling defeat have once
and for all separated the fates of Ukrainians and
Russians because the case of Ukraine is also the cause
of democracy against tyranny and kleptocracy. It is a
fight between the will of the people against the vicious
will of one, whose reckless actions have challenged
everything we stand for and who is directly responsible
for the economic disruption and food insecurity
that is affecting the entire world. He can choose to
stop, withdraw troops and quit Ukraine or continue
to descend in the very abyss he has created and face
the consequences.
The President: I understand that we have solved
the technical problems, so I suggest that we return to
the video.
An audiovisual recording was played in the
Council Chamber.
The President: I would like to thank the delegation
of Ukraine for sharing that video with us. The images
are harrowing. Speaking in my national capacity, we
are appalled by what we have seen and reiterate our
solidarity with Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Ambassador of the United Arab
Emirates for her remarkable presidency. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General António Guterres, Under-

S/PV.9011

Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Martin
Griffiths for their briefings. I welcome the participation
of President Zelenskyy in today’s meeting.
We continue to watch helplessly as the war in
Ukraine unfolds, as the death toll and the number of
displaced persons continue to rise and as the statistics
of civilian casualties and infrastructure continue to
grow. One day of war is certainly one too many.
As the conflict enters its sixth week, the number
of displaced people has now exceeded 10 million,
including nearly 4 million refugees in neighbouring
countries. This is an appalling humanitarian disaster,
the repercussions of which will undoubtedly be
exacerbated by the risks of food insecurity due to
the unpredictability of the harvests — again, with
transregional effects. In that regard, I would like to
welcome the establishment by the Secretary-General of
the Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
Finance to reduce the impacts of the war.
The allegations of violence, including sexual
violence, against women are a matter of grave
concern. My country is also very concerned about
attacks on humanitarian infrastructure and personnel.
Humanitarian workers who are active in combat areas
must never be the target of armed attacks. They are
often the only connection that victims of war have with
what remains of humanity when its very foundations
have been overturned. Therefore, they must be able
to deliver humanitarian aid everywhere it is needed,
unhindered and in conditions of security guaranteed
by all parties. Secure evacuation convoys must be
arranged to allow for the smooth evacuation of people
who wish to leave the combat zones. This is a matter
of vital aid for the approximately 18 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance in Ukraine.
The situation in Mariupol, to name but one city,
is becoming untenable. The exponential deterioration
of living conditions and even survival in some
localities is of great concern, especially when civilian
infrastructure and the provision of essential public
services are impacted. We are concerned about the
risk of disease resulting from water shortages in some
parts of the country, as well as the health risks resulting
from the lack of access to basic or specialized health
care. Women, children, the elderly and all those not
participating in the hostilities must be able to be helped
in all respects, without fearing for their lives.

22-3093513/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

War is a horror and a rupture in every respect
with that which binds us together as human beings.
International humanitarian law exists as a means to try
to reduce the effects of and mend, through legal means,
such a rupture of the human contract, as well as to
deny the expression of force free rein. All parties must
therefore respect it.
Regarding the persistent reports of massacres,
summary executions, atrocities and other mass crimes
against civilians in Bucha, it is urgent that a free and
independent investigation, under United Nations
auspices, be commissioned as soon as possible to shed
light on the victims and the circumstances of those
abuses. In the meantime, it is essential that the Council
does not lose sight of its role to guarantee peace and
security by offering an alternative to war. Peace will
not be restored in Ukraine by exchanging insults.
The war has gone on long enough and its effects
are already being felt beyond Ukraine’s borders. In our
view, it is essential that a ceasefire be established and
that conditions be created for the safe and unhindered
deployment of the necessary humanitarian aid to
the populations in distress. I reiterate my country’s
appreciation for Ukraine’s neighbouring countries,
which continue to mobilize for the emergency reception
of refugees. We encourage them to grant the same
welcome to all people in distress without distinction of
origin or race, including African nationals and students.
We demand respect for their dignity and call for the fair
treatment of all persons in distress.
It is urgent that the parties engage resolutely in
negotiations with a view to ending the hostilities.
We therefore call for de-escalation and an end to the
fighting. There is no other possible outcome. My
country is paying close attention to the negotiations
currently taking place between the parties, particularly
in Istanbul, and hopes that they will lead to a ceasefire
in the short term in order to create a climate of trust and
establish the calm necessary for diplomacy to prevail
and for the weapons to be silenced.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude and appreciation to the delegation of the
United Arab Emirates for its presidency during the
month of March.
We thank the Secretary-General, Under-SecretaryGeneral
DiCarlo
and
Under-Secretary-General
14/31

05/04/2022

Griffiths for their briefings. We also listened carefully
to the President of Ukraine, Mr. Volodymyr Zelensky.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for
his visit to Moscow, during which, as far as we can
judge, he had some useful meetings and discussions.
He should know better than anyone else the efforts
that Russia is undertaking every single day to organize
humanitarian corridors. However, even in the context of
the arrangements reached with the help of international
mediators, it is the Ukrainian side that is consistently
failing to fulfil its obligations.
I will not bore the Council with statistics, but detailed
reports are published daily by our Ministry of Defence.
I will simply note that, from Mariupol alone towards
the east, without any participation by the Ukrainian
side, we have already managed to save over 123,686
people. Overall, more than 620,000 people — more
than 122,000 of whom are children — have already
been evacuated to Russia since the beginning of the
special military operation. There has been no coercion
or abduction, as our Western partners like to imply.
The many videos available on social media testify to
the voluntary decision of those people.
Another topic raised for discussion at today’s
meeting has barely been discussed, so I will refrain
from delivering my remarks on that. Instead, I would
like to take advantage of the virtual participation of
the President of Ukraine in this meeting to address
him directly.
We place on his conscience the groundless
accusations against the Russian military, which have
not been confirmed by any eyewitnesses. We spoke
about that in detail yesterday at our press conference.
We all remember very well when, in 2019,
Volodymyr Oleksandrovych Zelenskyy was elected
the President of Ukraine. There were many hopes tied
to his election, because he went to the polls with the
promise of peace and an end to the war in Donbas. The
Russian-speaking population believed in him because
he undertook to protect their rights. It seemed that we
were on the verge of turning the page on the historical
injustice resulting from the Maidan coup in 2014, when
Ukraine began to transform into a hateful “anti-Russia”.
However, those hopes were not destined to become
a reality. He now scornfully refers to the inhabitants
of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics as a
sub-species, echoing his predecessor, who threatened
22-30935

05/04/2022

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

to let the people of Donetsk and Luhansk rot in their
basements and urged them to leave for Russia. Now he
has declared war against his native Russian language
by introducing, in essence, a linguistic inquisition
in a country where Russian is the native language of
a minimum of 40 per cent of the population. Today,
bombs and artillery rounds are exploding throughout
the territory of Ukraine, not only in the east, where
they have not ceased for the past eight years. They are
exploding precisely because, unfortunately, there is no
other way left to bring peace to Donbas, after he and
his subordinates categorically refused to implement
the Minsk agreements while preparing, already back
in March, to solve the problem of Donbas by military
means. During our special operation, we found many
secret orders testifying to that.

cruelty of Ukrainian nationals. I will read just a few of
them here. They are cruel, but they need to be heard.

We are told that there can be no Nazis in Ukraine.
However, we know perfectly well that they are there
and that, unfortunately, they are running the show.
How could it be otherwise when the national heroes
of Ukraine are the Nazi collaborators Bandera and
Shukhevych, who are responsible not only for the
Holocaust but also for the murders of hundreds of
thousands of Polish, Russian, Ukrainian and Jewish
civilians? He simply chose not to notice the Ukrainian
neo-Nazis, pretending that they do not exist.

Valentina Nikolaevna Borisenkova said that the
Ukrainian military expelled a woman with two children
from a private home on Kramatorskaya Street and used
it as a firing position to lob mortar rounds. She left her
home with tears in her eyes, along with two children.
They were kicked out by soldiers with blue armbands,
which are insignias of the Ukrainian army.

But, unfortunately, they are there, and even more
regrettably, there are many of them and they include
numerous young people. How do we know that? They
are not concealing it. They have Nazi tattoos, they
decorate their clothing with swastikas and other Nazi
symbols, they give one another Nazi salutes and are
open about it on social media.

“They tied me to a sewer pipe. When they found out
that I was Russian, they beat me, tortured me with
electric current, raped me and threatened to rape
and torture my young daughter.”

There are many of them in national battalions such
as Aidar, the Right Sector and the Azov Battalion. That
would not have been such an issue had they not acted
like Nazis and killed as they did. They are not just
killing captured Russian soldiers, whom they torture
and gloat about it on social media, but also their fellow
countrymen. His neo-Nazis and radicals have shown
unrivalled cruelty towards the civilian population,
which they use as human shields, and position
heavy artillery and multiple rocket launchers next to
residential buildings.
Today we have heard once again a tremendous
number of lies about Russian soldiers and the Russian
military. We have hundreds, if not thousands, of video
testimonials by people who are ready to testify to the

Natalia Kudinova said that the mayor of the town
was one of the first to escape, and then the Ukrainian
authorities lied and said that Russia was not allowing
people through the humanitarian corridors. The Azov
national battalion, under threat of death, kept women
with children in basements and robbed civilians
at checkpoints.
A grandmother with her grandchildren said that the
Azov Battalion did not allow her to leave her basement.
Anyone trying to leave was shot.
At the Azov checkpoint, girls and women were
stripped naked and had their jewellery and money
taken away.

Marina Vasilievna testified that she was tortured in
a basement by Ukrainian security services.

Shapovalova Olga Georgievna said,
“We left Mariupol from Mangush already on
25 March. The firing positions of the Ukrainian
army were positioned between residential homes
and the school courtyard. They used civilians as
cover. Near the drama theatre, a Ukrainian tank
drove around firing indiscriminately, including
targeting residential buildings. Tanks were
stationed nears schools No. 68, No. 69 and N. 5. I
saw it with my own eyes.”
Suportkina Olga Sergeevna said,
“At school No. 15 in Mariupol, on 25 February the
Ukrainian armed forces took up positions there and
left on 7 March. They directed fire from there. Our
building was badly damaged by the shelling.”
On 8 and 9 March there was intense shelling
targeting homes. The Ukrainian military was asked

22-3093515/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

why it was doing that. They replied that until the entire
Russian spirit was destroyed, they would remain there.
“They started looting right away and plundered all
the shops. It was the forces of the Donetsk People’s
Republic that helped us to get to Mangush.”
There are many other heart-rending stories — about
Russians and Ukrainians tortured to death with
swastikas burned into their chests; about people killed
by looters and criminals to whom weapons were
distributed; and about killed civilians and foreigners
whose deaths the Ukrainian leadership tries to blame
on Russian military, contrary to all facts and common
sense.
I said it already and I say it again now: it is
absolutely unacceptable and vile to even consider that
the Russian military would be capable of this, of doing
what they are accused of.
Now we are seeing blatant, criminally staged events
with Ukrainians killed by their own radicals, in the
best tradition of Goebbels, so as to accuse the Russian
army. They were killed in areas from which Russian
troops withdrew after encouraging peace negotiations
in Istanbul.
Now it turns out that the Russian forces should not
have left. I am talking primarily about Bucha.
I understand that members saw corpses and heard
testimonials. But they saw only what was shown to
them. They cannot ignore the blatant inconsistencies
in the version of events that is being promoted by the
Ukrainian and Western media, the fact that there were
no corpses in the city immediately after the departure
of Russian troops, as confirmed by several videos, and
the fact that there are recordings in which Ukrainian
radicals called for shooting those with white armbands,
that is, civilians.
If one watches the video shown today very closely,
one can see that the people lying on the ground wore
white armbands. They are civilians. Also, the bodies
shown in the video in no way appear to have been
lying on the street for three or four days; or, based on
the sensational and completely scientifically absurd
information provided by The New York Times, to have
been there since 20 March. The only ones who could
fall for this fake are absolute dilettantes or our Western
partners that do not want to hear anything and have
called black white, and vice versa, for a long time now.
16/31

05/04/2022

Those countries do not care in the slightest about
Ukraine itself. For them, it is simply a pawn in the
geopolitical game against Russia, which they will
sacrifice easily. But in the meantime, they will try to
prolong the conflict by delivering as many weapons and
as much ammunition as possible.
But the most important thing is — and I want to
reiterate it — how have we sunk to depths of cruelty such
that nationalists are displaying, for example, those of
the Azov Battalion? In President Zelenskyy’s interview
with the American media, he coyly and bashfully stated
that they are what they are. I really hope that he will
reflect on this and that he will find a solution to the
situation, because it depends only on him.
We went to Ukraine not to conquer Ukrainian
territory but to bring long-awaited peace to the bloodsoaked land of Donbas, not a truce but a true, lasting
peace. For that we need to root out the cruelty that I
mentioned. We need to cut out the malignant Nazi tumour
that is consuming Ukraine and would have eventually
begun to consume Russia. We will achieve that goal, I
hope sooner rather than later, because there is no other
outcome. We avoid shooting at civilian targets in order
to save as many civilian lives as possible, and that is
why we are not advancing as fast as many expected. We
are not acting like the Americans and their allies in Iraq
and Syria, razing entire cities to the ground. They had
no pity for them, but we feel great pity because those
are people who are close to us.
Radicals, however, have nothing to lose. They could
not care less about civilians. They are ready to take to
the grave with them the entire population of Ukraine, as
was clearly demonstrated by the provocation in Bucha.
Volodymyr Oleksandrovych Zelenskyy must not
allow the West to achieve its goals. He must make the
right decisions for his country, because the West is
ready to fight in Ukraine to the last Ukrainian. He must
make that decision now. After all, he is well aware of
the real situation at the front. Later might be too late.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I too would like to
thank the Secretary-General and our other briefings
this morning. I want to express a very warm welcome
to President Zelenskyy, who is with us this morning.
President Zelenskyy’s leadership and courage, and that
of the Ukrainian people, are an example to us all.
On 24 February, as Russia launched a large-scale
invasion of its neighbour, Ukraine, the Secretary22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

General told the world that Russia’s action was
wrong, that it was against the Charter of the United
Nations and that it was unacceptable. We agreed with
him. However, he also told us that this invasion was
reversible and called on President Putin to end this war
to save innocent lives. We echoed those calls.
Sadly, 40 days later, our call has been left
unanswered. Instead, over the past 40 days, we have
witnessed unprecedented levels of destruction and
human suffering. We are watching cities get pounded by
Russian artillery. We are seeing millions forced to flee
their homes, seeking refuge from Russian aggression.
Just minutes ago in this Chamber, we saw the utterly
shocking images of civilians lying dead in the streets of
Bucha and elsewhere in Ukraine. Some, we know, have
been piled into improvised mass graves. It is simply
harrowing. So many innocent lives have been lost on
our watch as our pleas for peace go unheeded.
The attempts at this meeting today to deny Russian
culpability are frankly appalling in their cynicism,
and I see them as an insult to the memory of those
slaughtered civilians.
We roundly condemn the atrocities reportedly
committed by the Russian armed forces in a number of
occupied Ukrainian towns. The images from Bucha and
other towns in the Kyiv region liberated by Ukrainian
forces are horrifying. We in this Chamber cannot
suspend our humanity. Our thoughts, first and foremost,
must be with the families of those killed. Their pain
at the loss of their loved ones in such an unspeakable
manner is almost unimaginable.
Let us be clear. The Russian authorities are
responsible for those atrocities, committed while they
had effective control of the area. The Russian authorities
are subject to the international law of occupation.
There can never be impunity for such crimes — never
ever — not in Bucha or in any other town or village
ever. Where crimes have been committed, they must be
fully investigated and evidence preserved, so that those
crimes can be prosecuted by domestic and international
courts, including the International Criminal Court.
Ireland will continue to support efforts to ensure
robust and independent investigations of all violations
of international law. We must have accountability and
justice for the victims and for the survivors of this war.
We at this table share that responsibility in the face of
such atrocities. We call on the Russian Federation to
abide by the order of the International Court of Justice

S/PV.9011

and immediately cease its military action and withdraw
from the entire territory of Ukraine.
In the past 40 days, we have seen a horrific
humanitarian disaster unfold in Ukraine because of
the Russian Federation’s unprovoked and unjustifiable
further invasion of that country — a country where
just weeks ago citizens lived in relative peace and
prosperity and which has now been transformed into
one where families lack access to basic necessities,
where basements have become bomb shelters and where
millions have become internally displaced persons
and refugees.
The use of explosive weapons in populated areas
has had a devastating impact on civilians in the midst of
active hostilities. Once again, we call on the parties to
the conflict to comply with international humanitarian
law, including the obligation to direct attacks against
only military objectives, the prohibitions against
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks and the
obligation to take all feasible precautions in attack.
We have heard increasing allegations of sexual
violence by Russian soldiers. The Secretary-General
referred to that this morning. We must stress that
conflict-related sexual violence can constitute a war
crime. The perpetrators of such crimes must be held
accountable and will be held accountable. Sexual
violence is another abhorrent crime of this war that
cannot go unanswered. We again reiterate the need for
full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access to those
in need, as called for today by Martin Griffiths.
We again echo the Secretary-General’s call for
Russia to implement an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire. It is the very least the aggressor can do. It is
way past time.
As we know, the reverberations of this war are
reaching far beyond Ukraine. It is unacceptable that
Russia’s war of choice against Ukraine is also having
and will continue to have significant spillover effects
across the globe: the deterioration of food security,
surging energy prices and increasing poverty. The most
vulnerable and impoverished in developing countries
will suffer the most. We utterly reject that.
It is our collective responsibility, here at this
table, to maintain international peace and security,
and nothing less. That is why we call on the Russian
Federation to stop the war, to stop its unlawful
attempts to establish occupying authorities and to

22-3093517/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

stop destabilizing the democratic foundations of the
Ukrainian State. Such steps are yet further reprehensible
violations of Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
It gets harder each time to say this, but it is never
too late to do the right thing and to end this war now.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me start by thanking
Ambassador Nusseibeh, along with her team at the
United Arab Emirates Mission, for competently
navigating the work of the Security Council in March.
I welcome His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, at this meeting of the
Security Council today.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Rosemary DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Martin Griffiths for their
updated briefings on the situation in Ukraine.
As we enter the sixth week of hostilities on
Ukrainian territory, we continue to witness appalling
images of human suffering. The recent reports of acts
of violence against civilians in Bucha, Irpin, Kharkiv,
Donetsk and other places affected by the conflict are
extremely worrying, according to the statement by the
International Committee of the Red Cross. We call for
a genuinely independent and thorough investigation
of all reported violations, with the full cooperation of
both parties to the conflict, without prejudging any
conclusions and underscore the need for perpetrators to
be held accountable.
The international community has witnessed for too
long appalling scenes of destruction of once peaceful
cities, with shocking images from the conflict and the
desperation of thousands of civilians trapped on the
battlefield with no food, no water and no electricity.
We once again renew our pleas for a broad, effective
and immediate cessation of hostilities in Ukraine.
Only after the silencing of the guns and the withdrawal
of troops are achieved will it be possible to halt the
immense costs of human suffering that the conflict has
brought about.
The General Assembly recently adopted resolution
ES-11/2, on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
As we said on that occasion (see A/ES-11/PV.7), the
General Assembly could not become a bystander to the
shocking consequences of the conflict, and, as we added
last week in this Chamber (see S/PV.9008), neither can
18/31

05/04/2022

the Security Council. As the main United Nations organ
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
has the mandate and the responsibility to address the
situation in an effective manner.
Nevertheless, our assessment is that the Security
Council is failing in its role to help support efforts to
foster a constructive dialogue between the parties, with
the aim of brokering an effective peace settlement to
the conflict. We deeply regret that the Security Council
has not been able to speak with one voice throughout
the crisis.
Promoting
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law, protecting civilians and calling for
peace are the objectives that should unite rather than
divide us. We should strive to create the conditions for,
on the one hand, invigorating the political negotiations,
and, on the other, reaching an understanding on
practical measures to minimize human suffering in
Ukraine. Civilians wishing to flee the hostilities must
be able to do so in safety, and those who decide to stay
cannot become targets of attacks. In the same vein,
parties must grant safe passage to relief consignments
to those in need.
Once again, Brazil reiterates the call for all parties
to fully respect, and ensure respect for, international
humanitarian law. The causes of conflict, whatever they
may be, do not undermine the obligations incumbent on
all parties to guarantee that civilians be protected, that
the wounded receive medical care, that humanitarian
assistance reach those in need and that detainees be
treated humanely in all circumstances. There must
be no politicization of humanitarian actions, or the
selective application of international humanitarian law.
In addition, geopolitical objectives must not supersede
the endeavour for peace, or prolong the human suffering
caused by war.
This conflict, and its associated sanctions, apart
from the enormous human suffering and devastation
caused in Ukraine, is having spillover effects in the
entire world, especially through increased prices of
oil, gas, grains and fertilizers, among other things.
Food insecurity has become an even greater threat to
the world’s poorest people, above all in developing
countries. The longer the conflict persists, the higher
the risk of further instability, hunger and devastation in
Ukraine and around the world.
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

It is high time to return to the path of dialogue and
diplomacy for a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
We urgently need the cessation of hostilities. The
de-escalation of tensions and negotiations are the
only way out of the conflict, not only for the countries
directly involved but also for the entire world.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I congratulate you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for April and assure you of my delegation’s
full support.
I listened closely to the remarks by the SecretaryGeneral and his Under-Secretaries-General, Rosemary
DiCarlo and Martin Griffiths, hoping to hear that our
fears that the war in Ukraine has entered a new more
dangerous phase were exaggerated. Sadly, they offered
no such comfort.
Instead, we are left with the words of His Excellency
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine,
who has described the horrifying suffering in Bucha
and other towns and neighbourhoods in Ukraine. His
account of the atrocities is in stark contrast to that of our
colleague in the Security Council, the representative of
the Russian Federation. But the fact that the truth in
Bucha is contested is the surest sign that we stand on
the precipice of more widespread human rights abuses.
In April 1994, even as genocide engulfed Rwanda,
there were members of the Security Council contesting
the horrifying truth that 1 million people were being
murdered. We should stand warned that the inability
of the Council to establish the facts and accordingly
attribute responsibility may enable the risk of escalation
into far worse crimes.
Beyond the city of Bucha, we are extremely
worried about the safety of civilians who are trapped in
other besieged cities and villages, such as Mariupol and
Kherson. Our actions today should seek to prevent what
we have witnessed take place in Bucha, Mariupol and
Kherson. While we debate who is responsible for the
horrors of Bucha, it is incontestable that what started as
a special military operation is now a war and that what
began with reassurances of limited aims, not targeted
at civilians, has led to thousands of dead civilians and
millions of refugees and internally displaced persons.
No one can doubt that there are flagrant violations
of international law, international humanitarian law
and the Charter of the United Nations under way in
Ukraine. Kenya condemns the abuses undertaken in the

S/PV.9011

past few weeks and those in the eastern provinces of the
country during the years that the conflict has raged.
The war in Ukraine is today’s most dangerous
threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is the latest assault by the most powerful
States against the multilateral order. Their continued
abuse of the Charter has created growing cracks over the
years in the global security order. Now the bottom has
fallen out. Ukraine may now become a model for a new
generation of disastrous wars on multiple continents.
Millions of refugees are being created, and there
will be many more as the economic effects of the war
produce and intensify conflicts elsewhere. Accelerating
food and energy prices are plunging millions into
worse forms of poverty. The United Nations, as a forum
for solutions to humankind’s most pressing problems,
is losing prestige and historical standing. President
Zelenskyy has left us with ideas for Security Council
reform that we need to consider seriously. Things have
fallen apart, and the centre cannot hold under these
assaults on the United Nations. We must reform.
There are no easy solutions. Even a negotiation that
is not properly structured to protect the people and the
sovereignty of Ukraine could be the prelude to a wider
war. For now, we urge the following urgent steps, while
understanding their limits owing to the inability of the
Security Council to act decisively.
We call for an impartial and prompt United Nations
investigation into the atrocities against the civilians in
Bucha and other towns in Ukraine. That calls for an
immediate end of all hostilities to guarantee unfettered
access for the investigative teams. We urge the
conflicting parties to immediately make clear to their
military personnel that they will be held to account on
the basis of command or superior responsibility if they
violate the international laws that regulate warfare.
We commend Ukraine’s neighbours for opening
their borders to refugees of multiple nationalities
from Ukraine. We continue to urge them to ensure
that the thousands of affected Africans be treated in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
with basic dignity. We commend the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the many
other organizations and individuals that have come
to the aid of the deserving people of Ukraine. In
this regard, we commend the third United Nationsorganized humanitarian convoy that reached thousands
of people in need in Sumy and other cities.

22-3093519/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

We call for the urgent activation of safe
passages with no restrictions and call for unimpeded
humanitarian access to the many in need, particularly
those in Mariupol, Kherson and other besieged cities.
We also urge the Security Council to reassure the world
of its relevance by approaching the other conflicts
with renewed vigour. The humanitarian crises caused
by conflict in Afghanistan, Haiti, the Horn of Africa,
Lebanon, Libya, Myanmar, Palestine and Israel, Syria,
Yemen and the Sahel, as well as the unfolding situation
in the Korean peninsula, deserve our urgent attention.
We look forward to the Secretary-General rallying
the international community to deploy resources
to cushion the most vulnerable from the effects of
the conflict in Ukraine. We reiterate our call for
the cessation of hostilities to allow humanitarian
operations under clearly defined contact lines and
humanitarian passages.
I conclude by reaffirming Kenya’s recognition
of the inviolable rights of Ukraine to its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish you every success, Madam President,
during your presidency this month and acknowledge
the work of the United Arab Emirates in leading the
Security Council last month.
We thank the Secretary-General and UnderSecretaries DiCarlo and Griffiths for their briefings. We
acknowledge the participation of President Volodymyr
Zelenskyy in this meeting of the Security Council. We
have listened to him with the utmost attention and with
the respect that we have for his dignity. We also watched
with horror the pictures he shared with us. They are the
Guernica mural, recreated anew with civilian victims.
For six weeks now, the world has been following
with dismay the devastating consequences of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine. Through two General Assembly
resolutions (General Assembly resolutions ES-11/1
and ES-11/2), the international community has spoken
out forcefully, deploring the invasion, demanding an
immediate cessation of hostilities and of any attack on
civilians or civilian infrastructure, and has called for
the urgent delivery of humanitarian assistance in an
expeditious, safe and unrestricted manner.
The International Court of Justice has also
demanded the immediate suspension of military
operations on Ukrainian territory. It is up to the United
20/31

05/04/2022

Nations to act as guarantor of compliance with the
Court’s decisions. All mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes under international law should
be channelled towards this common goal.
Regrettably, the hostilities are ongoing, and
civilian casualties are increasing, and with them the
humanitarian needs of the population are growing,
including with expanding urgency those of refugees
and internally displaced persons. The images of the
streets of Bucha and other cities, which have circulated
widely in recent days, have shocked the world. We
strongly condemn the atrocities depicted. There
is absolutely no justification for them. Protecting
civilians is an inalienable responsibility of the
international community.
As the High Commissioner for Human Rights has
pointed out, the serious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
make it necessary to maintain the possibility that
war crimes have indeed been committed. Mexico
fully supports the Secretary-General’s statement that
impartial investigations should be carried out as soon
as possible to identify those responsible and to ensure
effective accountability. We will also closely follow the
work of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and
we support the ICC Prosecutor who is in the process of
investigating alleged international crimes committed in
Ukraine. We also support the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry created for the same purpose
by the United Nations Human Rights Council. Their
reports will be decisive.
The consequences of this war have been terrible.
Its dramatic impact will also have serious effects in
the medium and long term, not only in the region,
but throughout the rest of the world. As the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme has made clear,
millions of people will pay the price for this conflict.
There will be shortages of basic foodstuffs in many
already insecure and fragile regions.
With all the difficulties involved and the urgency
they entail, the international community’s efforts to
address the humanitarian drama can only be temporary.
The fundamental solution is, as has been said in this
Chamber, an immediate cessation of hostilities and
a political agreement restoring negotiations through
diplomatic channels. We strongly support the efforts
of Under-Secretary Griffiths to agree on humanitarian
pauses to create the conditions on the ground for a
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

more fluid flow of humanitarian assistance. Mexico
recognizes and commends the work of all humanitarian
actors involved in Ukraine, as well as the solidarity
of neighbouring countries that have received millions
of refugees, and the mediation efforts of numerous
countries and different actors.
We hope that the Security Council, in strict
adherence to international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
will fulfil its responsibility and contribute effectively
to ending the war and restoring peace.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Secretary-General António Guterres for his presence
and remarks on the situation in Ukraine. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
respective briefings on the security and humanitarian
situation. We thank the participation of His Excellency
the President of Ukraine at today’s meeting. I also take
this opportunity to thank the United Arab Emirates
and Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh for their excellent
presidency of the Security Council last month.
The situation in Ukraine has not shown any
significant improvement since the Council last discussed
the issue (see S/PV.9008). The security situation has only
deteriorated, as have its humanitarian consequences.
Recent reports of civilian killings in Bucha are deeply
disturbing. We unequivocally condemn these killings
and support the call for an independent investigation.
We hope the international community will continue
to respond positively to the humanitarian needs. We
support calls urging guarantees of safe passage to
deliver essential humanitarian and medical supplies.
Keeping in view the dire humanitarian situation
in Ukraine, India has been sending humanitarian
supplies to Ukraine and its neighbours, which include
medicines and other essential relief material. We stand
ready to provide more medical supplies to Ukraine in
the coming days.
India continues to remain deeply concerned about
the worsening situation, and reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of violence and an end to the
hostilities. From the beginning of the conflict, we
emphasized the need to pursue the path of diplomacy
and dialogue. When innocent human lives are at stake,
diplomacy must prevail as the only viable option. In that

S/PV.9011

context, we take note of the ongoing efforts, including
the meetings held recently between the parties.
The impact of the crisis is being felt beyond
the region, with increasing food and energy costs,
especially for many developing countries. It is in our
collective interest to work constructively, both inside
the United Nations and outside, towards seeking an
early resolution to the conflict.
Allow me to once again reiterate the importance of
the United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance. Humanitarian action must always be guided
by the principles of humanitarian assistance, that is,
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Such measures should never be politicized.
We continue to emphasize to all States Members
of the United Nations that the global order is anchored
in international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of States.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. At the same time, I
would also like to thank Ambassador Nusseibeh and
her United Arab Emirates team for their outstanding
work during that country’s presidency of the Council
during the month of March.
The de-escalation of tensions in Ukraine, an early
ceasefire and putting an early end to the fighting are
the urgent expectations of the international community
and the strong desire of China. We have repeatedly
stressed that dialogue and negotiation are the only way
to open the door to peace. Russia and Ukraine have held
several rounds of negotiations. We call on the two sides
to adhere to the general path of peaceful negotiations,
overcome difficulties and differences and continue to
build conditions for a comprehensive settlement of the
crisis. The international community should create the
conditions and environment conducive to negotiations
between the two sides and space for a political
settlement. It should not set up obstacles to increase
resistance to peace, let alone add fuel to the fire to
aggravate the confrontation. Every effort should be
made to prevent the localized conflict from escalating.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine and supports all initiatives and
measures conducive to easing the humanitarian crisis in

22-3093521/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

Ukraine. As the current conflict continues, we call on
all parties to abide by international humanitarian law,
protect the safety of civilians and civilian facilities,
minimize civilian casualties, ensure safe and smooth
evacuation and access to humanitarian corridors and
guarantee the basic rights of women, children and
wounded combatants. Humanitarian issues should not
be politicized. The humanitarian needs of Ukraine and
neighbouring countries are enormous. International
humanitarian agencies should maintain neutrality
and impartiality, actively mobilize and coordinate
increased resources and make unremitting efforts to
save lives and protect civilians. China has provided,
and will continue to provide, humanitarian assistance
to Ukraine and neighbouring countries.
Under international humanitarian law, civilians
should be spared any form of violence in armed
conflict, and attacks against civilians are unacceptable
and should not occur. Reports and images of civilian
deaths in the town of Bucha are very disturbing, and the
circumstances and specific causes of the incident must
be established and verified. Any allegations should be
based on facts, and all parties should exercise restraint
and avoid groundless accusations until conclusions
are drawn.
As Secretary-General Guterres said, the spillover
effects of the Ukraine crisis are having a major impact
on the world, particularly developing countries. That
requires our close attention and must be managed
and controlled. Sanctions are not an effective
means to resolve the issue, but will accelerate the
spillover effects of the crisis and bring about new
and complex problems. Today, when globalization
is intensifying and the destiny of humankind is
closely interlinked, implementing comprehensive and
indiscriminate sanctions is tantamount to politicizing,
instrumentalizing and weaponizing the world
economy, triggering serious crises in the areas of global
economic, trade, financial, energy, food, and industrial
chains and supply chains, jeopardizing the development
achievements of the international community over
decades and causing the people of all countries to pay a
heavy price. The vast majority of developing countries
are not parties to the conflict and should not be involved
in the confrontation, let alone be forced to bear the
consequences of geopolitical conflicts and great power
games. The world’s major economies should take
responsibility, manage the risk of the spillover effects
22/31

05/04/2022

of the crisis and maintain the stability of global markets
and the momentum of the global economic recovery.
More than 30 years after the end of the Cold
War, such a geopolitical tragedy in Europe merits our
profound reflection. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries should be respected, and small
and medium-sized countries should not be pushed to
the forefront of confrontation between major Powers.
All countries have the right to decide their foreign
policies independently and should not be forced to
take sides. The security of all countries is indivisible,
and the security of one country cannot be achieved
at the expense of that of other countries. We call on
the United States, NATO and the European Union to
engage in comprehensive dialogues with Russia, face
head on differences accumulated over the years, find
solutions to problems and promote the establishment
of a balanced, effective and sustainable regional
security framework.
On the Ukraine issue, China does not seek
geopolitical self-interest. It is not our mindset to watch
the situation indifferently from the sidelines, let alone
add fuel to the fire. There is only one goal to which
we sincerely look forward, namely, peace. China will
continue to promote peace talks and play a constructive
and responsible role in helping to resolve the crisis
in Ukraine.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I welcome President Zelenskyy’s participation
in this meeting. Through him, I commend the courage
and spirit of resistance of the Ukrainian people.
France stands by his side. I thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings.
The war of aggression waged by Russia against
Ukraine has reached a new level of horror in recent
days. The images of mass graves, mass abuses against
civilians in the northern Ukrainian towns of Bucha,
Borodyanka and Motyzhyn have aroused condemnation
and indignation around the world. We express our
deepest sympathy for the victims and our full solidarity
with the Ukrainians. We of course remain shocked by
the appalling images that were shown in the video
earlier this morning.
France condemns in the strongest possible terms
the widespread abuses committed by Russian forces.
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

Such abuses could constitute war crimes as well as
crimes against humanity.
The disinformation tactics used by Russia to
conceal its crimes, regrettably, are no surprise to
anyone. Moscow again compounds the indignity of the
murder of civilians and the massacre of children with
lies, cynicism and denial. In the light of such heinous
crimes, France requests that we not yield to hatred. We
call for action to be taken in the following areas.
First, we must maintain the strongest pressure on
Russia to force its authorities to put an end to a war
that undermines global security and, as discussed, well
beyond Europe, in particular food security. France
remains fully committed to helping to achieve that
goal, in particular with its European partners, under
the French presidency of the Council of the European
Union, and in the Group of Seven. It will also continue
its resolute support for the Ukrainian authorities in all
its forms.
Secondly, the crimes committed in Ukraine must not
go unpunished. Credible and independent investigations
must be conducted to enable the competent national
and international courts to try those responsible for
those atrocities. We call in particular upon Russia
and Ukraine to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court and with the commission of inquiry on
Ukraine established by the Human Rights Council.
Russia is determined and methodical in its ongoing
war on Ukraine, which brings with it its share of
destruction and indescribable suffering. We call for
respect for international humanitarian law. Civilians,
including children and humanitarian workers, must be
protected. The same applies to civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools. We welcome the
mobilization of countries that share a border with
Ukraine, as they play a major role in receiving refugees.
The hospitality they demonstrate is a credit to Europe.
The European Union has mobilized a package
of more than €500 million in emergency support for
Ukraine. On 24 and 25 March, the European Council
announced plans to develop a solidarity trust fund for
the reconstruction of Ukraine. France will also play its
part by contributing €100 million in humanitarian aid.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Martin Griffiths to broker a humanitarian ceasefire to
enable the evacuation of civilians from besieged cities
and access to humanitarian aid. All efforts must be

S/PV.9011

made to end the hostilities. That is the first step towards
a lasting settlement of the conflict and a crucial sign of
a credible Russian commitment to the negotiations.
France is determined to continue contributing to
peace efforts, in particular by supporting Ukrainian
authorities in the quest for a political solution once a
ceasefire has been established, as well as by maintaining
channels of dialogue with Russia.
As the French Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, reminded us on 3 April,
France remains fully committed to putting an end to this
war of aggression, whose human cost and humanitarian
impact are becoming increasingly serious every day.
In the light of the horror and devastation caused by
the Russian aggression, France reaffirms its solidarity
and support for Ukraine and Ukrainians. We call on
the Russian people, who are also victims in this war,
to continue to find ways to express their opposition to
the conflict, despite the repression. It must be done to
break the mindset of hatred with which Vladimir Putin
seeks to hold hostage Ukrainians and Russians alike.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the briefers for their
valuable input.
Norway, too, expresses its utmost support for
the Secretary-General in making full use of his good
offices in the quest for a peaceful solution.
I would like to thank President Zelenskyy, through
the Ambassador of Ukraine, for his strong testimony
today and for the heroic fight in which the President,
the Ukrainian Government and the Ukrainian people
are engaged for their country and for the peace and
freedom of us all. We are with them. We support them.
As we heard from President Zelenskyy and saw this
weekend, the need for peace could not be more urgent.
For more than 40 days and nights, attacks by Russia
have continued to batter the Ukrainian people and their
cities, causing death and destruction. Their suffering is
escalating. We, too, are appalled by the reports coming
out of areas around Kyiv and other regions. We are
deeply shocked by the atrocities committed against
civilians in places that have been held by Russian forces,
including Bucha. The images are distressing — dead
bodies on roads and in mass graves; homes, schools,
hospitals and other civilian infrastructure destroyed
and reportedly left mined.
Russia is desperate to hide the truth about the war,
but atrocities must be investigated and those responsible

22-3093523/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

must be brought to justice. In that respect, we welcome
the establishment by the Human Rights Council of a
commission of inquiry on Ukraine to investigate all
alleged violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We also welcome
the fact that the International Criminal Court has
opened an investigation into the situation in Ukraine.
We urge Russia and everyone holding evidence to fully
cooperate with those investigations. We cannot allow
there to be impunity for war crimes being committed in
Ukraine. The world is watching.
Russia’s unprovoked and illegal war against
Ukraine, a free and sovereign country, is also an attack
on democratic values and freedom. It is a blatant
violation of international law and the very principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. As the SecretaryGeneral underlined earlier today, the Council has a
responsibility. We must do everything in our power to
end the war and mitigate its impact.
Let me repeat the message of Norwegian Prime
Minister Støre to President Putin when they spoke
on Thursday. He urged him to cease the hostilities
and emphasized that Russia must ensure rapid, safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access to the civilian
population, particularly in Mariupol. He also stressed
the need to find a negotiated solution for ending the war.
The suffering is widespread. Russia’s war is
causing the largest humanitarian crisis in Europe since
the Second World War. A quarter of the Ukrainian
population has now been displaced, and cluster
munitions will continue to maim and kill long after the
conflict has ended. The reconstruction, when it comes,
will take years. Ukraine has been set back decades in
its economic development, and the consequences of this
war will be felt by generations of Ukrainians.
Russia’s voice is also being felt globally,
exacerbating other humanitarian crises and causing a
serious negative effect on the agricultural sector, with
a global rise in food insecurity and increased prices of
fuel and fertilizer.
Before concluding, let me be very clear: Russia must
abide by international law. It must comply with the order
of the International Court of Justice to immediately
suspend this military operation and withdraw its troops
from Ukraine. The killing and destruction must end.
Russia must stop its illegal war.
24/31

05/04/2022

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I congratulate the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates for its
successful presidency in the preceding month and wish
you, Madam President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom the very best for this month.
Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his briefing to the Security Council and welcome
the briefings of Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin
Griffiths on the prevailing situation in Ukraine and the
coordinated humanitarian response of United Nations
agencies in the face of difficult operational challenges
on the ground.
I also welcome the virtual participation in today’s
meeting of the President of Ukraine, His Excellency
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy. My delegation has taken
careful note of the Ukrainian President’s remarks
and his country’s steadfast commitment to peace
and encourage the path of dialogue and diplomacy in
finding a settlement to this needless war.
The prolongation of the war in Ukraine continues
to be a situation of deep concern for Ghana. We are
particularly disturbed by the increasing humanitarian
cost arising from the unjustified aggression of the
Russian Federation against Ukraine.
We have observed with pain the unbridled
bombardment of civilian populated areas, as well as
civilian and other critical infrastructure, without regard
to the customary norms of international law and the
principles of international humanitarian law relating to
armed conflict.
Ghana is gravely concerned about the reports of
alleged gross violations of international humanitarian
law and international criminal law since the onset of
the invasion, including emerging reports and images
of human rights violations and the killing of civilians
in Mariupol, Chernihiv, Kharkiv and areas on the
outskirts of Kyiv, such as Bucha. We support the
Secretary-General’s call for independent, impartial
and thorough investigations to establish facts, gather
evidence and hold all perpetrators of such atrocious
crimes accountable for their actions.
The killing of children, the elderly, medical
personnel, humanitarian workers and journalists is
deplorable, and we condemn all such acts unreservedly.
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

We urge restraint on all sides and re-emphasize
the urgency of an unconditional cessation of hostilities
nationwide in order to enable the evacuation and safe
passage of civilians and facilitate the delivery of
life-saving aid to people in the cities who remain under
siege. Humanitarian agencies require unobstructed
access to reach people in need of food, water and
medicine and other critical supplies, and all parties
must guarantee such access.
The ravages of both the global coronavirus
disease pandemic and the situation in Ukraine
serve to demonstrate the interconnectedness and
interdependence of States and to reinforce the need for
a unified international response in support of the path
of dialogue and diplomacy.
We have followed closely the direct negotiations
between the conflicting parties and note the progress
made in the fourth round of consultations, which took
place in Istanbul on 29 March. In order to support the
negotiations, we urge restraint in the ongoing hostilities
and follow-through on the expressed commitments to
resolve the security concerns of the parties.
In furtherance of the efforts of the parties, the Council
must now focus on supporting confidence-building
measures that facilitate a negotiated settlement of the
immediate conflict and the wider question of European
security on the basis of international law and other
internationally agreed frameworks. The convergence
of the parties and the international community on
these matters is the only way to end tensions, bridge
the differences between the parties and forge a unified
position on the situation in Ukraine.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to join others in congratulating you and your team,
Madam President, for assuming the presidency and
wishing you a productive month. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator for their helpful
briefings. We also thank President Zelenskyy for his
address to the Security Council.
We have once again heard in the Council deeply
sobering and concerning reports from the ground,
including from Martin Griffiths and Rosemary
DiCarlo. With every meeting, the Council is reminded
of the rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation on
the ground in Ukraine — one quarter of the country’s

S/PV.9011

population have fled their homes, and the rising death
toll and the destruction of critical civilian infrastructure
are a grim reflection of the tragic human cost of war.
The images coming out of Bucha and other towns
and cities are shocking. The alleged crimes they entail
are of the utmost gravity. First and foremost, as others
have said, we must establish what happened there, with
the cooperation of all parties. It is imperative that we
do not get caught up in a war of narratives in addition
to the conflict that is ongoing. Indeed, we need to allow
for the existing mechanisms to investigate facts on the
ground impartially so that justice for all victims can be
served. We acknowledge the Secretary-General’s call
for that independent investigation as well as last week’s
appointment of the members of the Human Rights
Council’s independent, international commission of
inquiry on Ukraine.
As we enter the sixth week of conflict, we believe
that an immediate cessation of hostilities throughout
Ukraine is imperative in order to move towards a
peaceful solution to the war in Ukraine. We take note of
efforts to reach a diplomatic resolution to the conflict,
and we see the ongoing negotiations — several rounds
of negotiations — between Russia and Ukraine as a very
positive development. We remain hopeful that those
efforts at the negotiating table can urgently translate
into de-escalation on the ground, and we urge others to
support those efforts.
We also welcome the readout from Mr. Griffiths
on his meetings with senior Russian officials, as well
as his upcoming meetings with Ukrainian officials.
Establishing a viable humanitarian ceasefire could be a
stepping stone for broader negotiations and, eventually,
a sustainable peace.
However, until a cessation of hostilities is achieved,
the priority must be to work towards protecting and
alleviating the suffering of civilians. In addition to
the points we made during the most recent Council
meeting on Ukraine on 29 March (S/PV.9008), I
want to focus here on four additional points for the
Council’s consideration.
First, as others have done, we all need to continue
to reaffirm the need for all parties to abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians
and respect for the principles of distinction and
proportionality, which are paramount in conflict.

22-3093525/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

Secondly, the difficulties in providing relief and
humanitarian access need to be addressed immediately
and can be addressed quickly. It is critical to find
either local or broad-based agreements for security
guarantees so as to allow for the safe provision of
humanitarian assistance and for civilians to voluntarily
evacuate safely. Those are initial confidence-building
measures that can be developed down the line and
should also be encouraged, including the proposals left
by Mr. Griffiths with the Government in Moscow.
Thirdly, as the International Committee of
the Red Cross has noted, false narratives and
disinformation have the potential to cause real harm
for humanitarian organizations on the ground. The
use of digital technologies that amplify the spread
of harmful information, including misinformation,
disinformation and hate speech, is a true challenge
in conflict zones. Those phenomena are not new, but
technology has greatly increased the scale and speed
at which harmful information reaches target audiences
online. That is particularly concerning in crisis settings
where information can influence the dynamics and
behaviour on the ground and can put communities and
humanitarian responders at risk.
Fourthly, at a time of conflict, protecting civilians,
of course, must be our top priority. However, we should
not forget the impact that war has on a nation’s cultural
heritage and identity. We are concerned by UNESCO’s
recent reports on the dozens of cultural sites that have
been damaged in Ukraine since the conflict began. We
know from our experience in the Middle East that the
protection of cultural sites is critical to rebuilding peace.
In moments of violence and turmoil, cultural sites are
essential cornerstones for collective memory and a
foundation for future reconciliation. We therefore call
on all parties to refrain from the unlawful destruction
of cultural heritage and to think about what comes next
after the war concludes for the people living there and
how they go about building peace.
Before I end, allow me to take a moment to reflect
on what others have commented on, including the
Secretary-General — the devastating impact of the
conflict on food security worldwide. We are alarmed
by the figures shared just now by the Secretary-General
on how the war is affecting some of the most vulnerable
communities around the world — 1.2 billion people
in 47 developing countries are at risk due to rising
food prices.
26/31

05/04/2022

Food shortages are aggravating situations already
on the Council’s agenda, and those shortages are felt in
other settings where high prices of basic commodities
can lead to further unrest and instability, not just in this
part of the world but around the globe. We look forward
to seeing the United Nations Global Crisis Response
Group on Food, Energy and Finance address those
issues and offer it our full support.
Let us not forget that the effects of this war are
hitting communities that are still reeling from the global
coronavirus disease pandemic. These vulnerabilities
are further exacerbated by reduced domestic food
production due to the rising costs and scarcity of
chemical fertilizers and pesticides. The knock-on
effects, including global conflicts, will be grave and
the Council must stay focused on all of them.
Unless we do something to end this conflict now,
it will continue to drive suffering and instability
worldwide in the coming months and years. The world
simply cannot afford that. The Security Council should
do its part to stop this conflict and to help parties reach
a peaceful solution.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
The United Nations was created in the wake of a
European war of aggression that laid waste to Europe
and engulfed the world. All of us who signed the Charter
of the United Nations committed to ending the scourge
of war, to fundamental human rights, to the dignity
and worth of the human person, to the equal rights of
nations large and small, to justice and to respect for
international law.
Yet now we are facing another war of aggression
in Europe. We have heard again today the devastating
impact of Russia’s unilateral and illegal military action
on Ukraine, its impact on surrounding countries and
the region and on the security and prosperity of the
wider world as it seeks to recover from the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Thousands have been killed and
millions have been displaced. Cities have been razed
to the ground, hospitals have been bombed and citizens
have been cut off from food, water and medicine. Sea
ports have been blockaded and wheat prices have seen
a rapid increase. More pressure has been placed upon
already stretched humanitarian resources.
Now, as Russia is forced to retreat from areas
around Kyiv, the brutality of the invasion is laid bare.
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

We have all seen the horrific images from the towns of
Bucha and Irpin of civilians deliberately killed in areas
from which Russian forces have recently withdrawn.
The video we saw earlier underlined that horror. Those
acts and other credible incidents must be investigated
as war crimes and the United Kingdom fully supports
the work of the International Criminal Court and the
work of the Ukrainian Prosecutor General and other
national prosecutors.
As we and so many others have said so many times,
all of that could be stopped if the Russian Federation
ends the war now.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I know that this will not bring us any closer
to the end of today’s meeting, but given that today’s
topic is extremely important, I think that it is essential
to say a few words on the reason this meeting was
convened, especially as we were not given the chance
to elaborate on that yesterday in a separate meeting of
the Security Council on the matter. Unfortunately, our
Western colleagues have tried to sweep our request
for yesterday’s meeting under the rug by any means
possible, providing us with a fine example of what the
new “rules-based order” really is.
I would like to focus once again on the events in
Bucha, which became the premise for convening today’s
meeting and has led many Council members to jump to
far-reaching conclusion. All Russian armed forces units
fully withdrew from Bucha as a gesture of good faith
on 30 March, the day after a round of negotiations was
conducted between Russia and Ukraine in Turkey. A
report on the matter was published the very same day on
the official website of the Russian Ministry of Defence.
During the time that the town was under the control
of the Russian armed forces, not a single civilian
suffered any kind of violence. People were able to
move freely around the town and use their cell phones.
Furthermore, the Russian army supplied 452 tons of
humanitarian assistance to cities and towns in Kyiv
oblast. There is evidence to support this. The exits
from the town were not blocked; all inhabitants were
free to evacuate towards the north.

S/PV.9011

Meanwhile, the areas to the south of Bucha,
including residential areas, were shelled around the
clock by Ukrainian forces with heavy calibre weapons,
tanks and mortars. After the withdrawal of Russian
forces from the city, the Mayor of Bucha, Anatoliy
Fedoruk, in a video statement on 31 March, presented
that withdrawal as a heroic liberation of the city by the
Ukrainian Armed Forces.
Let him be responsible for the misrepresentation of
circumstances of that so-called liberation and focus on
the fact that he confirmed that, on 31 March, there were
no longer any Russian soldiers in the town. Furthermore,
the Mayor did not mention any local inhabitants having
been shot with their hands tied. Can one believe that
the Mayor did not notice 280 corpses on the streets, as
reported? On 1 April, Bucha city councillor Kateryna
Ukraintseva warned her fellow residents several
times in a two-minute video that representatives of
the Ukrainian security forces had entered the town
and were conducting a mop-up operation. She asked
everyone to be very careful.
Currently, on the web, one can also find an almost
eight-minute-long video on the announced mop-up of
Bucha by the Ukrainian national police on 2 April. In
that video, there are no bodies of civilians on the street.
Furthermore, in that video, the National Guard of
Ukraine conducts interviews with local residents, who
also make no mention of corpses or mass shootings.
On one Ukrainian news site, there was also a warning
posted on the upcoming mop-up of Bucha on 2 April
by Russian collaborators. It has now been deleted, but
some users were able to save it.
The so-called evidence of crimes by the Russian
forces in Bucha appeared only on 3 April — the fourth
day after Russian forces left the town. Once again,
without any evidence and based on the presumption of
guilt, the Russian army is being accused of evil deeds.
Of course, we could not help but notice how quickly
the images by Ukrainian journalists were lapped
up by Western politicians and famous human rights
organizations claiming to be impartial and unbiased.
At the same time, the obvious inconsistencies in
the Ukrainian version of events promoted by Ukraine
and westerners are pointedly ignored. If the corpses
had been out in the open for several days, they would
have displayed signs that are well-known to forensic
specialists. Our Western colleagues do not seem to
be bothered by that. Otherwise, The New York Times

22-3093527/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

would not go even further to state that the corpses
had been there on the streets since 20 March. Can you
imagine the kind of state they would be in if that were
indeed that case?
Furthermore, many of the bodies in the videos
circulated by the Ukrainians were wearing identifying
marks — white arm bands. Those arm bands were worn
by civilians after the Russian armed forces entered
the town. In one video posted online by Ukrainian
radicals, a call to shoot anyone not wearing a blue arm
band can be heard. That video, taken during the mopup of Bucha, was posted by a leader of the Territorial
Defence Battalion, to whom the Ukrainian authorities
had handed out weapons in an uncontrolled way.
Furthermore, the member of the City Council of Bucha
whom I mentioned, Kateryna Ukraintseva, stated on
the Meduza website that she had not seen Russian
forces execute any civilians. In the same interview. she
confirmed that it is the Armed Forces of Ukraine that
are guilty of most of the destruction. Of course, those
details have not been mentioned in the presentations
made by our Western and Ukrainian colleagues.
However, Ukrainian President Zelenskyy is
already claiming that all the staged events in Bucha
give the Ukrainians the right to an uncivilized
response. We can only imagine what that is based on
how Ukrainian radicals behaved in the east of Ukraine.
Many testimonials about their crimes are shocking.
Unfortunately, the Ukrainian experts on disinformation
and staging do not intend to stop there.
As the Ministry of Defence has claimed based
on confirmed information, in the evening of 4 April
in the town of Moschun, 23 kilometres north-west of
Kyiv, troops from the 72nd Center for Information and
Psychological Operations, Ukraine, shot another staged
video of civilians allegedly killed by Russian troops for
future circulation by Western media. Those kinds of
activities were carried out by Ukraine’s special forces
in Sumy and other towns.
In conclusion, I would like to address my Western
colleagues. We understand very well what they are doing
by playing the Ukraine card and fuelling anti-Russian
hysteria every single day. We are assuming that there
will be further horrible provocations similar to the one
in Bucha and fresh attempts to discredit Russian soldiers
and present them as sadists, murderers and rapists.
I say once again that this is an incredibly low
blow. Of course, they are not interested in the fact that
28/31

05/04/2022

modern technologies today make it possible to create
any video. We watched a video today presented by the
Ukrainian side. Already there is plenty of information
refuting what was in the video, stating that it was
filmed in a different place, at a different time and with
different people.
Just a few words to my American colleague, who
launched a crusade to exclude Russia from the Human
Rights Council. That was stated by the representative
of a country who three years ago criticized the Council
in the strongest, harshest terms because it had the
audacity to condemn the actions of American soldiers in
Afghanistan and Iraq. And, as is well known, the United
States left the Council. I hope that all our colleagues
from the United Nations will not allow themselves to
be manipulated and play up to Washington, as that is a
very dangerous game.
The President: The representative of Ukraine
has asked to make a further statement. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to say
a couple of things in Russian and then switch back
to English.
(spoke in Russian)
We have become accustomed to the lies that are
constantly being spewed in the Security Council
Chamber. Comrade Nebenzia decided to quote from an
interview from a media outlet called Meduza. I should
like to ask Comrade Nebenzia why he does not quote
the interview in full? Let me quote from that interview,
which the representative of Putin wanted to use for his
own purposes.
These are the words of the woman he mentioned:
“Sometimes Russian soldiers sent dry rations to the
basement, and then, after lowering those rations,
they tossed grenades into the basement.”
He wanted to quote that interview. Why did
he not quote the whole interview? This is about
their humanitarian assistance. After providing that
humanitarian assistance, they toss grenades. That is an
interview from the same woman he mentioned.
(spoke in English)
I would like to make a further statement in
response to the hypocritical questions put by Putin’s
representative. After the video we saw, with the
22-30935

05/04/2022

Ukraine

shocking images from Bucha, Irpin, Motyzhyn and
other sites, he should ask those very questions of
himself. When did the Russians get to be as cruel as
Nazis? When did they start enjoying acting like Nazis?
Killing civilians, attempting to redraw internationally
recognized borders and setting themselves the task of
finally resolving the Ukrainian issue, just like Hitler
attempted to resolve the Jewish issue.
When did they miss the point at which Russia
turned into a Nazi-style cancerous tumour, unable
and unwilling to stop expanding and bringing to
neighbouring nations suffering, destruction, pain and
death? I am appalled at his cynical and outright lie that
they do not hit civilian targets and that is why they
are moving so slowly. They do hit civilian targets and
kill civilians.
Shall I quote his own words, spoken yesterday at
the press conference that he gave here at Headquarters,
in which he said that civilians were being killed by the
Russian army, or shall I not? Shall I play the video?
He said that this is war, and civilians re killed in
wartime. It is warfare, he said. Perhaps in his mind, the
children’s hospital in Mykolaiv destroyed by a Russian
strike yesterday was a military target. And perhaps
one of the children killed as a result of the strike was a
Ukrainian nationalist.
The only truth he has spoken is that the Russians
are not moving as planned, and the only reason is the
resistance of the Ukrainian army and the Ukrainian
people, not the Russians’ smart military planning. The
Ukrainian people realize quite clearly what the Russian
world means in reality means.
We thank the international community for its
solidarity with Ukraine. Ukraine will win on its
territory and the entire world will win, despite the
threats that the criminal and liar throws in the face of
the Security Council.
Finally, if there is anything that we have to thank the
Russian representative for, it is his acknowledgement at
yesterday’s press conference that Russia is waging war
against Ukraine — “war”, he said several times, not
the “special operation”. I believe that confession will
impact the United Nations assessment of what is going
on at the centre of Europe. Perhaps it was a unique
moment when we should believe what a fully accredited
representative says in the United Nations.

S/PV.9011

Once again, I remind Putin’s diplomats that
Ribbentrop denied any knowledge of concentration
camps or racial extermination policies, yet he was found
guilty of war crimes at the Nuremberg trials. And we
all know what happened to him on 16 October 1946.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to address the
Security Council on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Iceland, Liechtenstein, the Republic of Moldova,
Georgia, Monaco and San Marino all align themselves
with this statement.
I want to start by congratulating you, Madam
President, and the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April, and by thanking you, Madam, for convening this
meeting and inviting us to speak. I also acknowledge
the presidency of the United Arab Emirates for the
month of March.
I want to thank the Secretary-General and UnderSecretaries-General DiCarlo and Griffiths for their
briefings, and I want to express our full support to,
solidarity with and respect for the heroic people of
Ukraine, as embodied by the address delivered this
morning by President Zelenskyy.
Forty-one days ago, Russia decided to wage a war
of aggression against Ukraine, in blatant violation of
international law, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the acquis of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. It was an
affront to the rules-based order and to global security
and stability. We have heard and seen again today the
tremendous cost to the people of Ukraine.
The dramatic consequences of Russia’s war of
choice are well known. Thousands of lives have been
lost and more than 11 million people — most of them
women and children — have been forced to leave their
homes. More than 500 schools and 52 hospitals have
been shelled; entire cities have been razed to the ground.
The unfolding drama in Mariupol and the images from
Bucha stain our common humanity. Russia must stop
that senseless act of violence.
The EU condemns in the strongest terms Russia’s
unjustified and unprovoked war of aggression against
Ukraine. We demand that Russia immediately stop its
military aggression, immediately and unconditionally

22-3093529/31

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

withdraw all forces from the entire territory of
Ukraine, and fully respect Ukraine’s territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence within its
internationally recognized borders, as demanded by the
General Assembly.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms the
reported atrocities committed by the Russian armed
forces in a number of occupied Ukrainian towns.
Haunting images of massacres, with large numbers of
civilian deaths and casualties, as well as the destruction
of civilian infrastructure, show the true face of
Russia’s brutal war of aggression. Those massacres
will be inscribed on the list of atrocities committed by
Russia on European soil. The Russian authorities are
responsible for those crimes, committed while they had
effective control of the area. They are subject to the
international law of occupation.
Russia is directing attacks against the civilian
population and is targeting civilian objects, including
hospitals, medical facilities, schools and shelters.
Those war crimes must stop immediately. Those
responsible will be held to account, in accordance with
international law.
We welcome the International Court of Justice’s
provisional measures ordering Russia to suspend
military operations immediately. We fully support
the investigation launched by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court into war crimes and
crimes against humanity, as well as the work of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine. The EU is assisting the Ukrainian Prosecutor
General and civil society in the collection and
preservation of evidence of the war crimes. It is clear.
There must be and there will be accountability.
The EU and its member States are providing shelter
for the more than 4 million refugees who fled Russia’s
violence. They do so regardless of nationality, ethnicity,
religion or race. We have adopted sanctions against
the Russian Government, its financial and defence
sectors, and those individuals enabling and financing
the aggression.
We have committed significant funding to the
United Nations humanitarian flash appeal and the
regional refugee response plan on Ukraine. So far,
the EU and its member States have mobilized over
€1.1 billion in emergency aid. That comes on top of
the €2.4 billion in humanitarian, emergency and early
30/31

05/04/2022

recovery assistance the EU and its member States have
provided to Ukraine since 2014.
In the largest ever operation under the EU Civil
Protection Mechanism, 29 countries — all EU member
States, together with Norway and Turkey — have
responded to the request for assistance from Ukraine.
As of 4 April, over 13,000 tons of medicines, hospital
equipment, ambulances, firefighting equipment, food
and energy supplies had arrived in Ukraine. European
leaders have set up a Ukraine Solidarity Trust Fund
to channel support to post-war reconstruction. At the
pledging event on 9 April, with Canada we will further
showcase that we stand in words and deeds with the
courageous people of Ukraine.
After the Security Council was unable to take
action, the General Assembly demonstrated once
again, less than two weeks ago, the overwhelming
international rejection of the Russian aggression and
overwhelming support for addressing the humanitarian
crisis in Ukraine. The international community
demanded safe and unhindered passage for civilians
fleeing violence, as well as humanitarian access to
those in need. International humanitarian law must
be respected.
The dramatic consequences of Russia’s war against
Ukraine are not limited to Europe; they are global.
Ukrainian farmers are prevented from sowing as a
result of Russian shelling. Ships filled with wheat are
blocked in Black Sea ports by Russian military forces.
As a result, food prices have skyrocketed, pushing
people into poverty and threatening to destabilize
entire regions. The poorest countries, as we have heard,
are the most vulnerable to shocks in food prices. All
this is a direct result of the war, despite Russia’s cynical
attempts to shift the blame.
The EU and its member States are fully mobilized
to end the war, in line with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. But at the same time,
crises the world over need our urgent attention. The EU
will continue to provide humanitarian and development
support to our partner countries, from North Africa to
the Middle East and from sub-Saharan Africa to Asia.
We are scaling up our multilateral action to provide
support to countries with acute food insecurity and
are committed to keeping global trade routes open
so agricultural staples can feed the world. The EU
has pledged €2.5 billion for international cooperation
related to nutrition for the period 2021-2024.
22-30935

05/04/2022

S/PV.9011

Ukraine

We also fully support the work of the United
Nations to deliver and scale up humanitarian assistance,
protect refugees and work towards a ceasefire. With a
particular focus on food security, we will contribute to
the work of the Global Crisis Response Group on Food,
Energy and Finance to deal with the global social and
economic effects of the war. We heard the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations this morning, and we have
already launched a strategy for safeguarding food
security and reinforcing the resilience of food systems,
backed by increased assistance.
Once again, we call on Russia to cease the
destruction of innocent lives across Ukraine and
immediately and unconditionally withdraw all its

troops. We call for an immediate ceasefire, safe passage
to civilians trapped in war zones and uninterrupted
humanitarian access. We stand in solidarity with the
people of Ukraine and all other people affected by
the war of Russian aggression. We stand in support of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and we
will continue to work diligently with the United Nations
and our partners to end the aggression and the address
humanitarian needs.
The President: I acknowledge the written
statement submitted before this meeting by the
delegation of Poland and on behalf of the eight Nordic
Baltic countries.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

22-3093531/31
