II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

---------~

Unity in the relevant work of the United Nations bodies
concerned, including in particular the positive role
played by the Administrative Secretary-General and the
General Secretariat of the Organization of African
Unity;
3. Welcomes the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity to find African solutions to some of the
issues of vital importance to the international community;
4. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the
present grave situation in southern Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in
this connexion, draws attention to the Assistance Fund
for the Struggle against Colonialism and Apartheid
established by the Organization of African Unity;
6. Draws once again the attention of United Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the Special Committee
against Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the United Nations Council
for Namibia, to the continued need to take effective
measures to associate closely the Organization of African Unity regularly with all their work concerning
Africa;
7. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and intensify their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution and
on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African Unity and the organizations concerned within the United Nations system.

67th plenary meeting
16 November 1976
31/16. Credentials of representatives to the
thirty-first session of the General Assembly
A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee. 35
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1976
35 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/31/308.

21

B
The General A.1sembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.313
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/20.

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 37
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this problem therefore continues to aggravate the Middle East
conflict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international peace and security,
Reaffirming that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be established without the achievement, inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of
Palestine on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right
of return and the right to national independence and
sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned
to it by the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the Committee and
endorses the recommendations contained therein, as a
basis for the solution of the question of Palestine;
3. Decides to circulate the report to all the competent bodies of the United Nations and urges them to
take necessary action, as appropriate, in accordance
with the Committee's programme of implementation;
4. Urges the Security Council to consider once
again as soon as possible the recommendations contained in the report, taking fully into account the observations made thereon during the debate in the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, in order to take
the necessary measures to implement the above-mentioned recommendations of the Committee so as to
achieve early progress towards a solution of the problem of Palestine and the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East;
5. A uthorizcs the Committee to exert all efforts to
promote the implementation of its recommendations
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session;
6. Requests the Committee to promote the greatest
possible dissemination of information on its programme
of implementation through non-governmental organizations and other appropriate means;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest
possible publicity to the Committee's work and to
86 Ibid., document A/31/308/ Add, 1.
37 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement

No. 35 (A/31135).

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

22

provide the Committee with all the necessary facilities
for the performance of its tasks, including summary
records of its meetings;
8. Decides to include the item entitled "Question
of Palestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirtysecond session.
77th plenary meeting
24 November 1976
31/21.

Admission of new Members to the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having examined the special report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly, 38
Taking note of the letter of 18 November 1976 from
the Permanent Observer of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the General Assembly, 39
Convinced of the ability and willingness of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to carry out the obligations
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating its conviction that the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam is fully qualified for membership in the
United Nations in accordance with Article 4 of the
Charter,
Recalling that resolution 3366 (XXX) of 19 September 1975, in which the General Assembly requested
the Security Council to reconsider immediately and favourably the application of Viet Nam, was adopted by
123 votes in favour and none against,
Noting that in the general debate of the current session of the General Assembly the admission of Viet
Nam to membership in the United Nations received the
unequivocal and widespread support of the Members
of the Organization,
Expressing deep regret and concern that, on 15 November 1976, 40 one negative vote by a permanent
member of the Security Council prevented the adoption
of the draft resolution supported by fourteen members
of the Council recommending the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations,
1. Considers that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations;
2. Accordingly recommends that the Security Council should reconsider the matter favourably in strict
conformity with Article 4 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
80th plenary meeting
26 November 1976
31/44. Admission of the People's Republic of
Angola to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 22 November 1976 that the People's Re88 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/31/330.
ao A/31/349.
40 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first
Year, 1972nd meeting.

public of Angola should be admitted to membership
in the United Nations, 41
Having considered the application for membership
of the People's Republic of Angola, 42
Decides to admit the People's Republic of Angola
to membership in the United Nations.
84th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/60.

Appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation contained in Security Council resolution 400 (1976) of
7 December 1976, 43
Expressing its appreciation for the effective and dedicated service rendered to the United Nations by
Mr. Kurt Waldheim during his first term of office,
Appoints Mr. Kurt Waldheim Secretary-General of
the United Nations for a second term of office beginning
on I January 1977 and ending on 31 December 1981.
93rd plenary meeting
8 December 1976
31/61.

The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3414 (XXX) of 5 December
1975 and noting with concern that no progress has
been achieved towards the implementation of that resolution, in particular its paragraph 4,
Recalling the debate held in the Security Council in
January 197644 on the Middle East problem including
the Palestinian question, in implementation of subparagraph (a) of Council resolution 381 (1975) of 30 November 1975,
Deeply concerned at the increasing deterioration of
the situation in the Middle East due to continued Israeli
occupation and Israel's refusal to implement United
Nations resolutions,
Reaffirming the necessity of establishing a just and
lasting peace in the region based on full respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations as well as for the resolutions concerning the
problem of the Middle East and the question of
Palestine,
t. Affirms that the early resumption of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East with the participation
of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine
Liberation Organization, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX) of 10 November
1975, is essential for the realization of a just and lasting
settlement in the region;
4 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/31/340.
42 A/31/85-S/ 12064. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement
for April, May and June 1976.
43 Official Records of tile General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 17, document A/31/393.
44 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first
Year, 1870th to 1879th meetings.
