218

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

11. Considers that ali Member Sta tes must promote international co-operation on the basis of respect for the independence, sovercignty and territorial integrity of each
State, including the right of cvery people to choose freely
its own socio-economic and political system and to exercise full sovercignty over its wealth and natural resources,
subject to the principies referred to in article 1, paragraph 2, and article 25 of thc Intcrnational Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, with a view to solving international economic, social and humanitarian problems;
12. Expresses concern at the disparity existing between
established norms and principies and the actual situation
of ali human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
world;
13. Urges ali States to co-operate with the Commission
on Human Rights in thc promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms:
14. Reiterates the need to create, at the national and
international levels, conditions for the full promotion and
protection of the human rights of individuals and peoples:
15. Reaffirms once again that, in order to facilitate the
full enjoyment of ali human rights without diminishing
personal dignity, it is necessary to promote the rights to
education, work, health and proper nourishment through
the adoption of measures at the national leve!, including
those that provide for the participation ofworkers in management, as well as the adoption of measures at the international level. including the establishment of the new international economic ordcr;
16. Decides that the approach to future work within
the United Nations system on human rights matters
should also take into account the content of the Declaration on the Right to Development ancl the need for the implementation thereof:
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms"
93rd plenary meeting
7 Deccmber 1987
42/120.

New international humanitarian order

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its rcsolutions 36/ 136 of 14 December 1981,
37/201 of 18 Decembcr 1982, 38/125 of 16 Decemhcr
1983 and 40/126 of 1.1 Dccemher 1985,
Recalling further thc rcports of the SecretaryGeneral, 136
Bearing in mind the comments communicated by Governments to the Secretary-General regarding a new international humanitarian order.
Recognizing the urgent need further to improve and
strengthen the international framcwork relating to
humanitarian issues while taking fully into account existing instruments and mechanisms,
Noting with concern that emergencies and disaster<;,
mostly man-madc, havc mcreased in frequency in recent
years, posing a growing challcnge to mcchanisms of international responses to t hem .

116 A/_17/145

A/1X/450. A 14() 14X ,rnd ,\t!d I and 2 ami •\/41 i.P::'

Aware that institutional arrangements and actions hy
governmental and non-governmental bodies require further strengthening, as well as adjustment to new realities.
in order to respond more effectively and speedily to contemporary humanitarian problems,
Noting the efforts ofthe Independent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues to promote public awareness of humanitarian issues, analyse relatively neglected
aspects and identify alternative approaches for resolving
humanitarian problems,
Notingfurtherthe establishment, outside the United Nations, of an Independent Bureau for Humanitarian Issues
to disseminate and follow up the work of the Independent
Commission,
Taking note of the report of the Independent Commission, as well as the sectoral reports on specific
humanitarian issues,
J _ Expresses its appreciation to the co-chairmen and
members of the lndependent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues for their humanitarian endeavours;
2_ Draws the attention of Governments and intergovernmental organizations, including those functioning at
the r_egional level, to the report of the Independent Comm1ss1011;
3. Requests the Independent Commission to transmit
its report to Member States and to the executive heads of
specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations system in order to enable them to consider its analyses and conclusions:
4. Invites ali non-governmental organizations concerned with the humanitarian issues examined by the Independent Commission to bear in mind the recommendations and suggestions made in its report in the context of
their policies and actions in the field;
S. Invites Governments to make available to the Secretary-General, on a voluntary basis, information and expertise on humanitarian issues of concern to them, in order to
identify opportunities for future action and to strengthen
international co-operation in the humanitarian field;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain in contact
with Governments, relevant specialized agencies and
programmes of the United Nations system, 11011governmental organizations concerned and the lndependent Bureau for Humanitarian Issues and to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, on the basis of
information made available to him, on the progress made
in the humanitarian field;
7. Decides to review at its forty-third session the question of a new international humanitarian order.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987
42/121.

International co-operation in the humanitarian
field

The General Assembly,
Noting that one of the purposes of the United Nations,
set forth in its Charter, is to achieve international co
operation in solving international problems or a
humanitarian character,
Guidcd, in particular, by the determination expressed in
thc Charter, tl, reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth of
thc human per-,on.
