S/PV.8970

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8970th meeting

Monday, 21 February 2022, 9 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26390 (E)
*2226390*

Ukraine

S/PV.8970

in the Luhansk region; and 2,158 ceasefire violations,
including 1,100 explosions, in the Donetsk region.

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: It is with great concern and sadness
that I brief the Council this evening on the unfolding
dangerous situation in and around Ukraine.
In his statement today, the Secretary-General was
clear. The Secretary-General considers the decision of
the Russian Federation to recognize the independence
of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions to
be a violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Ukraine and inconsistent with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We very much regret
this decision, which risks having regional and global
repercussions.
We also regret the order today to deploy
Russian troops into eastern Ukraine, reportedly on a
peacekeeping mission.
These developments follow the decision to order a
mass evacuation of civilian residents of Donetsk and
Luhansk into the Russian Federation.
We are concerned by the escalating shelling
across the contact line, reportedly leading to a number
of casualties. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine has recorded a total of 3,231 ceasefire
violations in the Donbas area from 18 to 20 February;
1,073 ceasefire violations, including 926 explosions
2/15

21/02/2022

We remind all involved of their responsibilities
under international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
Although the United Nations is not in a position
to verify the numerous claims and allegations made
by various actors, we are deeply concerned about the
reports of civilian casualties, the targeting of critical
civilian infrastructure and ongoing evacuations.
We are extremely concerned about the possible
implications of the latest developments for the
existing negotiation frameworks. Amid the current
risks and uncertainty, it is even more important
to pursue dialogue. Negotiation is the only way to
address the existing differences among the key actors
regarding regional security issues and the settlement
of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, in accordance with
resolution 2202 (2015).
Before the current, already dangerous conditions
escalate further, we call on all relevant actors to focus
their efforts on an immediate cessation of hostilities.
Civilians and civilian infrastructure must be protected,
and actions and statements that may worsen the situation
must be avoided.
Over the past few weeks, key actors have been
engaged in intense diplomatic efforts to avert a
new eruption of conflict in the heart of Europe. The
Secretary-General fully supports these efforts and has
deplored even the possibility that a new conflict could
even break out.
We are committed to our long-term partnership
with Ukraine — a founding Member of the United
Nations — as it continues to pursue its democratic reform
agenda 30 years after independence. And once again, we
reiterate the full commitment of the United Nations to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, within its internationally recognized
borders, according to General Assembly resolutions.
Throughout the eight years of conflict in eastern
Ukraine, the United Nations has continued to provide
life-saving humanitarian support to all in need, as well
as human rights-related work. During this difficult
period, we are committed to staying and delivering,
and remain fully operational in Ukraine, including
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. The safety and
security of all our staff must be respected by all parties.
22-26390

21/02/2022

Ukraine

The next hours and days will be critical. The risk
of major conflict is real and needs to be prevented at all
costs. I can assure the Council of the full commitment of
the Secretary-General to working towards a diplomatic
resolution of the current crisis.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Since the Second World War, the Charter of
the United Nations Charter — the key tenets of which
the Council is mandated to uphold — has stood as a
bulwark to the worst impulses of empires and autocrats.
Earlier today, Russia’s President, Vladimir Putin,
announced that Russia will recognize as “independent
States” the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic and the
Luhansk People’s Republic, the sovereign territory of
Ukraine, an area controlled by Russia’s proxies since
2014. He has since announced that he will place Russian
troops in these regions. He calls them peacekeepers.
This is nonsense. We know what they really are. In
doing so, he has put before the world a choice. We must
meet the moment and we must not look away.
History tells us that looking the other way in the face
of such hostility will be a far more costly path. Russia’s
clear attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity is unprovoked. It is an attack on Ukraine’s
status as a United Nations Member State. It violates a
basic principle of international law. And it defies our
Charter. What is more, this move by President Putin is
clearly the basis for Russia’s attempt to create a pretext
for a further invasion of Ukraine. The consequences of
this action will be felt far beyond Ukraine’s borders.

S/PV. 8970

territories — from the Russian Empire; the same Russian
Empire from before the Soviet Union, from over 100
years ago. That includes all of Ukraine. It includes
Finland. It includes Belarus and Georgia and Moldova;
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan; Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan and Lithuania; Latvia, and Estonia. It
includes parts of Poland and Turkey. In essence, Putin
wants the world to travel back in time — to a time before
the United Nations; to a time when empires ruled the
world. But the rest of the world has moved forward. It
is not 1919. It is 2022. The United Nations was founded
on the principle of decolonization, not recolonization.
And we believe that the vast majority of United Nations
Member States and Security Council are committed to
moving forward, not going back in time.
The consequences of Russia’s actions will be
dire — across Ukraine, across Europe and across the
globe. In our past two meetings on Ukraine, I have
mentioned that nearly 3 million Ukrainians need
food, shelter and lifesaving assistance right now. The
United Nations estimates that the humanitarian toll
will expand significantly should Russia further invade.
Already, Russian proxies dramatically increased
shelling and artillery fire over the weekend, killing
Ukrainian civilians and soldiers. If Russia invades
Ukraine even further, we will see a devastating loss of
life — unimaginable suffering. Millions of displaced
people will create a refugee crisis across Europe.
Nevertheless, Russia has declined repeated entreaties
to state its intentions before the world, including by
Secretary Blinken in the Security Council last Thursday
(see S/PV.8968).

We do not have to guess at President Putin’s motives.
Today President Putin made a series of outrageous,
false claims about Ukraine, aimed at creating a pretext
for war, and immediately thereafter announced that
Russian troops were entering the Donbas. He claimed
that Ukraine is seeking nuclear weapons from the
West. This is not true. Ukraine is in fact one of only
four countries to have voluntarily surrendered their
nuclear weapons. The United States and our allies have
no intention of supplying nuclear weapons to Ukraine,
and Ukraine does not want them.

President Putin is testing our international system;
he is testing our resolve and seeing just how far he can
push us all. He wants to demonstrate that through force,
he can make a farce of the United Nations. We must
act together in response to this crisis. Over the past
few weeks, the world has heard the other 14 members
of the Security Council speak with one voice, asking
Russia to pursue diplomacy. Other members of the
Council — even those that often align with Russia on
other matters — have been clear that the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of every United
Nations State Member, including Ukraine, should be
respected and safeguarded, that this is a basic norm of
international relations and that it embodies the purpose
of the United Nations Charter.

And then, President Putin asserted that Russia
today has a rightful claim to all territories — all

The sequence of events that Secretary Blinken
spelled out for the Council last Thursday appears to

22-263903/15

S/PV.8970

Ukraine

be proceeding exactly as he predicted. Today President
Putin has torn the Minsk agreements to shreds. We have
been clear that we do not believe he will stop at that. In
the light of President Putin’s latest actions, we must all
stand up for the principles upon which the Organization
was founded.
President Biden issued an Executive Order today
that will prohibit new investment, trade and financing
in the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic and
Luhansk People’s Republic regions. Tomorrow the
United States will take further measures to hold Russia
accountable for this clear violation of international law
and Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, but
we and our partners have been clear that there would
be a swift and severe response were Russia to further
invade Ukraine.
In this moment, no one can stand on the sidelines.
We must make it clear that an attack on Ukraine is
an attack on the sovereignty of every United Nations
Member State and the United Nations Charter, and
that it will be met with swift and severe consequences.
We continue to believe that the diplomatic table is
the only place where responsible nations resolve their
differences. That is the only place to preserve peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for another clear and comprehensive
briefing to the Security Council on this issue.
Albania condemns, in the strongest terms, Russia’s
decision to recognize non-Government-controlled
areas of Ukraine as independent entities. This is a
breach of international law, an affront to the Charter
of the United Nations and another blatant violation of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and it
puts an end the Minsk agreements.
This act of the Russian Federation is null and void,
has no basis and has no international legal validity. We
call on the Security Council and all the United Nations
States Members to reject and condemn it firmly.
Albania reiterates its firm position in support of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
Less than a week ago, we were sitting in this
very Chamber, at the Russian initiative, to discuss
the implementation of the Minsk agreements (see
S/PV.8968). Today we meet at an emergency meeting
exactly because of the Russian Federation decision to
violate the very Minsk agreements. This is disrespect
4/15

21/02/2022

not only of the Council and its decisions, but for the
entire universal principles of international law Russia
is set to respect and protect.
The whole world has witnessed how the Russian
Federation has continuously worked to undermine the
sovereignty of Ukraine and to determine its geopolitical
orientation. What happened today is nothing less but a
bis repetita of what we saw in Georgia in 2008 and with
Crimea in 2014 — aggression by fabrication of phantom
republics. Who is next?
Every United Nations Member State should be
alarmed and realize, eyes wide open, the consequences
of the instrumentalization of national minorities as a
weapon to undermine sovereign States and threaten
regional and international peace and security. We
should not allow the “made in Russia” model of
destabilization to be exported to other parts of Europe
or anywhere else.
We reiterate our demand for the removal of the
military troops from the Ukrainian border and from
the occupied territories of Ukraine, including troops
disguised as peacekeepers when they are simply
aggressors. Albania calls on the Russian Federation to
stop its fait accompli policy, revoke this illegal decision
and engage seriously and in good faith in diplomatic
talks and to give a chance to the Minks agreements.
This is yet another critical moment for Ukraine.
The United Nations should remain actively engaged
and committed, together with regional organizations,
to the right of the Ukrainian people to live in peace
and freedom.
We welcome the statement of the Secretary-General
and echo his call for all relevant actors to prioritize
diplomacy to address all issues peacefully as the only
way forward.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for her briefing. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
action and very clear words. I welcome the presence
of the representative of Ukraine, whose request for
an emergency meeting France supported, given the
extreme gravity of the situation.
France condemns Russia’s recognition of the
separatist eastern regions of Ukraine. This is not
just a further attack on the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, but it is also a violation of the
22-26390

21/02/2022

Ukraine

fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the
Minsk agreements, and the commitments undertaken
by Russia, confirmed at the very highest level these
past few days. On 17 February (see S/PV.8968), the
Russian representative publicly acknowledged before
the Council that there is no alternative to the Minsk
agreements and that they were the only internationally
recognized legal basis to resolve the conflict in Ukraine.
Today, however, the reality is quite different.
Russia is choosing to challenge and confront in spite
of continuous efforts over the past few weeks and days
to de-escalate, notably by President Macron working
with the German Chancellor. We are continuing those
efforts. We call on Russia to match its words with its
deeds, as it claims to be in favour of dialogue, and to
reverse its decision to recognize the separatist entities.
We are preparing targeted sanctions with our
European partners against those who took part in
that illegal decision. In the context of the heightened
tensions on Ukraine’s borders, provoked by the Russian
military build-up, we are concerned by Russia’s
additional destabilizing step and the threat it poses to
European security.

S/PV. 8970

developments have the potential to undermine the peace
and security of the region.
We call for restraint on all sides. The immediate
priority is the de-escalation of tensions, taking into
account the legitimate security interests of all countries
and aimed at securing long-term peace and stability in
the region and beyond.
We are convinced that the issue can be resolved only
through diplomatic dialogue. We need to give space to
the recent initiatives undertaken by the parties that
seek to diffuse tensions. In that context, we welcome
the intense efforts under way, including through
the Trilateral Contact Group and in the Normandy
format. We need the parties to exert greater efforts to
bridge divergent interests. We cannot afford to have a
military escalation.
As we have emphasized before, the Minsk
agreements provide a basis for a negotiated and
peaceful settlement. We need greater efforts to find
common ground to facilitate the implementation of the
provisions of the Minsk agreements, including their
key security and political aspects. As we have time and
again emphasized, constructive diplomacy is the need
of the hour so as to avoid the scaling up of tensions.

France welcomes Ukraine’s restraint in these
difficult circumstances. We express our full solidarity
with the people and the Government of Ukraine. We call
on Russia to refrain from other destabilizing actions,
in particular those that could undermine the security
and safety of civilian populations. We are concerned
by President Putin’s decision to send the army to the
separatist territories under the pretext of peacekeeping.
That would be another flagrant violation of Ukraine’s
territorial integrity.

The safety and security of civilians are essential.
More than 20,000 Indian students and nationals live
and study in different parts of Ukraine, including in its
border areas. The well-being of Indian nationals is of
priority to us.

France will continue to mobilize in support of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for the
updates she has brought to the Council tonight.

Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.

When the Organization was established in 1945,
it entrusted the Security Council with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Tension in and around Ukraine is being
aggravated on a daily — indeed, hourly — basis, giving
that habitual quotation from the Charter of the United
Nations extraordinary importance and relevance.

We have been closely following the evolving
developments
related
to
Ukraine,
including
developments along its eastern border and the related
announcement by the Russian Federation. The
escalation of tension along Ukraine’s border with the
Russian Federation is a matter of deep concern. Those

In conclusion, we strongly emphasize the vital need
for all sides to maintain international peace and security
by exercising the utmost restraint and intensifying
diplomatic efforts to ensure that a mutually amicable
solution is arrived at as early as possible.

We are all aware of how critical the situation has
become. Brazil is following the latest developments

22-263905/15

S/PV.8970

Ukraine

with extreme concern. In the present circumstance, we
in the Council, in representation of the international
community, must reiterate calls for immediate
de-escalation and our steadfast commitment in
support of political and diplomatic efforts to create the
conditions for a peaceful solution to the crisis.
The collective security system of the United Nations
rests ultimately on the pillar of international law. That
pillar, in turn, rests upon the core principles enshrined
in the Charter: the sovereign equality and the territorial
integrity of Member States, restraint in the use or threat
of use of force, and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Yet that pillar and those principles will not yield results
unless the legitimate concerns of all parties are taken
into consideration and unless there is full respect for
the Charter and for existing commitments, such as the
Minsk agreements.
In that vein, we renew our appeal to all concerned
parties to maintain dialogue in a spirit of openness,
understanding and flexibility and with a sense of
urgency to find ways for a lasting peace in Ukraine and
in the wider region.
A first inescapable objective is an immediate
ceasefire, with the comprehensive disengagement of
troops and military equipment on the ground. Such a
military disengagement will be an important step to
build trust among the parties, to strengthen diplomacy
and to seek a sustainable solution to the crisis.
We firmly believe that the Council must live up to
its core responsibility to help the parties engage in a
meaningful and effective dialogue so as to achieve a
solution that effectively addresses the security concerns
within the region. Let us make no mistake — at the end
of the day, we are talking about the lives of innocent
men, women and children on the ground.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
We meet this evening because, earlier today, President
Putin announced the Russian Federation’s recognition
of the independence of the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic, and issued a
decree to send Russian military forces into Ukraine as
so-called peacekeepers.
The actions Russia has chosen today will have
severe and far-reaching consequences.
First, there will be consequences for human life.
An invasion of Ukraine unleashes the forces of war,
death and destruction on the people of Ukraine. The
6/15

21/02/2022

humanitarian impact will be terrible on civilians
fleeing the fighting. We know that women and children
will suffer most.
Secondly, there will be consequences for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a United Nations
Member State, which is protected and guaranteed by
the Charter of the United Nations. As the SecretaryGeneral said earlier, Russia’s decisions are a violation
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine
and inconsistent with the principles of the Charter.
Thirdly, there will be consequences for international
law. The actions taken today make a mockery of the
commitments Russia has made through the Budapest
Memorandum and the Minsk agreements, endorsed by
resolution 2202 (2015). In seeking to redraw borders
by force, Russia’s actions show blatant contempt for
international law.
The United Kingdom will be announcing new
sanctions on Russia in response to its breach of
international law and attack on Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. There will be severe economic
consequences for its actions.
Now more than ever, the Council must shoulder its
responsibilities for peace and security and defend the
principles of the Charter. The Council must be united
in calling on Russia to de-escalate immediately, in
condemning aggression against a sovereign nation and
defending the territorial integrity of Ukraine, and in
calling on Russia to respect its obligations under the
Charter to the peaceful resolution of disputes.
Russia has brought us to the brink. We urge Russia
to step back.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her briefing on the current situation
in Ukraine.
We are following with concern the recent
developments in the situation in eastern Ukraine. In
the current circumstances, it is critical that any actions
exacerbating the crisis cease.
Through resolution 2202 (2015), the Security
Council endorsed the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements as the only
framework for resolving the situation in eastern
Ukraine. That resolution must be respected.
22-26390

21/02/2022

Ukraine

Specifically, in this particular case, three
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations are being violated, namely, refraining from the
threat or use of force in international relations, respect
for the territorial integrity and political independence
of States and non-interference in their internal affairs.
It is therefore unacceptable that over the past few days
the shelling, explosions and other ceasefire violations
have increased, according to reports from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission. We urge the parties to
immediately put an end to those actions.
We wish to recall that in this same Chamber a few
days ago Russia stated categorically that it would not
invade Ukraine (see S/PV.8968). We hope that it will
comply fully with that statement. Mexico reiterates its
commitment to respect for the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders, pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, particularly Assembly resolutions
2625 (XXV) and 3314 (XXIX).
We once again reiterate our appeal to resume
efforts to take the path of de-escalation, diplomacy
and dialogue.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I, too, want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.
We meet tonight at a moment of great danger
for the people of Ukraine; for peace and security in
Europe; and for the international norms and principles
that all of us around this table have a responsibility to
defend. It is a moment that we had hoped to avoid, a
moment that should have been averted by diplomacy
and dialogue. We must respond to it by speaking clearly
and honestly about this grave situation and how we can
resolve it peacefully.
So let me be clear about where we stand: Ireland’s
commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders is
unwavering. Ireland believes in and is fully committed
to the core principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. These include the sovereign equality
and territorial integrity of States. Ukraine has the
same fundamental right as every other sovereign and
independent State to choose its own foreign policy and
to ensure the security and defence of its own territory.

S/PV. 8970

The commitments we make as Members of the United
Nations are binding on every one of us — no exceptions.
Last Thursday, during the meeting organized by
the Russian Federation on the Minsk agreements (see
S/PV.8968), we heard from Deputy Minister Vershinin
that the goal of that meeting was for the Security
Council to affirm that there was no alternative to that
milestone document.
We believe that the Council did just that. Yet now,
four days later, President Putin has decided to recognize
as independent entities the non-Government-controlled
areas of Donetsk and Luhansk and to order troops into
those two regions of Ukraine. This is the second time
in less than 10 years that the Russian Federation has
violated Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
It is a flagrant violation of international law.
In taking that unilateral step, Russia has abandoned
the Minsk agreements and cast into doubt all the
diplomatic efforts of past weeks. Ireland commends
Ukraine for the restraint it has shown in the face
of Russia’s military build-up at its border and the
provocation of the recognition of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.
Ireland, along with our European Union partners,
supports a clear and unequivocal response to this
violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty. The Russian
Federation’s unilateral actions serve only to further
raise tensions. Ireland once again calls for calm,
de-escalation and the pursuit of diplomacy. Even if that
call has not yet been heard, it is a call worth making
again tonight. We need to see sustained and credible
moves on the ground towards the de-escalation of
the crisis. We urge Russia to reverse the recognition,
withdraw its military forces and return to discussions
within the Normandy format.
All signatories to the Minsk agreements agreed
on the need for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission’s safe and secure access to the entire territory
of Ukraine. The mandate of the Mission was agreed by
all 57 OSCE participating States. At this sensitive time,
it is imperative that the Mission be given the full access
agreed in its mandate.
We commend those who have engaged in dialogue
and urge them to redouble their efforts to seek a peaceful
resolution to this perilous situation. We owe nothing
less to the people of Ukraine. We call on all parties to

22-263907/15

S/PV.8970

Ukraine

ensure the protection of civilians as well as to refrain
from any actions that would escalate the situation.
Ukraine has already endured eight years of bitter
conflict, with more than 14,000 lives lost. The people of
eastern Ukraine in particular have suffered from years
of insecurity, humanitarian crisis and human rights
violations and abuses. The Council and its members
have the responsibility to work to resolve that conflict
rather than yield to a grim new chapter that will inflict
further misery on Ukraine and its people. This is the
time to show the courage to pull back from the precipice
and return to dialogue and diplomacy.
We all need to demonstrate our faith in the value of
diplomacy tonight.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her updates and briefing
this evening.
I would like to refer to the statement that the
United Arab Emirates delivered in this Chamber on
17 February on the same subject (see S/PV.8968). I
would like to emphasize once again the importance of
de-escalation and restraint in order to maintain regional
and international security and stability. We believe
that now is the time to engage constructively and in
good faith to address the current situation and mitigate
its impact, of course, on any civilians and civilian
infrastructure and to chart a diplomatic path forward.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates the importance
of dialogue, as others have said, de-escalation and
diplomacy, and of continuing all efforts to reach a
peaceful solution consistent with international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, particularly
the principles of territorial integrity, independence,
sovereignty and good-neighbourliness. We believe that
the Minsk agreements form a good basis for that and that
adherence to those principles is indeed a sustainable
pillar of a peaceful pathway forward.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
We meet tonight on the brink of a major conflict
in Ukraine. The diplomacy we urged on 17 February
(see S/PV.8968) is failing. The territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine stands breached. The Charter of
the United Nations continues to wilt under the relentless
assault of the powerful. One moment it is invoked with
8/15

21/02/2022

reverence by the very same countries that at another turn
their backs on it in pursuit of objectives diametrically
opposed to international peace and security.
In the two most recent meetings on the situation
in Ukraine (see S/PV.8960 and S/PV.8968) and given
the build-up of forces by the Russian Federation,
Kenya urged that diplomacy be given a chance. Our cry
was not heeded, and, more importantly, the Charter’s
demand for States to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security, and justice, are not endangered has
been profoundly undermined.
Today the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity and political independence of
Ukraine has been effected. Kenya is gravely concerned
by the announcement made by the Russian Federation
to recognize the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of
Ukraine as independent States. In our considered view,
that action and announcement breach the territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
We do not deny that there may be serious security
concerns in those regions. But they cannot justify
today’s recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk as
independent States when there were multiple diplomatic
tracks available and under way that have the ability to
offer peaceful solutions.
This situation echoes our own history. Kenya and
almost every African country were birthed by the
ending of empire. Our borders were not of our own
drawing. They were drawn in the distant colonial
metropoles of London, Paris and Lisbon with no regard
for the ancient nations that they cleaved apart.
Today across the border of every single African
country live our countrymen with whom we share
deep historical, cultural and linguistic bonds. At
independence, had we chosen to pursue States on the
basis of ethnic, racial or religious homogeneity, we
would still be waging bloody wars these many decades
later. Instead, we agreed that we would settle for the
borders that we inherited, but we would still pursue
continental, political, economic and legal integration.
Rather than form nations that looked ever backwards
into history with a dangerous nostalgia, we chose to
look forward to a greatness that none of our many
nations and peoples had ever known.
We chose to follow the rules of the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations Charter not
22-26390

21/02/2022

Ukraine

because our borders satisfied us but because we wanted
something greater forged in peace. We believe that
all States formed from empires that have collapsed
or retreated have many peoples in them yearning for
integration with peoples in neighbouring States. That
is normal and understandable. After all, who does not
want to be joined to their brethren and to make common
purpose with them?
However, Kenya rejects such a yearning from being
pursued by force. We must complete our recovery
from the embers of dead empires in a way that does
not plunge us back into new forms of domination and
oppression. We rejected irredentism and expansionism
on any basis, including racial, ethnic, religious or
cultural factors. We reject that again today.
Kenya registers its strong concern and opposition
to the recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk as
independent States. We further strongly condemn
the trend by powerful States in the past few decades,
including members of the Security Council, breaching
international law with little regard.
Multilateralism lies on its deathbed tonight. It has
been assaulted today, as it has been by other powerful
States in the recent past. We call on all Member States
to rally behind the Secretary-General in asking him to
rally us all to the standard that defends multilateralism.
We also call on him to bring his good offices to bear to
help the parties concerned to resolve this situation by
peaceful means.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Kenya’s respect
for the territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I will also begin by first
of all thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing to the Security Council.
The decision by the Russian Federation to
recognize the non-Government-controlled regions of
eastern Ukraine and to send in troops has stunned the
world. Ghana deeply regrets the decision of the Russian
Federation to turn its back on the Minsk agreements
and the dialogue required to address concerns over the
implementation of the agreements.
When Ghana joined this Organization, in 1957, we
were under no illusions that the international order was
perfect. However, we were, and are still, convinced
that the principle of the sovereign equality of States,
which constitutes the basis of this Organization and

S/PV. 8970

our multilateral order, is the very type of foundation
for a stable world. We believe that the United Nations
represents the best attempt at maintaining peace across
nations, forging relations and cooperation between and
among our peoples and holding forth the prospect of a
better tomorrow. It is for that reason that Ghana, like
many other Members of the Organization, solemnly
committed itself to upholding the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. We believe that,
through multilateralism, we can improve cooperation
to make the world a better place for its citizens and for
generations unborn.
Through this Organization and our common
actions on principles such as self-determination within
the context of the United Nations, the countries that
existed under colonial rule were assisted in becoming
sovereign and politically independent States. By its
sheer convening power, this Organization has set out
a pathway for dialogue for all its Members, regardless
of differences in political ideology, and encouraged the
development and maintenance of friendly relations.
Through the actions of this Organization, the rights of
people across the world have become more respected
by their Governments and their well-being has been
better guaranteed.
I will be clear: Ghana supports the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine, which joined the
United Nations as a bona fide Member. We do not
support any actions that violate Ukraine’s sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity. By its
principles, Ghana does not recognize any entity outside
the clear arrangements that have been established by
the Charter and the principles of international law for
the recognition of States.
As an international community, we have pulled
back from many dangerous scenarios when logic and
reason have prevailed. On this occasion, we re-echo
the voice of the coalition of peace for restraint by all
parties. While the sound of war may be loud, the voice
of peace runs deeper. We urge restraint on all unsettled
but accepted situations across the globe and remind
Member States of the need to protect the collective
security mechanism, which requires adherence to the
core principles of the Charter and international law.
The true test of greatness lies not in one’s ability to
use power but in the capacity to constrain its use when
that would be an obvious choice by those of a lesser
capacity. We hope that within the Security Council,

22-263909/15

S/PV.8970

Ukraine

and perhaps outside it too, we will find a resolution
of the existing situation in Ukraine in a manner that
does not impair the mechanisms for peace. While
Ghana and other African Member States have always
held that the use of the veto power is anachronistic
and counterproductive to the effective workings of our
modern arrangements for maintaining global peace and
security, that concern has never been rendered more
acute than in situations such as the one that we now
see. Even though on many occasions it may be enough
to say that we are against the actions of a Member State
that go against the international norms, on this occasion
we are all required to do more in reaffirming our
common commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter. Besides the immediate cost of instability,
all countries, including the most vulnerable in the
developing world, may pay a steep price for actions that
destabilize a part of Europe.
As we note with great concern the reports of
foreign troops being sent across the borders of Ukraine,
we reiterate our continuing concern about the situation
of the civilian populations in Donetsk and Luhansk.
We urge all parties to strictly comply with the tenets of
international law.
We may be at the precipice, but we have not fallen
over it. The path of dialogue and diplomacy remains.
We urge the reversal of escalatory actions and invite
the Secretary-General to renew his good offices
with regard to the situation in the eastern regions of
Ukraine, in close coordination with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and all other
relevant partners.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo for
her briefing.
Over the past few weeks, our attention has often
been focused on developments in the situation on the
border between Russia and Ukraine, amid fears of
military action and escalating rhetoric by the parties.
Following the call made by the Russian State Duma,
some days ago, to recognize the sovereignty of the
separatist regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, all signs
point to imminent action.
Today Russia announced its decision to recognize
the sovereignty of the self-declared Luhansk and
Donetsk People’s Republics. That decision is heavy
with consequence for the sovereignty and territorial
10/15

21/02/2022

integrity of Ukraine. It also undermines the relevance
and implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Gabon is particularly committed to the principles
of tangible borders, territorial integrity and national
sovereignty and notes the fact that the core principles
of international relations are being undermined.
My country calls upon all parties to de-escalate,
demonstrate restraint and adhere to the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in line with the Charter
of the United Nations. We encourage them to use the
channels of dialogue and diplomacy to resolve the crisis
and prevent irreparable damage.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me also thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
and, through her, the Secretary-General for today’s
press statement.
We are gathered here this evening because of the
Russian Federation’s violation of the core principle on
which the Organization is built — the sovereign equality
of all its Members. Norway strongly condemns the
decision by the Russian President to recognize the selfproclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk
People’s Republic, in eastern Ukraine, as independent
States. The recognition of the self-proclaimed People’s
Republics is a clear violation of the Minsk agreements,
under which Russia recognizes the non-Governmentcontrolled areas in eastern Ukraine as part of Ukraine.
As a signatory of the Minsk agreements and
as endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015), the Russian
Federation has made a clear commitment to seeking a
peaceful settlement to the conflict and recognition of
the self-proclaimed People’s Republics runs directly
contrary to the work of the Normandy format and
Trilateral Contact Group towards a negotiated peace.
Furthermore, Russia’s actions constitute a clear violation
of international law. It has chosen unilateral action and
military threats rather than diplomacy and dialogue.
Norway urges Russia, as a party to the conflict, to fulfil
its commitment, to abide by international law and to
return to the path of diplomacy.
Russia’s continued massive military build-up in
and around Ukraine remains an issue of grave concern.
Norway urges Russia to de-escalate by withdrawing its
military forces from Ukraine and from the vicinity of
its borders.
We commend Ukraine’s posture of restraint in
the face of continued provocation and destabilization
22-26390

21/02/2022

Ukraine

efforts. Russia’s decision to deploy forces in eastern
Ukraine is unjustified and irresponsible, as it further
increases tensions. We face the prospect of a war that
would not only threaten Europe’s security architecture,
but also lead to unparalleled suffering for the civilian
population. Norway calls on Russia to strictly respect
and fully adhere to international humanitarian law.
We call upon all parties to protect civilians, including
humanitarian personnel and civilian infrastructure, and
to facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian
access to those in need in Ukraine.
Let me conclude by again reiterating Norway’s
unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its recognized borders.
Finally, let me recall the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which are now under
threat by the actions of the Russian Federation in and
around Ukraine.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has paid close attention to the most recent developments
of the situation in Ukraine. We fully elaborated on our
position at the previous two meetings of the Council on
this topic (see S/PV.8726 and S/PV.8968). At present,
all parties concerned must exercise restraint and avoid
any action that may fuel tensions.
We welcome and encourage every effort for a
diplomatic solution and call on all parties concerned to
pursue dialogue and consultation and seek reasonable
solutions to address each other’s concerns, on the basis
of equality and mutual respect.
The current situation in Ukraine is the result of
several complex factors. China always adopts its own
position based on the merits of the matter in question.
We believe that all countries should resolve international
disputes by peaceful means, in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We have just heard several highly emotional
statements, categorical assessments and far-reaching
conclusions related to the signing today by Russia’s
President of decrees recognizing People’s Republics of
Luhansk and Donetsk. I will ignore the direct verbal
assaults against us. It is now important to focus on
preventing war and forcing Ukraine to stop the shelling
and provocations against Donetsk and Luhansk.

S/PV. 8970

From the statements made by several of our
colleagues, anyone would believe that Russia’s
recognition of the People’s Republics of Luhansk and
Donetsk took place suddenly, for no reason at all. Of
course, that is not the case. It should be recalled that
those Republics declared their independence from
Ukraine in 2014. We only recognize them now, despite
the high level of support for doing so, both in the
Republics themselves and in Russian society from the
very beginning.
At the time, the hope was that Ukrainian Maidan
regime would reconsider and stop talking to their
own citizens in the east in the language of cannons,
gunfire, shelling and threats. Time and again, we
firmly requested Kyiv to listen to the aspirations of the
people living in Donbas and to the Russian-speaking
residents of the country and respect their entirely
legitimate desire to use their mother tongue and teach
their children in that language. We also asked Kyiv to
honour the memory of those who liberated the land
from fascists, instead of those who fought on the side
of fascists and contributed to the killing of hundreds of
thousands of people during the Second World War.
After the Ukrainian military adventures foundered
upon the resolve of the Donbas and Luhansk people to
defend their land, the Minsk agreements were signed
and the package of measures was adopted to implement
them. There was once again hope for peace and the
prudence of the Maidan authorities, which had burnt
themselves on their desire to drown Donetsk and
Luhansk in blood. In particular, much hope was placed
in the 2019 election of the new president of Ukraine,
who promised to finally establish peace in Donbass.
However, those who counted on the peace-loving
attitude of the Ukrainian Government were
unfortunately mistaken. Kyiv not only quickly returned
to its bellicose rhetoric and continued to shell peaceful
civilians, but it also did everything it could to sabotage
and ultimately undermine the Minsk agreements.
Most important is Kyiv’s stubborn refusal to speak
directly with the representatives of Donetsk and
Luhansk, despite the fact that that requirement is a
central structural element of the package of measures.
We have heard the unequivocal confirmation of their
unwillingness to engage in such dialogue more than
once from Ukrainian leaders in recent days, including
from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine at the
Security Council meeting we convened on 17 February
on the implementation of the Minsk agreements (see

22-2639011/15

S/PV.8970

Ukraine

S/PV.8968). After that, it became clear once and for
all that Ukraine does not intend to implement the
Minsk agreements.
I want to remind my colleagues on the Security
Council that in all other conflicts, be they in Libya,
Syria or Yemen, we demand and call for direct dialogue
between the parties to the conflict, and only Ukraine is
somehow an exception to the rule.
One might draw the conclusion from some of the
statements today that a number of our colleagues are
ready to bury the Minsk agreements. However, I would
like to remind members that, at the time when the
Minsk agreements were signed, the Luhansk People’s
Republic and Donetsk People’s Republic had already
declared their independence. The fact that Russia
recognized that today in no way changes the make-up
of the parties to the Minsk agreements, as Russia is not
a party to them. We have repeatedly stated that and, in
that regard, nothing has changed.
It is another matter that the Minsk agreements, some
of the provisions of which should have been implemented
back in 2015, have long been openly sabotaged by
Ukraine, with the patronage of our Western colleagues.
Currently, we see that many of our colleagues want to
sign off to the idea that the Minsk agreements are dead,
but they are not. Kyiv remains obligated to implement
them. We remain open to a diplomatic solution, but will
not allow a renewed bloodbath in Donbas.
Unfortunately, we are compelled to note the
extremely negative role played in all this by our Western
colleagues, led by the United States of America.
Instead of forcing Kyiv to fulfil its commitments, they
have only openly incited Ukraine, repeating the empty
mantra that Russia is not fulfilling its obligations under
the Minsk agreements, which, as we have repeatedly
stressed, is not even party to them.
Moreover, for several weeks, while stoking
groundless panic about Russia’s supposedly imminent
invasion of Ukraine, our Western colleagues have
been shamelessly foisting weapons upon the country
and sending trainers there, thereby effectively pushing
the Ukrainians, who have deployed a 120,000-strong
military contingent along the contact line, to engage in
armed provocations against Donbas.
The bubble inflated by the combined efforts of
the West and Ukraine could not help but burst. Over
the weekend, the intensity of Ukrainian shelling of
12/15

21/02/2022

residential areas in the Luhansk People’s Republic
and Donetsk People’s Republic increased sharply.
Reportedly, up to 1,600 projectiles were launched,
killing civilians. Several subversive groups penetrated
into the territory of the Republics, who have carried out
or attempted to sabotage critical infrastructure. As I
mentioned, there have been civilian casualties. General
mobilization has been announced in the Luhansk
People’s Republic and Donetsk People’s Republic.
Refugees have poured into Russia, not Ukraine,
over the past several days, amounting to approximately
70,000 women, elderly people and children. Russian
is hosting them and providing them with shelter and
support. Towns in Russian territory close to the border
area were even shelled. It has therefore become clear
that Donbas is on the verge of a new Ukrainian military
adventure, as it already was in 2014 and 2015. We
cannot allow that to happen. That is why the President
of Russia listened to the opinion of parliamentarians
and members of the Russian Security Council. Everyone
knows the rest. The detailed statement by our Head
of State on the reasons for the decision adopted was
broadcast by the world’s leading media.
However, today we have heard an open distortion
of what the President said in his statement about history
and genesis of this crisis and the assertion that that he
allegedly would like to rebuild the Russian Empire.
I call on our Western colleagues to come to their
senses, set aside their emotions and not make the situation
worse. No one other than them will be able to restrain
Kyiv’s militaristic plans and force it to stop shelling and
provocations against the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s
Republics, which in the new circumstances could have
particularly dangerous consequences. In accordance
with the agreements signed with them today and on the
basis of their appeals, the armed forces of the Russian
Federation will perform the functions of maintaining
peace on the territories of the Luhansk People’s
Republic and the Donetsk People’s Republic.
In conclusion, I should like to note that, in today’s
statements, most of my colleagues failed to mention
the more than 4 million residents of Donbas. They
seem to have omitted their fates from their statements
since 2014, contemptuously calling them pro-Russian
separatists. However, they are guilty only of wanting to
talk with the authorities that came to power following
the illegal Maidan coup in 2014 and to discuss how
their rights would be upheld.
22-26390

21/02/2022

Ukraine

Over the past few days, with the intensification
in military activity of the Ukrainian army along the
contact line, the lives of hundreds of thousands of
women, children and elderly people, as in 2014 and
2015, have once again ended up under real threat. The
main goal of our decision was to protect and save those
lives, which are more important than everyone’s threats.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): It is with unease that I
will now remove my mask, and it is not because of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We are all vaccinated;
there are vaccines for COVID-19. It is because of the
virus that has so far no vaccine — the virus that hit
the United Nations and the virus that is spread by the
Kremlin. The delegation of Ukraine has requested this
urgent meeting to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the illegal and illegitimate decision of the
President of the Russian Federation to recognize the
occupied parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
of Ukraine as the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics.
Today the entire membership of the United Nations
is under attack — under attack by the country that
occupied the membership of the Security Council in
1991 bypassing the Charter of the United Nations;
the country that occupied the parts of the territory of
Georgia in 2008; and the country that occupied parts of
Ukraine in 2014.
As stated by the President of Ukraine,
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, following the urgent
meeting of the National Security and Defence Council
of Ukraine, the internationally recognized borders
of Ukraine have been and will remain unchangeable,
regardless of any statements and actions by the Russian
Federation. Ukraine unequivocally qualifies the recent
actions by the Russian Federation as violations of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The political leadership of the Russian Federation
shall bear full responsibility for the outcomes of the
decisions taken.
Recognition of the occupied parts of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine can be considered
as a unilateral withdrawal by Russia from the Minsk
agreements and shows its disregard for the decisions
taken in the framework of the Normandy Four. This

S/PV. 8970

step undermines peaceful efforts and ruins the existing
negotiating frameworks.
Through the decisions adopted today and those that
may be adopted tomorrow, Russia attempts to legalize
the presence of its troops, which have actually been in
the occupied areas of Donbas since 2014. A country
that has fuelled the war for eight years is not able to
maintain peace, as it claims.
What will happen next? We want peace, and we
are consistent in our actions. Today the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine sent a request, on the basis
of the Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances,
to the guarantors of Ukraine’s security, demanding
immediate consultations. A Security Council meeting
and a special meeting of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation (OSCE) were called. We insist on the
full-fledged operations of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine in order to prevent provocations
and further escalation. An emergency summit of the
Normandy Four was also requested.
We expect from our partners clear and efficient
shows of support. We will now see who our true friends
and partners are — who is on the side of the Charter
of the United Nations and who will continue to deter
Russia through words only. We are committed to a
political diplomatic settlement and will not succumb
to provocations.
In accordance with Article 51 of the Charter,
Ukraine has the inherent right to individual and
collective self-defence. We are committed to a peaceful
and diplomatic path and will not waver. We are on our
land. We are not afraid of anything or anyone. We do
not owe anyone anything, and we will not give anything
away to anyone. There should be no doubt whatsoever,
because it is not February 2014. It is February 2022.
This is a different country and a different army. Our
one goal is peace — peace in Ukraine and peace in
Europe, global peace
“[W]e must do all we can to make sure that
the problem of Donbas is resolved through the
implementation of the Minsk agreements.”
(see S/PV.8968)
That was said here in this Chamber just four days ago
by the Russian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs in
the chair of the President of the Council, with reference
to President Putin, who took the decision that we are
discussing today, which is a threat to the rules-based

22-2639013/15

S/PV.8970

Ukraine

order and to the Charter, in particular its Article 2, as
well as to international peace and security.
The Security Council has been tasked with
maintaining that peace and security, under Article 24 of
the Charter. Pursuant to Article 39, the Security Council
shall make recommendations or decide what measures
shall be taken to maintain or restore international peace
and security. The delegation of Ukraine calls on the
Security Council members to exercise those duties.
We invite the Russian Federation to carefully
re-read today’s statement again and again, in which the
Secretary-General considers Russia’s decision to be
a violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Ukraine and inconsistent with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for that powerful statement.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that it
remains up to Russia to abandon its long-standing
strategy on Ukraine, one based on threats and the use
of force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of my country, and to re-engage with
what we all have committed to — the fundamental
principles of peaceful relations, as enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.
We demand that Russia cancel its decision
to recognize the occupied parts of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine and return to the
negotiations table. We condemn the order to deploy
additional Russian occupation troops in the territories
of Ukraine. We demand the immediate, complete and
verifiable withdrawal of the occupation troops.
The United Nations is sick. That is a matter of fact.
It has been hit by the virus spread by the Kremlin.
Whether or not it succumbs to the virus is in the
hands of the membership. Today the Kremlin copypasted — word for word — the decree on Georgia
of 2008. They copy-pasted it word for word, with no
creativity whatsoever. The copying machine in the
Kremlin works very well. Who will be the next United
Nations Member? That is an open question.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I would like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.
14/15

21/02/2022

Only four days after our most recent meeting
(see S/PV.8968), the Security Council meets again to
discuss the situation in Ukraine. On Thursday there
was consensus in the Security Council that the Minsk
agreements, which the Council unanimously endorsed
in resolution 2202 (2015), needs to be implemented by
all, including the Russian Federation.
Today we are confronted with the very opposite
from Russia. President Putin’s decision to recognize the
separatist, self-declared “people’s republics” in eastern
Ukraine is not only a blatant breach of resolution 2202
(2015), but also of the basic principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. It is another flagrant and
deliberate violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity,
after the illegal annexation of Crimea and the instigation
and fuelling of the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine
since 2014. Russia has repeatedly insisted that it was
not a party to the conflict. Today it unmasks itself and
shows that it always has been.
My Government condemns Russia’s violation of
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine
in the strongest possible terms. With our allies and
partners, we will take firm and adequate measures in
response to Russia’s breach of international law that
will have serious economic, political and geostrategic
consequences. I call on all United Nations States
Members to join us in condemning Russia’s actions
of today.
Today’s decision comes in the context of an
unprecedented build-up of Russian forces around
Ukraine over the past weeks and months. Those forces
seem poised to attack. We have seen a flare-up along
the line of contact over the past few days and efforts
that appear to fabricate a pretext for a Russian attack.
Moreover, Russia has declared its readiness to deploy
troops in eastern Ukraine.
The Charter of the United Nations is crystal-clear:
it unequivocally prohibits the threat of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
States. The current Russian force deployment around
Ukraine can only be considered a further threat against
Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
I call on Russia to live up to its obligations as a
permanent member of the Security Council, and I
urge Russia to immediately revoke today’s decisions
and re-commit to the Minsk agreements, in line with
what the Normandy Four agreed upon. Russia must
not cross the internationally recognized borders of
22-26390

21/02/2022

S/PV. 8970

Ukraine

Ukraine. Moreover, Russia must immediately withdraw
its troops from the regions bordering with Ukraine in
Russia and Belarus.
I call on Russia to recommit to the rules-based
security architecture in Europe, which has been built
over decades. Russia’s decisions have put that order

under serious strain. We call upon Russia to return to the
path of diplomacy, instead of shedding further blood.
Germany will spare no diplomatic effort in
this regard, while steadfastly standing by Ukraine,
its territorial integrity, its sovereignty and the
Ukrainian people.
The meeting rose at 10.30 p.m.

22-2639015/15
