UNITED

NATIONS

\,

TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

-

;;
<.“\

i

;

/

r.”
,; !I!‘:
r,.,:.,;?/ ‘2
(1 ‘!
.,\,’t 1

rd
MEETING:

NEW

9 JUNE 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1543) , , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , , . , , . . . , , , . .

1

Statement by the President . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . ..I............

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President , . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , ,

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..L.........lI....I..I.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/9814 and Corr.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~.......

1

1

SIPV. 1543

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security (symbol S/ . . . >are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Secllrity Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information
about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisiolzs of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-THI

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 9 June 1970, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. P. KHATRI

Adoption of the agenda

(Nepal).

The agenda was adopted.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.’

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488) :
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Naticns operation in Cyprus (S/9814 and
Corr. 2)

Provisional agenda (SIAgendallS43)
1,
2.

Adoption of the agenda.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/9814 and Corr.2).

5. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the usual
practice of the Council when dealing with the question
now before it, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, pursuant to their request to participate
in the discussion of the question without the right to
v&e, to take places at the Security Council table.
At the invitation of the .?+esident, Mr. Z. Rossides
(Cyprw), Mr. U. Bayiilkerl (Turkey), and Mr. D. Bitsios
(Greece} took places at the Council table.
,6. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the question relating to
Cyprus on the basis of the report submitted to us by
the Secretary-General in document S/9814 and Corr.
2; the first corrigendum applies only to the French text.

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding with the
business before the Council this afternoon, I should
like to say a few words to express the sympathy which
all of us here feel for the people of Peru, who have
recently experienced such a disastrous earthquake. We
have all learned with grief of the widespread death
and destruction caused by that sudden natural disaster
and are gravely concerned about the grievous suffering
left in its wake.

7. Members of the Council have also received copies
of the text of a draft resolution, prepared for our consideration in the course of informal consultati@ns,
which is contained in document S/9831.

2. I should like to suggest that a telegram, be sent,
on behalf of the Security Council, expressing our deep
sympathy to the Government and the people of Peru
for the tragedy they have suffered.
3. In the absence of any objection,
to act on the Council’s behalf.

8. Several.representatives
have expressed the desire
to speak before the Council votes on the draft
resolution. The first speaker on my list is the representative of Cyprus, on whom I now call.

I shall proceed

9. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): May I at the outset,
Mr. President, be permitted to congratulate you on
your assuming the Presidency of the Security Council.
We wish to pay tribute to the distinguished representative of a small and valiant country which, through all
its history, has effectively resisted all colonialist domination and preserved its independence and integrity.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
4. The PRESIDENT:
Before proceeding to the item
on the agendafor today’s meeting, I also wish to convey
.the thanks of the Council, as well as my own personal
admiration, to Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet
for the
exemplary way in which he presided over the deliberations of the Council during the month of May. The
unanimous decision on the question of Bahrain that
the Council reached on 11 May 1970 [153&h meeting]
was due in large part to the tactful manner of the President for that month. Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet
also showed the same tact and sense of justice and
fairness when he presided over the Council’s meetings
during its consideration of the situation in the Middle
East [1537th to 1542nd meetings].

10. The Security Council has on its agenda the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
I take this early opportunity
to express our sincere appreciation for the excellent
work performed by the United Nations Force in the
island. In close co-operation with my Government it
has significantly
contributed to the pacification of
Cyprus. The work of the United Nations Force in Cyprus has been singled out as perhaps the most successful
1

case of the United Nations peace-keeping operations.
In that success the willing co-operation between the
Government and the UNFICYP
Command has been
the main factor. I wish to convey personally to the
Commander of the Force, General Prem Chand, and
to the officers and menunder his command, this expression of our appreciation.

separatism is .contrary to their own interests and is
particularly regrettable at a time when efforts the world
over are being made to unify the economy of nations,
It is time that the spirit of co-operation in the economic
as well as in the political field should be allowed to
emerge in Cyprus. This spirit does exist in the rank
and file of the Cypriot people, Greek and Turkish alike,
and would yield its fruits if not hindered by outside
influences and pressures.

11. In this connexion, I desire to place on record
our feelings of profound gratitude to Secretary-General
U Thant for his genuine concern over the problem
of Cyprus and for his sincere efforts towards its just
and peaceful solution. Our admiration goes to him also
for his wisdom and humaneness as an enlightened
world statesman. His independence
of mind and
dedication to world unity and peace through the Charter once more stood out in his recent pronouncements,
early this year, concerning the Nigerian situation, when
he spoke of the right of all Member States, by virtue
of their being Members of the United Nations, to
respect for their entity and unity and to the protection
of their independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity.

16. It is gratifying to see from the report that in
agriculture, which is the mainstay of the island, the
situation in intercommunal
relations appears “more
stable than at any time since the outbreak of the disturbances” [Ibid., pam. 451. Increased participation of
Turkish Cypriot farmers in the soil conservation and
afforestation programme and mixed farming projects
financed by the Government and the World Food Programme is another improvement. Mixed farming, as the
report observes, is “one of the most significant agricultural projects so far undertaken, which should benefit
a large number of Cypriots, both Greek and Turkish”
[Ibid.,purn.
471. It is, however, obvious that participation of Turkish Cypriots in economic developments
isnecessarilydependentuponthedegreeoftheirwillingness to co-operate.

12. Our warm thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral’s collaborators in the Secretariat, both in New
York and in Cyprus, Mr. Bunche, Mr. Rolz-Bennett
and his Special Representative in Cyprus, Mr. OsorioTafall, for their unremitting devotion and diligence
towards’ the successful operation of UNFICYP.
We
also wish to express our appreciation and thanks to
those countries whose valuable’contributions
in military contingents and voluntary funds make possible the
Unted Nations peace-keeping operation in Cyprus,

17. In the field of public services, as the report shows,
there has been an encouraging development towards
the return to normal conditions. The water supply fat
drinking and irrigation purposes in several Turkish
Cypriot villages has been improved or repaired by
Government authorities, while feasibility studies are
made for proposed dam sites. Further progress was
also marked in providing electric services to an
increased number of Turkish Cypriot villages.

13. Before us is the report of the Secretary-General
for the six-month period to 1 June 1970 [S/9814 and
Corr..2]. As emerges from it, the intercommunal situation has remained calm and the improvement
continues. The number of shooting incidents was reduced
to fifteen, as compared to thirty in the previous period.
The report also notes improvement
in the relations
between Greek and Turkish Cypriots and further reassuring signs of a return to normal conditions of intercommunal life.

18. “Government help” to the Turkish Cypriots, as
the report states, “is especially forthcoming in areas
where supervision can be exercised by technicians”
[Ibid. ,para. 461. In order that supervision may be exercised by technicians of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Natural Resources it is necessary that they be not prevented from entering the relevant areas which are in
a form of self-segregation; and this is a problem that
arises whenever assistance is to be given, but the last
report shows a great improvement in this situation.

14. In the economic field good co-operation was
maintained in a number of bodies, such as the Grain
Commission, Marketing Boards, the Higher Technical
Institute,
the Productivity
Centre and the Cyprus
Development
Corporation,
and others. As the
Secretary-General
in his report remarks:

19. In respect of freedom of movement, regrettabiy,
there has been no change since the previous report
[,S/9521]. The Greek Cypriot people are still prevented
from having access to Turkish Cypriot controlled
areas, a matter of serious concern to the Government.
In accordance with a list handed to UNFICYP
and
produced at the Political Liaison Committee, there are
123 public roads in Cyprus the use of which is wholly
or partly denied to Greek Cypriots; that is, the overwhelming majority of the Cypriot people are still prevented from using a considerable number of the public
roads of their country. Forty-six of those roads are,
in addition, of vital necessity to Greek Cypriot farmers
for access to their fields. And it may be recalled that,
among the said roads, five are main communication
roads
such as Nicosia-Kyrenia,
FamagustaChatos-Nicosia,
and others. In contrast, the Turkish

“The imperative need for joint efforts aimbd at
a better utilization
of the available means and
resources.of the Island for the benefit of all Cypriots
has been repeatedly stressed in many quarters.”
[Ibid., pura. 44.1
And it is well known that co-operation in the economic
field is a contributing factor, as the Secretary-General
says, in reducing and overcoming political differences.
efforts by the Turkish
Cypriots
15. However,
towards creating a separate economy still persist. This
2

Cypriots have free and unrestricted access to all parts
and all roads on the Island. Even in militarily restricted
areas they are now allowed by the Government to enter
freely in order to cultivate their fields.

be faced and overcome through patient and diligent
efforts towards mutual understanding, It is, therefore,
an encouraging
sign that both interlocutors,
Mr.
Clerides and Mr. Denktash, emphasized that the talks
have not failed and should be continued despite the
difficulties involved. Both sides are thus fully agreed
at least on one premise: that there should be a new,
determined effort in the talks. This shows that the road
to mutual understanding is open. President Makarios,
in a relevant statement, said “We shall continue the
talks with inexhaustible patience and goodwill”.

20. The Secretary-General, in his reports contained
in documents S/9233 and S/9521, stressed how important it was that in response to the normalization
measures of the GoLernment the Turkish Cypriot
leadership should lift the restriction of freedom of
movement in areas under their control, warning that
this abnormal situation could mar the prospects of the
intercommunal talks.

26. In this connexion we also note with appreciation
from the report that in recent public statements the
Foreign Minister of Turkey, Mr. Chaglayankil, no less
than the Foreign Minister of Greece, Mr. Pipinelis,
reitereated their full support for the intercommunal
talks and emphasized the need for a peaceful solution
on the basis of an independent unitary State.

21. In the intercommunal
talks progress has been,
regrettably,
rather slow. This is disappointing.
However, more important than their speedy conclusion
is the end product of the talks, which must be in substance a sound and durable solution. As appears from
the report of the Secretary-General, the main obstacle
to the progress of the talks is the antithesis between
the concept of unity, on the one side, and that of
division, on the other. Unity goes along with conciliation and co-operation; division is the partner oFmistrust
and antagonism.
The one is positive; the other,
negative. Blending the two is indeed a difficult task.

27. We may therefore express the hope that in the
next round of talks a new co-operative and determined
effort will be made upon positive lines that can yield
constructive results ensuring a just, workable and
enduring solution, one which is in accordance with
the principles of the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

22. The question of local administration has proved
the most intractable, both in its meaning and in its
application. Upon the accepted norms, local government could only have application to specific geographical localities; it never has been nor could it be determined on ethnic criteria. Nor could it be conceived
as extending vertically from bottom to top tb the point
of creating a State within a State. Straying from the
norms of a unitary State into the negativeness of division does not provide a solution; it only aggravates
the situation.

28. It should be realized that what unites the Greek
and Turkish Cypriots as fellow citizens in their island
country far transcends any differences that divide
them.
29. We have to look at what is good and positive
in one another, at what is good in people, in situations
and in life. We are in a new era. Technology has unified
our planet. Mankind has to recognize that reality and
return to unity and peace if there is to be survival.
This is the moral demand of our present age. It applies
equally to the part as to the whole. And in my country,
which is a small country, co-operation and unity within
and between all segments of the population must come
if its present difficulties are to be overcome and peace
prevail in the island. For the problem of Cyprus, as
other problems, is basically a moral one and turns upon
the axis of man’s ethical response.

23. The Government of Cypius, while making every
possible concession in order to meet the other side,
cannot possibly go beyond the framework of a unitary
State in a way that would destroy the integral unity
of the island. The process of concession towards
accommodation
should always be governed by the
main objective, namely, that the solution is just and
workable. To obtain consent, whether by pressure or
otherwise, to a settlement which is unsound in itself
and which intensifies division or which is contrary to
the principles of the Charter is not a solution. It is
merely moving from one stage of difficulty into a worse
and more complicated one, with far graver consequences to the people concerned and to international
1 peace.

30. We believe in the inherent ability of man for adjustment. We therefore look with hope for a new approach
to the problem of Cyprus in a positive response so
that the efforts towards a solution may this time prove
meaningful and fruitful, Such a development would
furthermore have a positive effect on the stability of
the whole troubled region,

24. In this sense my President, Archbishop Makarios,
while stressing that there was no intention or wish
whatsoever to derogate from the rights of the Turkish
Cypriots as equal citizens, made it clear that his
Government
would accept neither cantonization nor
federalization
of Cyprus.

31. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to thank the
Ambassador of Cyprus for the kind words he addressed
to the Chair.
32. The next speaker on my list is the Ambassador
of Turkey, on whom I now call.

25, The i‘undkmental difficulties in the present problem are obvious. Difficulties, however, among men
of reason and goodwill are not to be shunned but should

33, Mr. BAYULKEN
(Turkey): Mr. President, allow
me first to express our congratulations to you in assum3

ing the presidency of the Security Council and convey
to you our very best wishes.
34. Once again the Security Council meets to consider
a report of the Secretary-General on this item [S/9814
and Cow. 21: As usual the report is comprehensive
and enlightening and recommends the renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP
at its present strength for a
further six months.
35. In its introduction, the report summarizes theconditions in Cyprus for the period covered by the report
as follows:
“The intercommunal
situation in the last six
months has remained calm and there has been some
improvement towards a return to normal conditions
of life. However, certain developments, including
acts of violence, occurring within one of the communities have tended to increase tension and
apprehension in general.” [Ibid., pnra. 2.3
36. We believe that al1 those who are genuinely and
sincerely interested in the attainment of a peaceful,
just and agreed solution to the problem of Cyprus cannot but note with some regret and disappointment the
situation evaluated in the report. As a matter of fact
my delegation and the delegations which are most
directly concerned with the problem, as well as the
members of the Security Council which made known
their views during the previous meeting of the Council
on this item six months ago [1521st meeting], had been
justifiably encouraged by the promising assessment of
the situation in Cyprus at that time. In the words of
the Secretary-General, not only had the situation then
remained “calm with only a few incidents causing
tension”, but “the continuing general desire to maintain peaceful conditions” had been “clearly evident
throughout” and there had been “a steady improvement towards a return to normal conditions of life”
[S/9521, pnra. 21.

37. However discouraging
and regrettable this
deterioration of the situation and the resulting impediment to progress towards better and more auspicious
conditions for a return to normal life may be, my delegation believes that an unemotional and constructive
approach by all to the probelm at hand is what is
required most in the present circumstances. In our
opinion it is the only approach which might be instrumental in transforming “some improvements”
into
“steady improvements” for obtaining an uninterrupted
reign of calm and quiet which are the prerequisites
for achieving an agreed and peaceful settlement.

tinned to maintain close liaison and good working relations with both communities.
The shooting incidents
were at an all-time low, for all areas, including the
most sensitive.
39. As to the developments concerning the maintenance of law and order, the report states the following:
“During the period under review, a number Of
violent incidents, involving members of the Greek
generated
tension
and
Cypriot
community,
apprehension in the island. Fortunately,
no interresulted
from
the
communal
disturbances
incidents.” [S/9814 and Cow. 2, paw. 33.1
40. In the analysis of this encouraging intercommunal
situation, due credit is given for the restraint shown
by the Turkish-Cypriot Community and its leadership
during the difficult days in March, which in the words
of the report has “undoubtedly contributed to an early
stabilization of the situation” [ibid., pnrn. SO].
41. I am sure the members of the Security Council
and all those concerned will not fail to appreciate this
constructive attitude of the Turkish community which
underlines once again its profound and sincere desire
for a peaceful and agreed settlement of the problem.
42. My delegation can find no better words in describing this positive attitude than the ones already inscribed
in the report concerning the statement made by the
Turkish community. With your permission,
I shall
quote that statement:
“On behalf of the Turkish-Cypriot
community,
a spokesman stated that any attempt on life, or use
of violence against persons, was deplorable and that
if such an attempt were made against persons in
high authority or to achieve political objectives it
became all the more regrettable as it tended to create
a general feeling of insecurity; it was hoped that
this kind of irresponsible action would not spread
to undermine completely the present endeavours fog
finding a peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem;
terrorist activities, whether directed agaist the Turkish Cypriot community or within the Greek Cypriot
community proper, could not be conducive to such
a solution.” [Ibid., para. 35.1
43. In spite of the attitude of restraint displayed by
the Turkish community, I believe it wtjuld not be too
difficult to understand the genuine concern and the
apprehension that has been felt by the ‘Turkish community as a whole in the face of the serious developments, generating tension and alarm, which are dealt
with at some length and detail in the report,

38. In relation to the duties of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force, to prevent a recurrence of
fighting, we are gratified to note that a quiet military
situation prevailed during the period covered by the
present report. There has been almost no instance of
obstruction-in
fact only two cases concerning both
communities-regarding
the freedom of movement of
UNFICYP and the isolated incidents were caused by
ignorance or misunderstanding
of orders having
nothing to do with wilful obstruction. UNFICYP con-

44. The depth of this genuine concern would be
appreciated better when one rearls the considered opinion of the Secretary-General, to the effect that while
the tension seems subsided to a large extend, the “subsequent incidents indicate that the difficulties underlying these happenings are as yet by no means at an
end” [ibid., para. 79).
4

-.-

,_

benefits of which the Turkish Cypriots are still deprived, such as pensions and social insurance and so
on. It is common knowledge that for years no share
from the public revenue has been allocated to the Turkish community and it is also known that the salaries
of the Turkish Cypriot members of the civil service
are borne by the Turkish community.

45. I should like to add that while acts of violence
I with ominous consequences were taking place on the
island, the theme of enosis, the union of the island
with Greece, has again been in prominent use in
several-including
responsible--quarters.
That should
explain sufficiently the increased concern and alarm
of the Turkish community. It is therefore only natural
that the Turkish community’s deep concern is not dissipated and that it is viewing the happenings which
are not of its making not only with sincere regret but
also with profound disquiet and utmost caution.

5 1. When viewed under the general conditions which
naturally affect the process of normalization,
and when
analysed within the escalating activities of terrorism
and violence of the recent months, as indicated in the
report, the cautious attitude of the Turkish Cypriot
community should be understandable in matters relating to the freedom of movement. In fact, paragraph
59 of the report conveys the Turkish community’s
viewpoint on this matter and contains equally information as to the passage of several hundred Greek Cypriots through the Turkish areas between January and
May 1970.

46. The report in its section describing the increase
df violent incidents and the escalation of terrorist
activities-paragraph
4;1--mentions the fact that the
recent recovery by the Greek Cypriot authorities of
illegally-held
weapons and ammunition amounted to
400 subsome 300 rifles, 60 machine-guns,
machine-guns and light-machine-guns,
800 pistols and
revolvers, 1,200 grenades and 340,000 rounds of
ammunition.
These figures are impressive in themselves and require no further cc)mment.

52. I am constrained to repeat what I said with respect
in the previous meeting of the
to “normalization”
Security Council six months ago. 1 have to point out
once again that during the period under review the
balance-sheet of normalization continues to leave much
to be desired. I note with regret, with reluctance but
also with conviction, that a more satisfactory situation
could have been achieved in this field even, if I may
say so, irrespective of the’events to which I have referred a while ago, had the Greek community demonstrated more willingness and understanding towards
the problems of the Turkish community.
One fundamental measure of understanding required from the
Greek community is to refrain from the use of normalization as a pretext for either depriving the Turkish
community of its present constitutional rights or endangering its security. Although seriously attached to the
cause of peace and peaceful settlement, and eagerly
seeking a mutually agreed and satisfactory solution,
the Turkish-Cypriots
should not be expected to surrender their viral rights and forgo their security until a
mutually acceptable solution is reached.

47. The question of illegally held weapons has always
been one of the major sources of concern to the Turkish
community.
The above-described events have thus
shown that its fears were not unfounded. It is in this
context that the Vice-President, Dr. Kiil;iik, addressed
the Secretary-General and asked the United Nations
to use its influence and good offices for neutralizing
the threat of a possible use of such arms against his
community.
48. My delegation feels that the disturbing developments which the report mentions and which I have
touched upon very briefly have also been most unfortunate as they have emerged at a period when slow
but steady progress towards mutual conficence among
the two communities was being recorded.
49. In section III entitled “Activities towards a return
to normal conditions”, the report does not fail to relate
some improvements in intercommunal life which have
appeared to us to be a cause for satisfaction.

53. I am sure that the Council in its good conscience
will recall the many warm responses of the Turkish
community to the Greek-Cypriot measures for reconciliation and for resumption of co-operation. The Turkish community has been ever ready, even anxious
to match every act of constructive and co-operative
good will directed to ameliorating the hardships it has
faced since the 1963 events. In spite of its ordeal, it
has been careful not to trespass beyond the bounds
of its constitutional
rights. It has always sought to
remain within the legislation in force in 1963. The
administrative
measure’s it has taken were imposed
upon it by the present circumstances of its daily life.
As is recorded in the Secretary-General’s
report, these
measures are of a temporary nature and do not prejudge
the constitutional
structure of the State on which, in
fact the intercommunal
talks are based.

50. We would wish sincerely that the developments
which are most likely to bring about sustained conditions of confidence and mutual understanding to the
benefit of both sides might continue and take precedence over all others; but, as I said, in order that those
improvements may keep a steady upward trend, they
should be beneficial to both sides. As points at hand,
I should like to mention the problem of displaced Turkish Cypriots; paragraph 56 of the report speaks of
some progress in this matter. But from the same paragraph it also appears that, all in all, forty-five Turkish
Cypriot families were able to return to their former
villages. Considering that these displaced persons total
more than 20,000 people, one cannot fail to register
the disappointment for the very slow pace of the resettlement and rehabilitation. Actually, the Turkish Cypriot community still awaits an answer to the proposals
which’it submitted in this matter to the Greek Cipriot
community.
On the process of normalization,
my
delegation also would like to point to some rights and

54. I now turn to intercommunal taiks. The SecretaryGeneral in his report gives a factual account of the
efforts of Mr. Denktash and Mr. Clerides with regard
5

60. Mr. BITSIOS
(Greece) (inlerpretatiorz
from
French): I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President and to convey my best wishes to you for the
duration of your presidency of the Council.

to the dialogue between the two communities. We all
know the difficulties
encountered in those talks.
However much we may’ all regret that talks have not
as yet produced sufficient results towards an agreed
solution, we consider that, in addition to some important work already done, the determination
of the
leaders ofthe two communities and of the Governments
most directly concerned with the problem constitutes
an element of encouragement and hope. My Government continues to support the intercommunal talks and
gives every possible assistance in this respect. AS
underlined in the report, the Prime Minister of Turkey,
Mr. Demirel, described intercommunal
talks as an
important stage on the road to a solution and stated
that it is everybody’s interest “to capitalize upon that
possibility” [ibid., para. 701.

61. In his report of 1 June the Secretary-General
recommends the maintenance of the Force at its present strength for a further period of six months. My
delegation supports that recommendation.
62. Analysing the reasons that led him to put this
request to the Council, U Thant cites, among others,
the fact that the Cypriot Government and the TurkishCypriot leadership consider that the Clerides-Denktash
“ . . . talks still offer the .only acceptable way
to settle outstanding differences and that, even if
there is little basis for immediate optimism, they
should none the less be continued”. [Ibid,, para,
81.)

55. The report also quotes from the statements of
my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Caglayangil,
emphasizing the need for the two communities, determining jointly and through agreement, the conditions
for living together and preserving at every stage the
characteristics of an independent Cyprus State.

The Secretary-General
also my view” Libid.].

concludes by stating: “This is

63. Speaking of the relations between the two segments of the population, in paragraphs 42 and following
of his report, as well as in his observations at the end
of paragraph 83, the Secretary-General notes the presence of further reassuring signs concerning the return
to a normal situation, owing to the improved cooperation between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots.

56. With regard to the possibilities of achieving an
agreed basis for a solution, the Secretary-General says
the following in the present report:
“In spite of all the difficulties, I still believe that
the elements necessary for a political settlement in
Cyprus do exist and that a compromise solution,
including both political and economic elements, and
protecting the legitimate interests and aspirations of
both communities, could be worked out. I appeal
therefore to both sides ot continue the intercommunal talks in good faith, with a determination to
get results and a willingness to make concessions.”
[Ibid., para. 82.1

64. However, even on that level the situation still
leaves much to be desired, as is apparent from paragraphs 22,23,24,59 and 83 of the report, in particular
with respect to the lessening of the areas of confrontation and freedom of movement. Accordingly, the
Secretary-General presses his reasoned opinion that,
pending a political solution, partial arrangements as
suggested by his Special Representative and by the
Commander of the United Nations Force could be
elaborated, which would facilitate a return to normalcy,
contribute significantly to a rapprochement, and would
at the same time increase the chances for progress
in the talks now under way.

57. Considering the realism and the inspiring wisdom
of this evaluation and appeal, my delegation wishes
to convey its deep appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, and hopes most sincerely that it will be welcomed in the same manner by all concerned. We
believe that a successful outcome of the talks will
depend, more than anything else, on realism, constructive approach, and statesman-like attitude.

65. There is no doubt that in these two very important
areas-i.e. the question of co-operation between Greek
and Turkish Cypriots, and the talks designed to find
a solution to their disputes-the
contribution of the
United Nations Force and the assistance of Ambassador Osorio-Tafall and General Prem Chand are of
great value and consequently, necessary,

58. Before concluding, I should like to express our
deep appreciation once again to Secretary-General u
Thant and to his immediate collaborators here in New
York and in Cyprus in the field. I wish to make special
mention of Under-Secretaries-General
Mr, Ralph
Bunche and Mr. Rolz-Bennett, as well as of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr, OsorioTafall, and the Commander of the Force, MajorGeneral Prem Chand, and those serving under them,
who through their diligent, patient and constructive
efforts, ensure the smooth functioning of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus,

66, It is because we are convinced of the usefulness
of the United Nations presence in Cyprus in the present
circumstances that Greece will continue to Iend its
moral and financial support to the Force by contributing to defray its expenses. Our contribution recently
exceeded the figure of $8 million.
67, I am fully aware of the fact that other Member
countries of the United Nations have had to make substantial sacrifices to set up and maintain the Force
and that they are entitled to expect greater progress

59. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Greece, on whom I now call,
6

ia the Clerides-Denktash talks--qrogress
that would
open the way to lasting pacification and, therefore,
to the withdrawal of the Force.
($3, I am among those who have constantly regretted
the slow pace of the Nicosia negotiations, both in my
consultations with the Secretary-General and in my
statements in the Security Council, although I recognize the difficulties that those talks are encountering,
69. In my speech to the Security Council made at
themeeting held on 11 December 196911521sr meeting]
I again ‘conveyd to the Council the concern we felt
at the fact that these talks were marking time. In particular I said:
“ . . . we are more than ever convinced that the
two parties in Cyprus must intensify their efforts
to ensure that’ the talks they are holding will lead
to useful results.
“In the past/ I have had occasion to assure the
Council that w$ on the Greek side consider the time
factor importarit, and we maintain this opinion.”
70. Later in that same meeting, almost all members
ofthe Council expressed their fears that the static situation might engender not a spirit of conciliation but
rather a hardening of the positions involved.
71. The representative of the United Kingdom even
spoke of four factors dominating the situation, and he
added that the human and economic factors:
“ 1 . . make for good relations, for reconciliation
and for peace., The other two factors, political and
military, could~ work the other way-for separation
and segregatioti and the perpetuation of dispute and
division.”
72. It seems to me that Lord Caradon’s diagnosis
was correct, for the reasons that prevent the parties
from making tangible progress in the talks underway
seem to be largely political and might lead, as Lord
Caradon foresaw, to separation, segregation and
division,
73. However, it is ,appropriate to recall the point of
departure of the Nicosia talks. The point on which
all sides agreed was based on the principle of the
independence and*unity of the Cypriot State.
/
74. Mr. Cleride’s, who had been entrusted by his
Government with the responsibility
for conducting
these negotiations, summed up his mandate on 29
October 1969 as follows:
“Greece and Turkey have agreed that the problem
of Cyprus should be settled by peaceful means, for
they are aware that an armed confrontation of the
two countries would have catastrophic consequences, both for Greece and Cyprus as well as for
Turkey. They have thus come to the conclusion that

the framework within which to seek a solution to
the Cyprus problem should be the maintenance of
an independent Cypriot State, the constitutional system of which should however be revised so that,
on the one hand, the State would be unitary and,
so that on the other hand, the Greek ‘majority of
Cyprus would respect the ethnic existence of the
Turkish minority by granting it the necessary constitutional guarantees,
“In the light of what I have just mentioned, the
appeal of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations for the start of talks between Greek and
Turkish Cypriots was accepted by Greece, Cyprus
and Turkey, and was supported by east and West,
as well as by the non-aligned countries.
“Since by the very nature of things, a peaceful
solution of the Cyprus problem is not only desirable,
but necessary, Greece and Cyprus agreed that the
most advantageous and most equitable procedure
should be that of talks between Cypriots-a procedure that we are pursuing in close co-operation with
the Greek Government.”
75. This statement by one of the negotiators has not,
as far,as I know, been denied. Moreover, you may
have noted the statements made on 20 May 1969 by
Mr. KiiGiik who said:
“What the Turkish Cypriots were aiming at was
‘securing respect for their right to live in peace and
security as a partner community within a unitary
State i.e., the Republic of Cyprus’.” [S/9233, pnrn.
67.1
76. More recently therepresentative of Turkey stated
here on 11 December 1969 [152Zstmeeting], and I ven-

ture to quote him again:
“As regards his remarks on the unitary State, the
leader of the Turkish Community did not object to
a unitary State. The question is how the unitary State
will be framed.
‘ ‘1I . *The problem is, really that the independence of Cyprus should be maintained and within
the context of this independence the two communities
should have good working relations, keep their identity and not fear each other.”
77. Other statements along the same lines appear in
paragraphs 69 and 70 of the Secretary-General’s report
[s/9814 and Corr. 23. It would appear from this that
thCre is no tangible difference in the respective positions. Where therefore do the difficulties lie? Apparently they stem from the complex details of the proposals that the negotiators have before them. Certainly,
the side represented by Mr. Clerides would not refuse
to recognize that the agreement to follow should, as
Mr. K@iik wishes, take account of the specific identity
atid interests as well as the security of the Turkish
Cypriot community, or even of their desire to settle
their own local affairs, as Mr. Denktash has explained.
78. But the Greek Cypriot side is equally anxious
to safeguard the specific.identity of the State of Cyprus,

riots have lived for so many years, at times under the
threat of foreign military intervention,
at times under
the vain expectation of a solution which would
guarantee their future based on international principles
enjoyed by the majority of the international community
of States. But to say that events that have effected
only the Greek Cypriot population of the island might,
or do in fact prevent these talks from making porogress
is an attempt to turn them to account. This is tantamount to saying that the Turkish Cypriot negotiators
might, on this hypothesis have been able to effect some
progress in the talks but they were prevented by events,
events which had nothing to do with the Turkish Cypriots and which in no way affected them; for it is a
fact, and this is set down in black and white in the
Secretary-General’s report that the relations between
the two segments of the Community,
far from having
deteriorated during the past six months have, on the
contrary, made slow but definite progress. One could
even say with the Secretary-General that if the Turkish
Cypriots had shown themselves to be more understanding in the question of deconfrontation
and in that of
freedom of movement we would have witnessed an
even greater relaxation of tension.

to ensure that a system of Government is in force which
will give the Greek and Turkish Cypriots the feeling
of ,belonging to a single State, for if by trying to do
too much you break the unitary character of the State,
you thereby affect its territorial integrity and do away
with its independence. And this would run counter
to a series of ideas that the Council members have
in mind, without my having to enumerate them.
79. There, it seems to me, is where the difficulties
lie which inject a certain element of immobility in the
talks, and which cause my delegation some concern.
For our part, we hope that these talks will revert to
their natural course so that they may lead to a viable
solution which would once and for all do away with
the terrible crises that has& beset the island for SO
long. The Greek Government is dedicated to this objective, It will spare no effort to contribute to the success
of this operation of reconciliation and peace.
80. 1 had intended to limit my statement this afternoon
to the essentials, and what is essential for the Security
Council is the state of the relations between the two
segments of the population of Cyprus and the development of their talks which seek practical and viable
solutions concerning their joint existence. If concrete
and positive results are attained in this direction, the
task of the United Natidns in Cyprus, according to
the resolutions of the Security Council, would be
largely completed.

86. Before concluding, I should like to convey to the
Secretary-General and to his distinguished colleagues
an expression of our great appreciation
for their
devoted efforts to the cause of peace and for what
the United Nations has done in Cyprus.
87. The PRESIDENT:
I have no further speakers
on my list. As no other representative has asked to
speak at this time, the Council will proceed to vote
on ,the draft resolution contained in document S/983 1.

81. It was therefore my duty to set forth briefly to
the Council our appraisal of the development of these
aspects of the question of Cyprus which are before
this body and to offer the Council the formal assurance
that the course of conduct of the Greek Government
is in conformity with the letter and spirit of the resolutions of the Security CounciI as a whole,
82. The outline that I have just given, although
sketchy, does however serve a$positive purpose. It
leads us to see more clearly what still remains to be
done to achieve the desired goal, that is to say, the
pacification of the island of Cyprus.

88. The PRESIDENT:
Several representatives have
asked to speak after the vote, and I shall call on them
in turn.
89. Mr. HILDYARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, may I first extend to you, Sir, on behalf of my
delegation, a warm welcome as President of this Council for the month of June. Some of us have already
had experience of your skill as Chairman in one of
the committees set up by this Council. We know that
from you we can expect the authority of a soldier and
the tact and understanding of a diplomat. We are fortunate to have as our President such an outstanding
son of your noble country.

83. It is not by recriminations that this result will
be achieved. We shall still need a large measure of
goodwill and mutual understanding
to solve this
problem, and what is important is the position of the
Governments directly conceined in this political issue,
as expressed by their attitudes and their statements.
84. The representative of Turkey implied a few
minutes ago that certain events that hid occurred in
Cyprus had or might have an adverse effect on the
favourable course df the talks and on relations between
the two communities.

90. I should like also to associate my delegation with
the tribute which you paid to the Ambassador of France
who acted as President of the Council during the month
of May. I cannot hope to add to the very warm words
with which the leader of my delegation welcomed him
at the first meeting!of the Council for that month[153611t
meting], but I should like to express to him personally
our appreciation and admiration.

85. Indeed, events have occurred which we are the
first to condemn as morally and politically intolerable,
They have broken the peace and calm that the Greek
Cypriot population needs so badly in this tempestuous
period of its existence. Therefore no one will be surprised if I say that these events are in large measure
the results of the uncertainty in which the Greek Cyp-

’ See resolution 281 (1970).
8

96. In these circumstances
it is logical that the
Secretary-Genral
has recommended,
and that the
Security Council has agreed, that the mandate of
UNFICYP
should be extended for another six months.
My delegation was glad to vote for this extension. We
are grateful for the Secretary-General’s
efforts to
reduce the cost of the operation, in particular by reducing the size of the forces involved. It is clear from
the report that there is little if any scope for more
cuts in the immediate future, but we hope that the
Secretary-General
will continue to keep in mind the
possibility of further reductions consonant with the
needs of the situation and the operational effectiveness
of the Force.

9 1. Before turning to the item on our agenda, I should
like also to express my delegation’s welcome and support for the message which you have addressed, on
behalf of the Council, to the people of Peru in the
terrible disasters which have befallen them.
92. We are grateful again to the Secretary-General
for a lucid and constructive report [S/9814 rind Corr. 2).
He does not encourage illusions or complacency, but
he puts the difficulties in proportion. In spite of all
our hopes that the island had now entered on a period
of calm, there has been a recrudescence of violence.
We share his profound relief that President Makarios
escaped unhurt when his helicopter came under fire
on 8 March and we welcome, with the SecretaryGeneral, the signs that the tension which was so in
evidence at that time may have subsided. The United
Nations presence must certainly have been a factor
for calm and stability in those difficult days, At least
as the report brings out, there have been practically
no serious intercommunal
incidents during the period
under review, such as would inevitably have inhibited
the slow growth of confidence between the two communities.
We remember the melancholy situation
which obtained until the early months of 1968, and
we know how much is due to the United Nations Force
and the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative,

97. Meanwhile, I am glad to be able to state that
the United Kingdom will maintain its contingent in
UNJFICYP
for the six months period. We shall meet
all its costs. Assuming that other contributors agree
to keep their voluntary contributions at the same level
as before, we are prepared to make the same voluntary
contributions as in the past, that is $625,000, the equivalent of $1.5 million for the two quarters.
98. I should like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
my Government’s unqualified support for the independence and unity of Cyprus. Given continuation of the
present restraint-and
the statements which we have
heard from the representatives of the three parties
today show both restraint and a spirit of conciliation-we
can hope that the intercommunal
talks
will be given the encouragement and support which
they clearly need, and that both sides will proceed
with a due sense of urgency. We hope and believe
that the time will come when all the inhabitants of
this beatiful island will be able to live together in friendship and peace.

93. Here I should like to join in the tribute which
has so deservldly been paid to the Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall.
His ability and skill have
been invaluable. We are also fortunate in the Force
Commander,
General Prem Chand, who, in the comparatively short time that he has been in Cyprus, has
won widespread admiration and esteem.
94. As the representat’ive of Cyprus has reminded
us, the United Nations Force .in Cyprus is the most
impressive peace-keeping operation in the history of
the United Nations, It is indeed an operation in which
even an Organization as uncomplacent as the United
Nations, and rightly cncomplacent, can feel justifiable
satisfaction and pride.

99. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
the United Kingdom for the kind words expressed to
me.
100. Mr, MWAANGA
(Zambia): Mr. President, I
should like to congratulate you on your assumption
of this high and worthy office of President of the Security Council for the month of June. Your personal qualides, Sir, give us entire confidence that you will perform your duties in such a manner as will meet with
our often optimistic expectations.

95. What of. the future? In his report the SecretaryGeneral expressed the view that the elements necessary for a political settlement in Cyprus do exist and
has recommended that the intercommunal talks should
be continued. My Government wholeheartedly shares
that view and supports the Secretary-General’s appeal
to the parties to go on with the talks in good faith
with a determination
to get results and a willingness
to make concessions. We note that co-operation
between the communities at the village level for the
solution of day-to-day problems has increased and that
this could be a good omen for co-operation at higher
levels. The United Nations Force has helped and can
continue to help. In the end, however, everything
depends on the communities
themselves. AS my
Foreign Secretary said recently said at Ankara: “A
policeman can keep the peace between two neighbours,
but only the neighbours themselves can make the
peace”.

101. My complimentary
remarks would hardly be
complete if1 did not pay a tribute to your distinguished
Ambassador
Kosciusko-Morizet
of
predecessor,
France, for the exemplary manner in which he presided
over our deliberations last month. We shall always
remember his skill, sense of fairness and humor.
102. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
contained in document S/9831 extending the presence
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprns
because we believe now, just as in the past, that this
is in the interest of all the people of Cyprus.
103. Last December, when I spoke in my capacity
as the representative
of Zambia [1521st meeting], I
9

by the Turkish Cypriot community and its leaders during the difficult weeks of the month of March made
it possible to prevent a worsening of the tensions. But
the persistence of those tensions, together with the
absence of any sigtiificantprogress in the conversations
going on between representatives of the two communities, leads to the conclusion that, despite a certain
improvement in collaboration which has been brought
about in various fields between Greek and Turkish
Cypriots, no quick solution of the fundamental problems of Cyprus can be expected.

expressed regret that no significant progress had been
made so far towards resolving the outstanding political
and economic issues in Cyprus. I wish to reiterate this
regret, We know that the people of Cyprus want peace
more that any one qf us, and it is our hope that nothing
will prevent them from achieving this goal of peace.
We look forward to a time when it will be deemed
unnecessary to continue maintaining
the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus.
104. We are indebted to the Secretary-General for
his having provided us, as always, with such a comprehensive report on the situation in the island. We
encourage the Secretary-General
and his colleagues
to continue doing everything possible to bring about
national reconciliation in Cyprus, and to that end we
pledge our never-wavering support.

110. In these circumstances, the Secretary-General
thought that the best he could do was to recommend
maintenance of the Force in the island for another sixmonth period. The Council agreed with this, since it
received assurance that the Secretary-General’s
recommendation was the result of thorough consultations with all intetested parties and that it met with
the full agreement of those parties. However, it cannot
be. concealed that the prolongation
of a provisional
arrangement. that the Council, more than six years ago,
envisaged as lasting for only three months, cannot be
regarded as entirely
satisfactory.
Despite the
implementation of some of the suggestions of the Secretariat survey team that went to Cyprus last year,
and despite a certain reduction in the number of armed
forces involved, the Cyprus operation still continues
to raise delicate financial
problems
for our
Organization. Above all, one wonders whether the continued presence of the United Nations Force, though
it indeed assures the maintenance of a precarious kmd
ofpeace, fully corresponds to the objectives with which
it was charged by the Council. For paragraph 5 of
resolution 186 (1964) recommended in particular that
the function of the Force should be “to contribute
to . . , a return to normal conditions”.
But, as the
French delegation has emphasized on many occasions,
one may fear that the presence, constantly renewed,
of United Nations forces has had rather the effect of
Perpetuating, or crystallizing a dangerous situation’and
that it has served as a pretext fbr indefinite postpbnei
ment of any final settlement of the Cyprus problem
by the parties directly involved, despite the efforts of
the Secretary-General and of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr, Osorio-Tafall-and
I can
personally testify-having
known him personally and
seen him at work elsewhere in difficult circumstances-to Mr. Osorio-Tafall’s cool competence, will
power and high awareness of his responsibilities.

105. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the Ambassador of
Zambia for his kind remarks.
106, Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (inte,:
from French):
May I, Mr. President, be
permitted to tell you first of all how grateful I am for
the extremely kind words you found to describe my
term as President of the Council for the month of May.
I also wish to express my gratitude to all my colleagues
who were kind enough to join in those words.

pretation

107. As for ,yourself, Mr. President, we know you
well, and I can assure you that the French delegation
has complete confidence in you at this moment when
you are assuming such a heavy task. The manner in
which you expressed our collective feeling by addressing a message of solidarity and sympathy to the people
of Peru shows the fashion in which you intend to carry
out your duties, and we thank you.
108. This time again, the, so to speak, almost ritual
debate of our Council on the question of Cyprus terminates in a unanimous vote of a resolution extending
for a new six-month period the mandate of the peacekeeping force established under the terms of resolution
186 (1964), of 4 March 1964. The French delegation,
as on previous occasions, voted in favour of that text
and would like to explain briefly the considerations
that led it to do so.
109. Thelast report of the Secretary-General,

[S/9814

and Corr. 21, notes that during the period between

2 December 1969 and 1 June 1970 calm has prevailed
between the rival communities in the island, and that
progress has been achieved towards the restoration
of normal conditions of life. However, although the
number of incidents involving gunfire during the last
six months was much smaller than during corresponding previous periods, peace has not yet been brought
to the minds. We may regard as testimony to this fever
the despicable attempt of 8 March against the life of
the President of the Republic of Cyprus, together with
the assassination, a week laster of Mr. Polycarpos
Gheorghadjis, former Minister of the Interior. Indeed,
as the Secretary-General
stressed, the firm measures
taken by the Government and the moderation shown

111. Still, the Secretary-Genera1

tells us that

“ . . . the elements necessary for a political settlement in Cypru do exist and that a compromise solution, including both political and economic elements, and protecting the legitimate interests and
aspirations of both communities,
could be worked
out.” [Ibid., para. 82.)
How then, in these circumstances, can one fail to
express the wish that, as urged in the resolution just
adopted, the parties concerned will redouble their
efforts so that true peace may be restored between
10

the two communities which today are divided, so that
all concerned, without forgettmg their origin, may
become Cypriots and .nothing else, as a previous
sPeaker has put it. For 1t.spart,. the French delegation
hop& that this appeal ~111 be Fnally heeded by those
to whom it is addressed, for 1: woyld be dangerous
and futile for the two communlties~ involved to hope
to go on living forever under a provlsonal and temporary system.
112, There is no doubt whatsoever that, although it
is always difficult to reconcile unity with diversity,
the only possible way lies in not merely coexisting,
but also in living together and co-operating-which
implies
a maximum of local freedoms but also a
minimum of central powers if what is desired is at
the same time to assure respect for the rights of the
communities and, the satisfactory functioning of an
independent State.
113. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of France for his kind words.
114, My. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatedfionz Russian): Mr. President, it gives
me great satisfaction to begin my statement by expressing to you personally the congratulations of the Soviet
delegation on your assumption of the high and responsible office of President of the Security Council. Knowing your personal qualities and your politic1 and diplomatic experience, we express our firm conviction
that you will be brilliantly successful in discharging
the tasks entrusted to you.
115. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet
of France,
and express our deep,satisfaction at the important work
he has done in fitting that responsible post. During
his term as President the Security Council, through
the united efforts of all peace-loving States, succeeded
in formulating a condemnation of the evils of aggression, and justice prevailed as a result of the decisions
taken.
116. The Soviet delegation is eager to associate itself
with your initiative in suggesting that we should express
our condolences to the Government and people of Peru,
a country which has been the victim of a frightful
natural disaster. The Soviet press has today published
a cabled message of condolences sent by Mr. N. V.
Podgorny, President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the USRR, to Mr. Juan Velasco Alvarado,
President of Peru, in connexion with the earthquake
which ravaged that country.
117. Turning to the substance of the issue under discussion, the Soviet delegation deems it necessary to
make the following observations, The position of the
Soviet Union on the substance of the Cyprus question
which is today before the Security Council has
repeatedly been set forth in statements by the Soviet
Government and by representatives of the USSR,
Including statements made in the Security Council.
That Position retains its full force and significance now.

118. The Soviet Union has always considered that
the question of Cyprus can and must be settled exclusively by peaceful means, in the interests of the whole
population of Cyprus-in other words, in the interests
of both national communities. Such a settlement must
be based on the strengthening of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus which, as a sovereign State and a Member
of the United Nations, pursues a policy of peace and
non-alignment with military blocs. It is precisely a settlement of this kind which the Soviet Union strongly
advocates.
119. At the same time, the Soviet Union considers
that the solution of the internal problems of the Republic of Cyprus is a matter for the Cypriots themselves,
and for them alone. They must put their internal affairs
in order themselves, without anyinterferencefrom outside. Neither other States nor the United Nations have
the slightest right to interfere in the internal affairs
of the Republic of Cyprus or to impose on the Cypriot
people who constitute its two communities, Greek and
Turkish, any formula for the settlement of the internal
problems of that State.
120. The Soviet Union is resolutely opposed to any
attempt to infringe upon the sovereignty of the Republic
of Cyprus, opposed to any intention-such as appears
to be harboured, as in the past, by certain States-to
contrive a settlement of the question of Cyprus behind
the backs of the Cypriot people to the detriment of
their vital interests, in furtherance of the imperialistic
purposes of certain Powers which are members of the
NATO military bloc. The Security Council, and the
United Nations as a whole, must display the utmost
firmness in resisting any attempts and intentions to
subordinate the fate of the people of Cyprus to the
implementation of military plans in the Mediterranean
area and the neighbouring Middle East.
121. All this a&mes particularly great significance.
at the present time when, as a result of the subversiie
activities of the international imperialist forces and
their agents in Cyprus, tension has increased and acts
of terrorism directed against the country’s political
leaders and public figures defending its independence
have become more frequent, culminating in the villainous attempt on the life of the President of the Republic
of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, and the brutal assassination of the former Minister of the Interior and
Defence, Mr. Georghadjis. It is quite clear that the
tension in Cyprus,, as noted by the Secretary-General,
has’ intensified the threat to the independence and
sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus and to peace
and security in the eastern Mediterranean area as a
whole, In these circumstances the seriousness of the
threat to the independence and security of Cyprus
posed by the existence of foreign military bases in the
territory of that State becomes increasingly obvious.
These military bases are in themselves a Source of
constant tension in Cyprus.
122. The general approach of the Soviet Union to
the question of Cyprus is based on its over-all foreign
policy, as laid down by V. I. Lenin, the great founder
ofthe Soviet State, the hundredth anniversary of whose
birth mankind is celebrating this year. From the very

first days of its existence, the Soviet State, following
Lenin’s guidance, has pursued a policy of peace and
friendship among peoples and has resolutely and consistently opposed colonial enslavement and the oppression of peoples by imperialism. To this day the Soviet
Union remains a confirmed advocate of the liquidation
of the vestiges of colonialism in all its manifestations,
in all parts of the world where the twin evils of colonialism and racism have not yet been liquidated, where
they have not yet been completely eradicated, and
where imperialism,
with the help of military bases,
threatens the freedom and security of peoples.
123. The Soviet delegation also wishes to draw attention to the fact that, in the current report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in
~ypm
1~/9814 mi COIY.~], it is again stated that
negotiations are taking place in Cyprus between representatives of the Greek and Turkish communities
with a view to settling the problems which exist in
the relations between them. We take the position that
those negotiations are an internal matter of the Republic of Cyprus. We sincerely hope for the early success
of those intercommunal
talks, since oniy such talks
based on mutual understanding and goodwill and free
from outside interference, can lead to the creation of
conditions which will ensure peace and security for
all Cypriots, Greek and Turkish alike.

that this peace-keeping operation of the United Nations
cannot and should not be continued indefinitely. This
operation, by reason of its very nature and of its length,
cannot serve as aprototype or model of anormal United
Nations peace-keeping operation. The very presence
of foreign troops in the territory of an independent
sovereign State, even under the auspices of the United
Nations, can be only an extraordinary measure and
must be brought to an end at the earliest opportunity,
The Soviet delegation expresses the hope that such
an opportunity will present itself not later than the I
end of the current six-month period during which the
Force is to be stationed in Cyprus. It is on that understanding, and taking into account the position of the
parties concerned in this matter, above all the position
of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, that
the Soviet delegation will refrain from raising at this
time the question of the withdrawal of those forces
from Cyprus.
127. With regard to the resolution adopted by the
Security Council, the Soviet delegation deems it essential to note in particular the fact that in connexion
with the extension of the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force for a further
period of six months the resolution reaffirms the provisions of Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4
March 1964 and subsequent decisions of the Council
relating to the question of Cyprus. That was the key
factor in determining the Soviet Union’s attitude
toward the resolution in question.

124. At the same time, the Soviet delegation particularly wishes to stress that it shares the concern
expressed in the report of the Secretary-General
regarding the lack of progress on basic issues in those
intercommunal talks. In this connexion, the question
inevitably arises whether there is not some negative
influence being brought to bear on the talks by those
forces, those international imperialist circles, which
recently provoked a worsening of the tension in Cyprus
and which, naturally, have no interest in a successful
outcome of the intercommunal
talks, since such success would be a severe blow to their plans for a
“settlement”
of the question of Cyprus on a basis
which would be in the interests of certain of the NATO
Powers. The breakdown of the negotiations and a
recurrence of internecine strife in Cyprus would, of
course, serve the interests only of those anti-popular
forces and would provide a pretext for foreign interference in the affairs of the State of Cyprus and its people.
Such a course of events would inevitably pose a threat
to the independence of the Cypriots and imperil the
Republic of Cyprus.

128. The delegation of the USSR is authorized to
state that the Soviet Union, for the reasons given, did
not oppose the extension of the stationing in Cyprus
of the United Nations Force for a further six-month
period, it being understood that this extension will be
in full conformity with the provisions of the Security
Council resolution referred,to by me, in other wools,
that the functions of the, United Nations Force in Cyprus will remain unchanged and that it will continue
to be financed in accordance with the present system,
i.e. on a voluntary basis.
129. ThePRESIDENT:
I should like to thank Ambassador Malik for the kind words that he addressed to
the Chair.
130. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretatiorz
,,fkm
French): Mr. President, the delegation of Burundi
would like to address to you its congratulations on
your assumption of the Presidency of this Council,
My delegation would like also to take this opportunity
to pay a tribute to your dynamic qualities, which have
helped us to settle the problems of the United Nations
generally and those affecting the African continent in
particular. It is these qualities that have led you to
assume the Chair formerly held by my humble self
in the United Nations Committee on Namibia,2 which
is currently in session. So long as you hold this high
office my delegation will be happy to offer its contribution, which, albeit modest, will be given in full
measure.
‘Ad HOC Sub-Committeeestablished in pursuance of Securily
Council resolution 276 (1970).

125. In conclusion, I should like to refer to the question of the United Nations operation in Cyprus. The
report of the Secretary-General on that operation for
the period 2 December 1969 to 1 June 1970 includes
a recommendation that the force known as the “United
Nations Peace-keeping Force” should be continued
for a further six months.
.
126. It must be noted, however, that over six years
have elapsed since those forces were sent to Cyprus,
The stationing of those forces in Cyprus for such a
lengthy period can in no way be regarded as normal.
The Soviet delegation considers it essential to stress
12

131. My delegation is also happy to express satisfaction at having taken part in meetings of the Security
Council last month under the guidance of a person
who represents a country that has very close relations
with the Republic of Burundi, and who is also a friend,
His Excellency Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet,
who
made it possible for the Security Council to appraise
the contrast between his brilliant French mind and his
name. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity
to congratulate him for the dignity, skill and diplomacy
with which he guided the work of the Security Council,
thanks to which the Council was able to note with
gratification that a development has occurred-one
that is partially satisfactory and which has made it
possible for calm to be restored.

‘should like to assure YOU of my delegation’s full cooperation. We are convinced that under your experienced guidance the discussion in the Council will be
successful.
137. May I also be permitted to address our delegation’s thanks to Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet
of
France who, in a very talented and brilliant way, discharged his responsibilities as President of the Council
in the month of May.
138. The polish delegation would like to take this
opportunity
to express its deep sympathy to the
Government and people of Peru in connexion with the
most tragic catastrophe that has taken place in that
country. In that respect, we therefore join you, Mr,
President, in the cable which you have proposed on
behalf of the Security Council.

132. I now come to the present problem. I have been
instructed by the Government of Burundi to make a
statement within the tiamework of peace and unity,
which are the two essential sine ~LKI non for the two
communities on Cyprus. As a matter of fact, any proposals by the Security Council or by the United Nations
in general should be directed towards the restoration
of peace and the creation of a climate, at first
psychological and later political and social which would
be designed to safeguard and cement the unity of the
Cypriot people and to inspire the two constituent elements with mutual confidence. This unity is in the
higher interests of the two communities, which, owing
to the vicissitudes of history, are called upon not only
to coexist, but also to intermingle. The fact that they
are different in their ethnic origin, far from being an
insurmountable
obstacle to coexistence, should provide the foundation for a complementary and mutual
enrichment,
these being two pillars of one single
edifice, Cyprus. From this standpoint it is up to the
Cypriot people themselves as a single national entity
to dwell less on their respective historical allegiances
and more on their present common fate, namely, that
of being a people, a nation, and they should embrace
as their primary task the job of building an indivisible
State, and assuming control of their destiny.

139. We have before us the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
for the period of 2 December 1969to 1 June 197O[S/9824
rind Corr. 21. We have also a resolution we have just
voted for, which provides once more for the extension
of stationing of United Nations forces in Cyprus for
a further six-month period.
140. As all the representatives could notice, there
is a difference between the evaluation of the’situation
in Cyprus in the present report of the Secretary-General
and that in the report of 3 December 1969. The previous
report starts its chapter VIII entitled “Observations”
by stating: “The improvement in the situation in
Cyprus, which began in December 1967, has continued
during the period under review” [S/9521, pat-a. 731.
the present report of the
14 1. Unfortunately,
Secretary-General does not contain such a formulation
and at the beginning of its corresponding chapter it
states that:
I‘ . I . the calm which had characterized the situation in Cyprus for some time was disturbed by a
series of violent actions culminating in the attempt,
on 8 March, on the life of the President of the
Republc” , and that “tension caused by this dastardly
attempt was increased by the murder, one week later,’
of Mr, Polycarpos Georghadjis, the former Minister
of the Interior.” [S/9814 and Corr. 2, para. 79.)

133. It is to that sacred duty, the defence of the
indivisible sovereignty of Cyprus, that my Government
firmly commits itself. The Republic of Burundi is a
tireless champion of peace and harmony among the
sons iind daughters of one mother, the homeland.
134. From that point of view, the two communities,
regardless of their relative size, are entitled to claim
their right to life and citizenship and to enjoy these
rights on an equal footing.

142. Those disturbances could not have a positive
impact on the intercommunal
talks and that is why
the Secretary-General
in his report had to say that
“in the prevailing circumstances, it would be unrealistic to expect an early solution of the basic problems
of Cyprus” [ibid., para. 811.

135. These are the overrriding
principles
and
guidelines which have led my Government to support
the pacification action of the United Nations on that
island, an island which in other respects is a tourist’s
paradise.

143. The preceding difference in the evaluation of
the situation in Cyprus in the reports is also reflected
in resolutions, The previous resolution 274, (1969) of
11 December 1969, in its third preambular paragraph,
of the situation
in
noted “that the improvement
Cyprus” had “continued”.
We do not find those words
in the present resolution.

136. Mr, KASPRZYK
(Poland): Mr. President, permit me, first of all, on behalf of the Polish delegation,
to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the
high office of President of the Security Council. I
13

enced and we are happy that you had transmitted
sentiments on behalf of all of US.

144. In other words, the report and the new resolution
indicate that there were serious elements of deterioration of the situation in Cyprus. That cannot be considered as accidental. Behind it are those forces which
would like to undermine the independence of the
Republic of Cyprus. It is also evident that certain
NATO circles are intensifying the tensions in Cyprus
because of their growing activity in the Mediterranean
and Middle East.

those

151. NOW, with regard to today’s agenda item, it is
the view of my delegation that the Council’s action
in extending the mandate of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus for another six months is happy evidence
of our common conviction that the presence of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus indeed makes an
important contribution of maintaining peace between
the two Cypriot communities and thereby contributes
to the possibility of a permanent solution of the communal problems. In addition, we should like to give
particular recognition to the dedication and the splendid performance of the officers and men of the United
Nations Force and their new Commander,
MajorGeneral Prem Chand. The successful reorrr,anizational
measures taken by the General in response to suggestions of a Secretariat survey team are particularly
deserving of note. These steps, in our view, have
increased the operational flexibility and effectiveness
of the Force and at the same time have produced significant savings. Therefore, these measures deserve our
particular commendation.

145. In this connexion, our delegation would like to
recall that Poland has always supported the struggle
of the Cypriot people against imperialism and COIonialism. From the very creation of the Republic of
Cyprus we have strongly supported its independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Poland has always
stood for the removal of foreign military bases from
Cyprus and for the peaceful solution of the question
of Cyprus without foreign interference.
146. Our delegation voted for the provisions of the
resolution extending the stationing in Cyprus of United
Nations forces for a further period of six months. We
should like, however, in this connexion, to stress that
this extension should be effected in accordance with
the provisions of the Security Council resolution 186
(1964)) that is, that the present function and the existing
procedure for the financing of United Nations forces
in Cyprus should be maintained.

1.52. Then, too, the Secretary-General’s
report
[S/98/4 and COV. 25, which we have before us today,
is most useful and informative. I think we are all taking
encouragement from the fact that the intercommunal
situation has remained calm during the past six months,
despite the heightening of tension which resuIted from
the deplorable events of last March. The regrettable
attack on President Makarios, along with the other
violent incidents w,hich have been referred to here this
afternoon and detailed in the Secretary-General’s
report gave rise to special concern. We are most
gratified that the attack on the President of Cyprus
failed and that the measures taken by the Government
of Cyprus, togethe? with the restraint and statesmanship exihibited by the Turkish Cypriot leadership, permitted tensions to subside without intercommunal
strife. I should like to add that we deplore acts of
violence of any sort on the island, and we hope that
all concerned will work actively to prevent them.

147. We should also like to join those delegations
which have drawn the Council’s attention to the fact
that it is already more than six years since the United
Nations forces have been stationed in Cyprus. That
situation cannot be considered as normal. We therefore
should like to express our belief that the opportunity
will arise soon when the United Nations troops can
be withdrawn from Cyprus.
148. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): Mr,
President, may I join the many who this afternoon
have already expressed their deep pleasure in seeing
you in the President’s chair for this month. Your wellknown personal qualities and your long experience here
will assure us all that the work of the Council during
June will be as fruitful as any wise leadership can possibly make it.

153, Hope may also be drawn from the fact that there
has been some movement towards normal conditions
of life on Cyprus. Nevertheless, I should be less than
candid if I did not point ou t that my Government regrets
that it has not been possible to put into effect more
of the United Nations proposals in the area of deconfrontation and normalization.

149. I should also like to join in paying tribute to
the manner in which the representative of France presided over our proceedings during that very difficult
month of May. I think we would all agree that his
Presidency can be characterized as nothing less than
brilliant.

l-54. We are frankly disappointed at the lack of progress in the intercommunal
talks. The position of the
United States on this subject remains unchanged: again
we would urge both participants in the talks, and the
communities
for which they speak, to maintain
attitudes of compromise and accommodation,
and to
examine their positions and all proposals with a view
to accepting what is best in the long run for Cyprus,
rather than what they may judge to be best in the short
term for their respective communities.

150. Finally, before turning to the subject on our
agenda, may I, too, express our appreciation for your
initiative in transmitting condolences to the Government of Peru on the tragic losses which it suffered
as a result of the recent earthquake. I know that all
of our minds and our hearts were indeed touched by
the magnitude of death and suffering which was experi14

155.
Now, we concur fully in the Secretary-General’s
view
that the elements necessary for a political settlemen t in Cyprus do exist and that a compromise solution
which
protects the legitimate interests and aspirations
Of both communities can be worked out. We continue
to believe that such a solution, premised on an independent Cyprus, can best be reached through the intercommural
talks and we therefore hope that Mr. Clerides
and
Mr. Denktash, the very able negotiators for the
two communities, will continue to pursue their efforts
in the same positive spirit which they have demonstrated
in the past.
156.
However, we feel constrained to point out that
as these negotiations drag out over a long period of
time,
the two communities in isolation from each other
tend
to develop separate civic roots, and that this process
of development in isolation can tend to work
against
achieving the just solution we all desire.

160. Mr. TOMEH
(Syrian Arab Republic): To the
view of all the delegations that have addressed their
felicitations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
high office of the Presidency of the Security Council,
the delegation of Syria wishes to add its own voice.
Those of us who have known you as colleagues for
a number of years have always admired your tact and
your wisdom which represents the wisdom of Asia at
its best and highest. Indeed, your taking the initiative
today in addressing a cable of condolences to the people
and Government of Peru in their plight and tragedy
is in itself an indication of your deep humanism and
your deep humanity.
161. I also wish to take this occasion to associate
my delegation with all those delegations that expressed
their admiration
to the representative
of France,
Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet,
for his Presidency
over the Council during the month of May. As the
representative of an Arab State, I cannot but underline
the fact that during the month of May and under the
Presidency of the French representative,
two Arab
problems were discussed as you yourself, Mr. President, have .mentioned.

157.
In this connexion, it is perhaps worthwhile to
draw
particular attention to paragraphs 43 and 44 of
the
report and to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
remark
that inter-communal
co-operation
in the
economic
field can contribute greatly to reducing and
ultimately
overcoming political differences. We are
confident
that the able and judicious representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, whom we
are indeed happy to see in our midst again today, will
continue
to render all possible assistance to the parties
and. to provide whatever good offices they may find
useful.

162. The first was the problem of Bahrain in which
it was affirmed that the overwhelming majority of the
people,of Bahrain want to be in a fully independent
State, fully enjoying its sovereignty. We then expressed
the hope, as we express it now, that other peoples
in the Arabian peninsula, those among the Arab peoples
who are struggling for their independence and freedom,
will soon achieve, as we are sure they will, their peoplehood, nationhood and full sovereignty.

158,
Finally, I should like to add a brief word on
the financial situation. My Government considers that
it would be most unfortunate if the measures already
taken
by the United Nations Force to lower costs were
to lead members to cohclude that the financial crisis
had passed. If that were the case, we would find ourselves in the anomalous positiog of seeing these highly
desirable
measures lead indirectly to a worsening of
the
situation, rather than an amelioration.
As the
Secretary-General
informs us, there is still a deficit
Of
$7.5 million. For its part, the United States intends
to meet its financial obligations fully. In the past we
have
pledged approximately 40 per cent of the total
costs
bf the United Nations Force in Cyprus; we are
prepared
to continue to do so, but we do not believe
that
any one nation should assume a disproportionate
share
of what is a common responsibility and that is
the
reason for the condition which we attach to our
pledge.
Therefore, once again we urgk that the Member
States
of the United Nations family be approached,
with
a view to securing additional contributions for
increases
in the level of former contributions. To support
the Force with rhetoric is fine, but the United
Nations
needs far more tangible support if it is to be
effective,
and, in our view, Council members bear a
very
special responsibility in this regard.

163. Turning now to the substance of the question
we are discussing, we cannot but express our appreciation for the report submitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General
[S/9814 nrzd Corr. 21, a report
characterized by its realistic approach as well as its
realistic recommendations
for the improvement of the
situation in Cyprus.
164. We wish equally to express our appreciation for
the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus. Our concern regarding the question of CYPrus as an Asian Member is too evident to be explained.
First of all, Cyprus is in the Mediterranean
Basin Of
Asia; it is in our own vicinity. Therefore, we consider
peace in that area as being a very basic and important
condition
for peace in the whole continent
Of
Asia-indeed
of all the continents of the world.
165. It is our continent now which is suffering most
the results of aggression and the tragedies and calamity
of war, Suffice it to mention that no less than fifteen
States on the continent of Asia are right now at this
moment in an active and actual state of war as a result
of imperialism
and its machinations
in our area.
Whether it be South-east Asia or western Asia, referred
to as the Middle East, we all know of the ravages
of war that are devastating that part of the world.

159.
Let me conclude by once again expressing the
deep
appreciation of my Government to the SecretaryGeneral
and his staff, to the United Nations Force
in Cyprus and its Commander, and to the SecretaryGeneral’s
Special Representative.
They all fully
deserve
our support and encouragenient.

166. With the three parties concerned,
Syria, as indeed all Arab countries-and
15

my country,
by the three

behaviour of the people of Cyprus themselves
internal relations.

parties concerned I am referring specifically to Turkey,
Greece and Cyprus with its two communities-has
traditional ties of friendship and understanding. Therefore we sincerely wish that the two communities of
Cyprus will be able to realize full understanding, much
more than they have done so far, in order to overcome
the legacy of imperialism that has been left in Cyprus
and indeed in our part of the world in general.

175. The report of the Secretary-General
is factually
comprehensive. It is also replete with observations of
significant relevance to the subject matter at issue.
Our attention has been drawn to the restoration of
normal economic conditions. We have observed that
good co-operation between both Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots is evidenced in such bodies as the
Grain Commission, the agricultural marketing boards,
the Higher Technical Institute, the Productivity Centre
and the Cyprus Development Corporation. All of these
are listed in paragraph 43 of the report. Improvements,
we learned, have also taken place between the two
sectors in such highly important
areas of human
endeavour as water supply, postal services, electricity
and so on.

167. To the people of Cyprus, to its two communities,
to the parties concerned, we express our sincerest
hopes that peace will ultimately be found.
168. We have voted for the resolution which calls,
among other things, for the prolongation of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for six months
more, Nevertheless, we cannot but note that the United
Nations Force in Cyprus is now entering its seventh
year. Therefore, it is no accident that it is stjll there.
The conditions that called for its existence at the
beginning are indeed the justification for its continuation at the present time. Ultimately, peace itself is the
guarantee of peace and therefore the only foundation
on which peace can be obtained in the area is full
understanding that can be reached through the two
communities of Cyprus: the Greek community and the
Turkish community.

176. We are gratified to learn that intercommunal
talks are still being carried on, slow-dragging though
they may be, and we are convinced that while the
two sections of that country are engaged in such
exploratory talks the fear of active involvement in fighting will be much reduced and the hope for a peaceful
settlement and understanding will not be dampened.
177. We understand from the Secretary-General that
even though the talks have been slow and uneventful,
yet they are the only acceptable alternative, to both
the Cyprus Government and the Turkish Cypriot
leaders, to a state of active war. My delegation this
afternoon voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in document S/9831 to extend the life of the
United Nations operations in Cyprus because it is convinced that a removal of that Force would result in
a complete reversal of the trends which have developed
and would presumably lead to a state of deterioration
in the island. This we would not want to see happen.

169. Finally, I wish to express my great appreciation
and admiration for the very considerate approach with
which the three parties addressing the Council have
dealt with the problem, in a spirit of peace apd understanding.
170. The PRESIDENT:
of Syria for the friendly
my regard.

in their

I thank the representative
sentiments he expressed in

171. Mr. SAVACE (Sierra Leone): Mr. President,
may I on behalf of my delegation take this opportunity
of congratulating you on your assumption of the high
office of President of the Security Council. Your wise
counsel and great leadership are known to the members
of this Council and therefore need no elaboration.

178. My delegation would be remiss in its duty were
it to end its intervention without expressing profound
appreciation to’the Secretary-General,
to his Special
Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
to MajorGeneral Prem Chand, as well as to the several members
of his military and civilian staff who lavour so hard
to maintain peace in the island and have put the United
Nations operation on a successfiil footing.

172. We congratulate your predecessor in office,
Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizetfor
his exemplary performance last month, During his tenure, as we all here
can attest, important questions were discussed and
very serious attempts made to reach a solution based
on justice and self-respect for all,

179. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the representative of Cyprus who has asked to spenk in order to
exercise his right of reply.

173. Today the Council has met to consider the question of the United Nations operation in Cyprus dealt
with in the report of the Secretary-General of 1 June
1970 [S/9814 and Cow. 21.

180. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): I have just a few
words. It is not a question of replying with a long
drawn-out argument. I only want to thank the members
of the Council who referred to the question of Cyprus,
to the strengthening of the independence of Cyprus,
and to its territorial integrity and entity, and who spoke
about the need of solving the problem in a spirit of
co-operation and unity, as I indicated in my intervention.

174. My delegation cannot help but put on record
its tribute to the representatives of Cyprus, Greece
and Turkey who in their statements have expressed
the views of their Governments before the Council
this afternoon. All of them have demonstrated considerable restraint and, in more ways than one, an
undeniable emphasis on the need for conciliation, This
trend we should like to see develop into a pattern of

181. My original intervention was really restricted to
what should be done to strengthen the possibility of
16

the talks being successful, in a spirit of co-operation
and understanding. For that reason, I avoided any
reference to past events which might have been regrettable. However, inasmuch as they were mentioned by
the representative of Turkey I have to say a few words
about them.

ready. A permanent military force for invasion in
Cyprus is stationed at the port of Mersina. They
are reinforced every year with arms and equipment
worth 250 million lira.”
187. Now, this concept of having a specific force,
at the coast nearest to Cyprus, ready for invasion in
Cyprus is something that is entirely contrary to the
idea of preventing tension in the island. We understand
that perhaps there were certain reasons for this statement to be made-propably
internal reasons-but, in
any case, the very fact that there is a feeling that a
force from Turkey is ready to invade Cyprus creates
tension in the island. We do hope that this situation
will not be repeated and that we will not hear any
more statements about readiness to invade Cyprus.
Cyprus is an independent and sovereign country and
is entitled to its territorial integrity, to its entity and
unity, as the Secretary-General has said in respect of
Nigeria, and we feel that we ought to be protected
from any threats of invasion.

182. First of all, with regard td the abnormal situation
that was created in Cyprus by the violent acts and
the abhorrent attack against the Archbishop, the President of Cyprus, I wish to thank the members of the
Council who have expressed their sympathy for the
Archbishop. The Government is in complete control
of the situation and all the culprits have been arrested.
The weapons that were stolen have been recovered
to the greatest extent. According to the last report
I received from Cyprus, 90 per cent of the weapons
that were taken in the last raid have been recovered
and the whole situation is under control.
183. Any kind of violence is regrettable. Any kind
of antagonism is regrettable, and that is why we want
a spirit of unity in Cyprus. But I should like to say
that violent acts have appeared all over the world,
and peculiarly at this time; under the date of 31 May,
Mr. James Reston, writing in The New York Times,
said:

188. However, this is a matter of the past, I did not
want to mention it, but I felt that since some other
aspects were referred to as matters of uneasiness this
should be referred to in the hope that it will not be
repeated.
189. My distingtiished friend from Turkey also spoke
about the question of erlasis. At every meeting of the
Security Council it has become customary for the Turkish representative to refer to the question of elzusis
on one ground or another, on each occasion. But I
think that there is no real fear in the mind of Turkey
about enosis. Turkey knows it very well and the
Government of Greece has made it very clear. Foreign
Minister Pipinelis has said that the only desire and
wish of Greece was to see a really independent, unitary
Cyprus Republic. The relations between the Foreign
Minister of Greece and the Foreign Minister of Turkey
are excellent. As they have both stated, they are in
complete understanding. This is avery fortunate event.

“At a conservative estimate, . . . about one quarter of the sovereign States on planet Earth were
engaged in inter-or iptra-state conflict involving the
use of regular armed forces . . + “.
Fortunately, in Cyprus we have avoided any of the
bad aspects of it, thanks to the spirit of restraint that
has prevailed.
184. With regard to the seizure of arms, it is interesting to see that in Uruguay-a
very valiant country
for which we have the greatest admiration and respect
-a very similar thing happened. Bands broke into the
naval school and took 700 weapons and quantities of
ammunition.
Forty persons were involved, and they
were not arrested, So it was exactly the same thing.
Sut in Cyprus the situation is under control.

190. Therefore, in the circumstances, who is going
to accomplish the,union of Cyprus with Greece if not
Greece? But Greece has excellent relations with
Turkey, and there is thus no problem. We therefore
do not see the reason for any uneasiness on the part
of Turkey with regard to union with Greece.

185. However, there is another aspect that I should
like to mention. The representative of Turkey referred
to the uneasiness that this situation has created. I
understand that. But, of course, there are other sources
of uneasiness in Cyprus that I avoided mentionning.
And I think that they should also be restrained, and
it is easy to restrain them, As regards the armed bands,
they are really irresponsible persons. But we would
like to see the responsible Governments concerned in
restraining
sources of uneasiness and tension in
Cyprus.

191. The fact, however, is that the question does not
turn on the union of Cyprus with Greece. What is
involved is the question of the independence of Cyprus,
0% whether Cyprus will be allowed to have, in reality,
the independence and sovereignty to which it is entitled, without foreign intervention or the threat of intervention and without the- threat of force, and under a
constitution based on a unitary State resting on conditions of unity, understanding and co-operation.

186. With reluctance, I have to refer to the event
of 22 April, when the Defence Minister of Turkey,
Mr. Topanoglou said in the Budget Committee of the
National Assembly of Turkey:

192. The PRESIDENT:
The Ambassador of Turkey
has asked to speak, and I now call on him.
193. Mr. BAYULKEN
(Turkey): At this late hour
in the meeting I shall try to be as brief as possible
and not take much of the Council’s time,

“The Turkish armed forces are always ready
against Cyprus, Our naval forces are always ever
17

That is what he stated, and I would
emphasize the words further on:

194. I think that, having been associated with the
United Nations since 1952, I can possibly lay claim
to some modest ability to appreciate the fact that political problems are not solved through recriminatin or
through attempts by one representative to seek momentary advantage over another, but that solutions can
be achieved rather through patient, constructive
efforts. I believe my main statement has sufficient relevance to what the Ambassador Rossides said just now,
but I think I need to clarify just one or two points.
Also, I think I owe a clarification to my colleague from
Greece, Ambassador Bitsios, who spoke about the
talks and the slow pace of the talks.

“Specifically, he stated that Cyprus must remain
an independent State with a system of government
in which the Greek and Turkish communities would
be able to feel that they belonged to, and indentified
themselves with, such a State and were able to coexist in peace, freedom and security without either
community running the risk of being subjugated by
the other or threatened with the alienation of its
national character.” IIbid.
I should like to emphasize the words “would be able
to feel that they belonged to, and identified themselves
with, such a State”. That is a sort of expression which
favours Cypriot nationhood, Cypriot consciousness;
it does not oppose it.

195. First of all, I believe I should dispose of the
contention regarding the statement of the Minister of
Defence which was made during the budgetary debate
in the Parliament. It was in answer to a question put
forward by a member of Parliament. Many members
of this Coundl have at one time been members of parliaments; they know what sort of questions are directed
at a minister responsible for affairs. The question was
directed to the Minister of Defence at a time when
very disturbing and violent acts had occured on the
island, such as the attempt against the life of
Archbishop Makarlos the imminence of a coup d’&tat
and others. However, the Ministei did not say that
Turkey was ready to invade Cyprus. In fact, Turkey
has never said it was ready to invade Cyprus. What
Turkey up to now has said, and will continue to say,
under its treaty rights, is that Turkey is a guarantor
of the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus,
and also of the state of affairs created under the Constitution.of 1960. I believe that my colleagues from
Greece, Ambassador Bitsios, will remember that
Greece is also a guarantor under that treaty. There
can therefore be no contention that Turkey is or will
be ready to invade Cyprus. That is out of the question.
Turke) has always been hi the defensive position. This
is the history of the whole question of Cyprus,
However, I do not want to enter into a very detailed
debate; it might take hours, even days.

197. I shall now give another example by quoting
a few lines froin a speech which was not made six
months ago or even before, but was in fact delivered
on 30 March 1970 by Mr. Spyridakis, the Greek Cypriot
Minister for Education. Edtication is a communal
matter, and the creation of a Ministry of Education
is against the Constitution; however, he is the Minister
for Education of the Greek Cypriot administration. He
drew attention to the dangers of “Cypriot consciousness” which it is sought to impose on the Greek
Cypriots and pointed to the necessity of standing up
against it in the “Hellenic spirit”. He said: “We neither
deny our past nor establish a political life for ourselves
outside Greece, which will continue to be the motherland for us.” He went alittle bit further, and the speech
ended with these words: “Cyprus belongs to Greece
and is apart of the Greek ethnological arena. All friends
and enemies must know this to be so.”
198. I should like to apologize for any erroneous
interpretation of the facts because this is a summary
interpretation, but this was exactly what he said.
199. Now, I thinkthat the two examples that I submitted to the Council show very clearly where the danger
lies. Therefore, I would ask Mr. Rossides, when he
looks for unity and co-operation, to pay attention to,
these elements.

196. Since my arrival at the United Nations, I have,
of course, consulted the past record of the Security
Council’s meetings since 1964; and Ambassador Rossides, whom I know so well and so long, has maintained
the theme of divisiveness, of separateness, the theme
of unity against separatism, of unity against division.
Well, in order, as I said, to be very brief, let me state
an example of what sort of unity the Turkish community understands and what sort of unity is sometimes
understood by certain people in the Greek community-though
here I would like to make an exception
in the case of Ambassador Rossides, because he has
to act under instructions. As a matter of fact, what
I am going to mention is included in the SecretaryGeneral’s report:

p

especially

200. I should like to say that I was really surprised
when the representative of Greece spoke of the slow
pace of the talks. I hope I did not understand him
correctly-I
do not have the verbatim record before.
me-but I had the impression that he tried to apportion,
to the Turkish Cypriots responsibility for the slow pace
of the negotiations. I think that is contrary to the real
situation. I believe that I made quite clear in my statement the appeal of the Secretary-General,
The
Secretary-General said that there were grounds, possibilities, for the two to make concessions, to negotiate
and succeed, How then could my colleague-if
he did
so; if not, I would withdraw my remarks-put
the blame
on the Turkish community? I think that I should say
this in order to straighten the record. He mentioned
my remarks made at a previous meeting of the Security
Council. I do not depart from what I have said, I said

“For his part, ‘Vice-President Kii@k stated both
in March and April that there was no sign as yet
that the talks would yield a positive result; however,
as both sides desired to continue the talks, it was
too early to say that no results could be
achieved.“[Sl9814
and Cow. 2, para. 69.1
18

that the Turkish CO~nNUdy Was not against a Unitary
State and was trying to work out a solution which
would befit its desires. But I said that the problem
sow was to frame the conception of a unitary State.
After that comes lOCal aUtOnOmy, etc., etc. So I do
sot understand how I really departed from what I said
at that meeting.
201, As far as the Turkish position is concerned, I
feel that I must mention what was stated in relation
to the pronouncements of my Foreign Minister, which
are included in paragraph 70 of the report, and were
referred to in my main statement. I do not wish to
repeat it, but I shall go on to the part which I did
not mention: “such an independent, unitary State
should be based on the principle of local autonomy.”
so it is very clear what is involved. The Turkish position is clear and is stated in the report. I do not have
to refer to other material.
202. I think that’another text will really be necessary
to set the record straight once and for all about these
communal talks. And what are the real things involved?
I should like to quote what Mr. Denktash in fact said
ia regard to these,talks and why they are proceeding
at a slow pace. He said:
“There are two stages of partnership in the State
of Cyprus. The first stage is independence, territorial
integrity and the sovereignty of the island. In these,
the Turkish community has inalienable and undeniable vested rights and interests on equal footing with
the Greek Cypriot community.”
203. Then he explains why the conflict aross. I do
not want to take up the time of members of the Security
Council by reading the whole text. But then comes
the element of the talks. After having explained the
difficulties encountered because of the Constitution of
1960, he said that the Turks always respected the provisions of this Constitution, and he said further:
“Hence, in reconsidering the future set-up of the
Cypriot State we have to evaluate the pros and cons
of such constitutional provisions where one side is
determined not to implement such provisions. We
have come to the conclusion that if matters of State
are separated from local autonomy matters and the
Community are given the right to run their own local
affairs, ways and means may be found to do away
with most of these rights at States level and give
more emphasis to matters of security, day-to-day
administration of local affairs, and thus bring about
a new equilibrium to the balance of power between
the two communities which have created the independent Republic of Cyprus with a view of reducing
all points of intercommunal
friction to the very
minimum,”
204, AS I said, I did not quote the whole of the text,
but I think what I have quoted shows the spirit in
which the Turkish community approaches the reaching
of an agreed solution with the Greek Cypriot community. It is not approaching the Greek Cypriot com-

munity in order to create divisiveness or separatism,
but in order to reach an agreement which will secure
for them a life of their own, such as they had for centuries, as was the case with the Greek Cypriot community. And I should like to recall that during the
Ottoman Empire period the Greek Cypriot community
had many of the rights that are today denied to the
Turkish community. Therefore I do not understand
this refrain about separatism or divisiveness. The
Turks are not looking for divisiveness, And I should
like to repeat that.
205. AS to the violent acts, again I am surprised that
the representative of Greece implied that they had
taken place because of a danger of intervention from
abroad and tilso because of the frustration felt in the
search for a solution. First of all, I think that just a
summary look at the report suffices to show that this
is not the case. I think that the attempt on the life
of Archbishop Makarios could not be just an element
of a liaison with foreign intervention. I think that it
was Greek Cypriots who attempted to take the life
of the President. Thus I am at a loss to understand
why foreign intervention is mentioned. Secondly, a
glance at the international press of this difficult period
would again suffice to show that the acts of violence
had nothing to do with any foreign element of intervention; on the contrary.
206. I should like to make a final point, if I may,
by asking why the representative of Greece actually
mentioned the intervention of Turkey. Here are the
treaties. Here is the Treaty of GuaranteeeR As I said,
we are signatories, as is the United Kingdom, to protect
the independence of the Republic of Cyprus. Therefore, what kind of intervention is in question? I hope
that my colleague will not return to that question,
because he knows that Turkey has never had any intention of invading Cyprus. Turkey is and will be against
any action which might do away with the independence
of Cyprus, because under the Treaties4 Turkey has
an obligation. I think that Greece also has an obligation,
as has the United Kingdom, until the Treaties are
changed through peaceful negotiations and agreed solutions found which prescribe other ways. This is a fact
that should be recognized.
207. I have said that I would try to be as brief as
possible. I am sorry for having taken the Council’s
time, but I felt that I had to express these realties
in order to set the record straight for my delegation.
208. As a final word I should like to take this opportunity of thanking all the members of the Security
Council who spoke so constructively about this item.
209. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the Ambassador
of Greece, who wishes to exercise his right Of reply.
1 U&d Nations Treaty Series, vol, 382 (1960), NO. 5475.
d Treaty concern& the Establishment of the Republic of Cyprus
(United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382 (19601, No. 5476); Treaty
of Alliance between the Kingdom of Greece, the Republic of Turkey
and the Republic of Cyprus (ibid., vol. 3.97(19611, NO. 5712).

say that. I did not make any accusations against anyone
this evening. In trying to explain the events that
occurred in March on Cyprus I simply said: the representative of Turkey repeatedly tried to explain to
the Council the difficult conditions under which the
Turkish Cypriots live, But the same thing is true of
the other party. Just because the Greek Cypriot population is in the majority, it has not had an easy life during
recent years. I said that the Greek community is this
Greek majority, the Greek population of the island,
despite the fact that it is in the majority, has lived
through many years of great uncertainty, years in which
it lived the fear of an invasion, which perhaps did not
figure among the intentions of the Turkish Government
and which perhaps never would have occurred. But,
none the less, the danger was there and the Security
Council is aware of this, because we brought the matter
to the Council several times in the hope of a solution.

210. Mr, BITSIOS
(Greece) (intcrprelntion
porn
French): I thought the representative of Turkey, my
friend Ambassador Bayulken, was somewhat at cross
purposes in his second statement. I attribute this to
the fact that he believed that efforts had been made
to attribute to his country the intention of invading
Cyprus. He has denied that very vehemently, and I
am very satisfied to have heard Ambassador Bayulken
speak to us in those terms. I note that this is the first
point on which we are completely in agreement.
211. With respect to the status of guarantor to which
he referred, my reply would be as follows: undoubtedly
considerations of policy have led us both to support
Cyprus’s independence. In Greece we do not interpret
the attributes of guarantor just mentioned by the representative of Turkey in the same manner. That question was debated here during the serious crisis of 1963
to 1964 and at that time I told the Security Council
how we interpreted that clause of the Treaty of
Guarantee. But what is important is not the way in
which one party might act; what is important is that
the intentions of our Governments at this time are sincere and that the two countries are now devoted to
the creation of a truly independent Cyprus. I believe
that my colleague from Cyprus will not dispute the
sincerity of my Government’s intentions. Therefore,
that is the second point on which we are completely
in agreement.

215. All that uncertainty about the future created a
certain atmosphere in which tensions such as those
we witnessed in the month of March develop quite
naturally. That is what I wanted to say.
216. The PRESIDENT:
of Cyprus.

I recognize the Ambassador

217. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): I think that this
exchange of views is very useful. This is one of the
important functions of the United Nations, in the
Security Council or the General Assembly, when a
Member State is called upon to explain some of its
actions. The explanation is already a move in the right
direction. The representative of Turkey says, “No,
we have no intention to invade”. That is a good move.
He has to say that. He cannot say, “Yes, we intend
to invade”. And the fact that he says, “We have no
intention to invade, we certainly do not want to
invade,” is a welcome statement, because it contradicts the statement of Mr. Topanoglou,
and that
contradiction
gradually creates a better climate,
because Mr. Topanoglou will probably see that his
statements are not so good. He puts the representative
of Turkey in a difficult position to explain them and
to say, “We are not going to invade”. That is one
of the important functions of the United Nations.

212. There is a thir,d point regarding which I have
noted that our policies also agree. That is, the question
concerning what type of State will emerge from the
talks underway in Nicosia. Mr. Bayulken was good
enough to mention certain statements by leaders to
the effect that the Turkish community also has decided
in favour of a unitary State. That is the third point
on which we agree.
213. There is a fourth point which Ambassador
Bayulken raised, that is, that I had fixed responsibility
for the lack of progress in the talks lin Nicosia exclusively on the Turkish community. However, I did not
mention the Turkish community in my statement. I
said: Where do the difficulties lie? Apparently in the
complicated
details of the proposals that the
negotiators have before them. There are a series of
proposals involved and the negotiators are trying to
reach agreement. .Each party wants to protect his
rights, and we all know that the Turkish community,
in trying to protect its rights, is asking for certain prerogatives. The difficulty derives from the fact that the
extension of these prerogatives would cause the other
party to fear that the State would .not be, unitary. I
was asking a question. Perhaps that is not where the
difficulty lies. If there are other difficulties, I .am not
aware of them. It seems to me that that is the major
difficulty. I did not blame anyone. So long as the
negotiators wish to go on with their talks, so long as
there is goodwill and so long as the Governments support these talks, I think we are in agreement, Therefore,
there is a fourth point on which we agree,

218. However, although I welcome that statement,
I must disagree with my friend Mr, Bayulken. I disagree
with him when he relates the threat of invasion to the
Treaty of Guarantee.” The Treaty of Guarantee does
not give the right to any of the guarantors or to Turkey
to violate the Charter, Arti.cle 2, paragraph 4, and
invade Cyprus, because it is a guarantor. Even before
the United Nations and before the League of Nations,
treaties of guarantee which purported to give the right
of intervention by force were treated as null and void
because they violated the basic principles of international law even then. How much less, now, under the
Charter, could anyone say that the Treaty of Guarantee
gives Turkey the’ right to send its forces to Cyprus
because it thinks things are not all right there? Why?
Is Turkey acting as the United Nations or the Security

214. Mr. Bayulken, you said that I had implied that
your country wanted to invade Cyprus. No, I did not

5 United Nations, Treaty Series,

20

vol.

382 (1960),

No.

5475.

Council &titled to decide upon enforcement action,
to protect the independence of Cyprus, or rather to
de&,), the independence of Cyprus.by invading it?
This is a very peculiar state <Of affairs. I am sorry,
but I must say that the intentlon of invading Cyprus
is not to protect the independence of Cyprus but to
abolish it by partition- and I can refer to a series of
officisl Turkish, statements.

224. I think that we have the most authoritative document here showing that whenever Turkey threatens
invasion of Cyprus its intention is to partition it, and
its ultimate intention is to annex the whole island in
the same way as Alexandretta. These are the realities
of the situation and that is the reason why the stalling
of the talks is going on because they have JO keep
the people of Cyprus divided, not united. If they unite
into one State, a really independent State, there would
be very little chance for partition. They have to keep
it divided. That is why the enclaves are kept as
enclaves, and in spite of all the efforts that were made
by Archibishop Makarios and the Government to bring
normalization to the island, there has been no response,
The Secretary-General has repeatedly said that there
must be response, that you must allow access into
the enclaves. They would not allow that because they
are afraid that by this kind of communication there
would be conciliation and they could not in that case
keep up the divisive spirit so as to prepare at some
time, whenever it is convenient, sor partition. He cited
Dr, Ki@ik, when he says that his community is running
the risk of being subjugated by the other, threatened
with the alienation of its national character; a community so cowed as to be frightened of being “alienated
of its character and being subjugated” yet which holds
123 public roads and denies access to the vast majority
for years now.

219, Mr. Kemal Satir former Vice-President
of
Turkey, in a public statement in 1964 said: “Cyprus
will he divided in two sections, one of which will join
Turkey.” So there is the intention of partition.
220, The former Foreign Minister of Turkey, Mr.
Erkin, clearly spelt it out when he said in a newspaper
interview, in Athens: “The radical solution would be
to cede one part ,of Cyprus to Greece and the other,
closerto Turkey’s Asiatic coast, to Turkey.” Is that
not clear evidence of partitionist intent? Then, federation was mentioned but partition was intended.
221. The Prime Minister of Turkey, Ismet Inonu, on
8 September 1964, some time after the statement by
E&n about partition, said: “Officially,
we now promote the federation concept rather than the partition
thesis, so as to remain within the provisions of the
Treaty.” Therefore, whenever the word “federation”
is used, it means “partition”
camouflaged under the
word“federation”, so as to be more palatable to the
outside world.

225. Who is really threatened by subjugation, the
Greek majority or the Turkish minority, with Turkey
ready to invade Cyprus? That is the real crux of the
matter. The tension in the island and everything that
is abnormal in the island is a consequence of the fact
that Cyprus has been kept under the continuous threat
of invasion from Turkey. This uneasiness, this threat,
creates an abnormal situation. If this situation were
eliminated, the question of Cyprus would be solved
overnight. The Greek and Turkish people in Cyprus
have lived in peace for generations and they want to
live in peace, if they are allowed to do so freed from
outside intervention.

222. Furthermore, what is intended by this partition?
Merely partition? No. The intention is, as expressed
byDr. KiiGiik, to annex Cyprus. And what is the precedent? The precedent is that regarding Syria. H&in
Sessi, the mouthpiece of Dr. Ki.i$iik, in its editorial
of 9 August 1965, writes: “Cyprus is another Alexandretta in the history of Turkey”. And everyone knows
whathappened to Alexandretta. First, joint domination
and SOon, until eventually the occupation and annexation of Alexandretta by force followed. Dr. Kii@k,
whois SOfond of the independence of Cyprus, says:
“The power of Turkey will ensure an honourable life
for the Turkish Cypriots in the same way as it did
in Alexandretta, by annexing it.” Is this not clear evidence of the real intentions of Dr, Kii$.ik when he
talks about independence?

226. That is the situation. I am sorry to take time,’
but I had to say all this, and it is better said than
left unsaid. It is better for the Security Council to realize
what the situation is in Cyprus. Where the threat comes
from, what the intentions are, why we have this
unnatural situation that the talks cannot progress. I
have stated this in a constructive way in the hope that
we can move forward to unity, understanding and conciliation; and I still have this hope. AS I have said,
the fact that Ambassador Bayulken denies that there
would be any possibility of an intention to invade Cypms is a good sign. It is a step in the right direction.
The fact that he denies or will deny that there is an
intention to partition Cyprus is a good sign.

‘22% What was the intention of the invasion contemplated by Mr. Topaloglou?
Was it to “calm the
situation”, to protect the independence of Cyprus, or
wasthe intention to partition the Island? I refer here
to a. letter addressed to Prime Minister Inonu on 5
June 1964, by the President of the United States, President Johnson. He said:
“It is my impression that you believe that such
interveution by Turkey is permissible under the provisions of the Treaty of Guarantee of 1960. I must
call Your attention, however, that to our understanding, the proposed intervention
by Turkey
would be for the purpose of effecting a form of partition of the island”.

227. So the more these things are thrashed out in
the United Nations, the better it is. The Governments
in their capitals will see that in the United Nations
they have to give an account of their actions or whatever they are and that is what is important.
21

concerned should try to reach ajust and peaceful agreement on the question of Cyps?
In those days we
were even denied by the Greeks the right of being
a party to the Cyprus problem It is quite a change
that today I am not facing such allegations or such
demands.

However, now we have to look forward to the
future. But the future for Cyprus must be one of peace,
understanding, unity, and co-operation-not
division.

228.

229, The PRESIDENT:
of Turkey.

I call on the representative

230. Mr. BAYULKEN
(Turkey): As I said in my
main statement and also in the remarks I made in an
attempt to clarify the record, I mentioned the fact that
it was not the intention of the Security Council that
we could or should settle today the problem of Cyprus
around this table. My clarifications were necessary in
order to reply to what Ambassador Rossides had said
about separatism and divisiveness. Now he has taken
another aspect of the Cyprus problem. I shall try to
be as brief as possible in replying to his points.

236. Then we come to the 1960 Agreements7 I know
that the Security Council is fully aware of most of
the details concerning the views of the parties to the
1960 Agreements and of the events that happened afterwards in 1963. There are at least three or four volumes
of records of the Security Council that contain information on the views of Amassador Rossides, of Ambassador Eralp, of Ambassador Bitsios, and before him
Ambassador Liatis, or of Mr. Kypriano. Well, we have
all expressed our views, but none of those views has
been inserted in a resolution saying, “Party X, you
are right; all others are wrong”. I think that Ambassador Rossides should remember this.

231. First, however, let me express my gratitude to
the representative of Greece; I am very much satisfied
by his explanation. In my reply I said that I had possibly
not heard his words very well, If they were not meant
in that way, I am ready to retract mine. Therefore
that settles the matter, and I always consider it a good
augury that agreement, ententr and co-operation
should exist between our two countries in regard to
the Cyprus problem too.

237. As for divisiveness, I think it is really very presumptuous to say that after 1960, the Turkishcommunity tried to impose a solution on the Greek Cypriot
community, which is four times larger than the Turkish
community. In fact, the sad events of 1960 have shown
amply enough that the Turkish community could not
have been the perpetrator of acts of violence against
anything, but rather that they were in a position of
self-defense. I should just like to remind Ambassador
Rossides of the reports of the Secretary-General. I shall
not go into reports from the international press, for
if I were to do so, as I said, it would take days and
days. I shall mention only the reports of the SecretaryGeneral.

232. Trying to be as brief as possible, and taking matters in chronological order, I hope the points that I
am going to make,will not surprise Ambassador Rossides. Let us start from the very beginning without
going into the “genesis”,
233. Is it partition, divisiveness and disunity which
are first heard in the history of Cyprus, or is it enosis
and union? Even at the time of the British Administration, when the Greek Cypriot community leadership
tried to achieve etzosis, the Turkish community was
against that idea. If anybody has any doubt about it
he might refer to the most comprehensive work on
the history of Cyprus, written by Sir George Hill0
In fact, I have a copy here.

238. In all cases General Gyani and other commanders mentioned in their reports the fact that the Turks
were in a defensive position. There may be one or
two trivial incidents of one group attacking the other
in a particular area, but in general it is an established
fact that the Turks in Cyprus are not perpetrators of
acts of violence. They cannot be, because they are
not numerous enough. Secondly, they do not have
weapons and ammunition to the same degree as the
Greek Cypriot community. Even if we accept for the
sake of argument the concept that such a small cornmunity would like to or had the idea of attacking the
larger one in order to achieve partition, the chronology
of history shows that to be entirely false, because the
first demand was for enosis-and that is the illness,
Ambassador Rossides,

234. As for the second point, coming back to the
present era, the era in which he and I have lived for
almost twenty years, let us see what has happened.
Were the demands for partition in 1945, 1946, 1949,
1950, 1951 and 1954 made on the part of the Turkish
community? Or is the demand for union made on the
part of the Greek community?
235, Then we come to 1954 and the request submitted
to the United Nations. One of our colleagues, Ambassador Kyrou, thought that the United Nations would
be the sort of organization that would just rubber-stamp
such demands. The question had been discussed here
for five Assembly sessions. What happened? Was there
any rubber-stamping that would permit the Greek Cypriot community to achieve enosis without taking due
regard of the Turkish community’s
rights and existence, or was it a resolution stating that the parties
‘A Histo$ of Cyprus

(London,

239. I remember the years we worked for the independence of Cyprus, I know that in your conscience YOU
know it as well; but we are here as the representatives
of our Governments and we bave instructions. But
I know that you know perfectly well that the 1960
Agreements were made in good faith. I will not take
the time of the Security Council by reciting the state” Treaty of Guarantee (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382
(1960), No. 5475); Treaty concerning the Establishment of the RePublit of Cyprus (ibid., No. 5476); Treaty of Alliance between the Kink!
dom of Greece, the Republic of Turkey and the Republic of CYPmS

Cambridge University Press,

1949).

(ibid.,

22

vol. 397 (1961),

No. 5712).

merits of Archbishop Makarios or Mr. Averoff or my
Foreign
Ministers of the day; I do not want to take
the time. I think that this question of intervention to
which you made allusion is entirely a falsified sort of
allusion
because, as I said-and I am ready to repeat
it at any time under any circumstances-Turkey
and
the Turkish Government never had any intention of
invading
Cyprus. But the Turkish Government, I
should like to repeat, yesterday and today has rights
under the Treaty of Guarantee, and those rights are
there to stay until a soluticm is found that will change
the treaties by mutual agreement. That should be kept
in mind. In saying this I think I have a right to explain
the situation in its true light because I believe that
however modest I am in a position to know more closely
what the intentions and the positions of the Turkish
Governments
were. in the past ten years. I think that
that disposes of the question that Turkey would invade
Cyprus.

they would change that erroneous attitude, They are
not trying to achieve partition. If the debate was a
debate on Cyprus, I would have liked to put a question
to Ambassador Rossides, I would have liked to see
whether the answer to such a question would be
immediately yes or for ever no. But this is not a debate
on the question of Cyprus.
241. We are just speaking of the renewal of the mandate. So I agree with the latter part of his statement
when he said that we should look forward and inlooking
forward with, I think, hope, we should also, as I said
in my statement, read carefully and give due credit
to the appraisal of our Secretary-General whose tireless
efforts on the question of Cyprus are well known. I
mentioned his statement, I stand on it.
242. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to express my
profound satisfaction at the unanimous adoption of the
resolution by which the Security Council has extended
the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus until 1.5 December 1970. May I also
express the hope that this further period of six months
will be utilized more fruitfully to achieve the objectives
of the Security Council,

240.
I should like to conclude my remarks by again
reverting
to my main statement. As Ambassador Rossides said, those were the things of the past, and we
should not look back, we should look forward. I think
that in this sense his community would do well if,
instead
of insisting on the erroneous assumtion that
the. Turkish Cypriots are trying to achieve partition,

The meetirzg rose at 7.15 p.m.

$23

HOW

TO OBTAlN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstorts
and dlslribulors
lo: United
Nations,
Soles Secflon,

COMMENT

LES PUlllCATlONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
NW York

UNIES

Ler publications
des Notions
Unies rant en venle dans 10s Ilbrairies
et Its ogencer
diporitaires
du monde entier.
Informaz-vous
auprbs de votre libroirie
ou adrassez-vous
ti:
Notions
Unies, Section des venter,
New York ou Gen&e.
KAH

IlOJlY’IMTb

M3AAHMl-l

OPrAHH3AuMH

113pl1111nOprairnsaqnn O6’bEAIIllEWllJX

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAqMA

D Iurnxntlx BfJlrR:lllllnX II
06 nlipUlnlIX II BGIllO~flillllXllOll
~a~n~nne nnn IIIIIIIIIT~ no a~pooy: Oprallnsnqan 06~e~1111enr1uxHa@, C~I;I~IIII WI
upoAasw n3~tutniI, Hardop~ nna Xenena.
ill%llTCTBaX

COMO

II0 DCt?S piIfiOIl2lS

CONSEGUIR

3Illp&

PUBLICACIONES

Hnqnit
&kBOfinTC

aloilalo
CIpUNilI

KyIIllTb

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publlcodones
de 10s Nociones
Unidat cst6n en venta
tn todos partes del mundo. Conrulte a su Ilbrero o’dirfjose
Vcntas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

N;~tions.

New

York

Price:

W.C.

1.50 (equiwlenl

en librerias
y cosas distribuidoros
(I: Nrrciones
Unidor,
Seccibn

in other

cwencies)

de

82080-August 1973---2~0~0
