S/2006/434

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 June 2006
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission on the electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 30 May 2006 (S/2006/344), the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had
decided to send a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 10 to
12 June 2006, which would be led by Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière.
Following consultations among the members of the Council, it was agreed that the
composition of the mission should be as follows:
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière (France), head of mission
Ambassador Basile Ikouebe (Republic of the Congo)
Ambassador Lars Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark)
Ambassador Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana)
Ambassador Shinichi Kitaoka (Japan)
Counsellor Vitaliano Gallardo (Peru)
Ambassador Peter Burian (Slovakia)
Ambassador Augustine P. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania)
Minister Counsellor William Brencick (United States of America)
2.

The terms of reference of the mission are annexed to document S/2006/344.

3.
The Security Council mission visited Kinshasa from 10 to 12 June, where it
met with the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the four VicePresidents, separately; the bureau of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC); a
forum grouping members of some of the 273 political parties participating in the
electoral process; the bureau of the High Media Authority; the International
Committee in Support of the Transition (CIAT); an ecumenical group of religious
leaders; and a group of women’s non-governmental organizations focusing on the
issue of sexual violence.
4.
The mission also met with the representatives of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the
local business community represented by members of the Fédération des entreprises

06-39847 (E) 270606

*0639847*

S/2006/434

du congo (FEC); and Christophe Lutundula, Member of the Parliament of Transition
and chairman of the Special Parliamentary Commission in charge of evaluating the
legitimacy of the contracts concluded during the 1996-1997 and 1998 conflicts. The
mission also met with the Joint Commission on Security Sector Reform and,
separately, with the members of the European Union mission of assistance for
security sector reform (EUSEC), with the European Union police mission in
Kinshasa (EUPOL), as well as with the deputy commander of the European Union
standby force.
5.
The mission was briefed by the senior leadership of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
including the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, William Lacy Swing, and the two Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Haile Menkerios and Ross Mountain. The mission also received a briefing from the
Chairman of the Group of Experts on the arms embargo in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), Ibra Déguène Ka. The
mission also met, informally, with the staff of MONUC and of the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
6.
The seventh visit of the Security Council to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was made as the transitional process is entering its final phase, which should
end with the holding of free and fair elections open for participation by all of the
people and political parties of the country.

II. Political and electoral process
7.
The Security Council mission stressed the need for the elections to be held in
accordance with the calendar announced by IEC, in a peaceful climate free of
intimidation, fear and the use of derogatory language. While highlighting the strict
impartiality and neutrality of the international community in the electoral process,
the mission urged the transitional authorities to ensure a level playing field for the
elections, including equitable access to the public media for all the parties and
candidates. At the same time, the candidates and political parties need to act
responsibly in accepting the result of the polls and not resort to violence in the event
of electoral disputes, which, the mission emphasized, should be resolved through the
appropriate mechanisms. The mission also called for the publication of the full
electoral timetable, including the dates of the possible second round of the
presidential elections and provincial and local elections.
8.
President Kabila shared the concerns of the members of the Security Council
delegation regarding the deterioration of the political climate in the run-up to the
elections, including acts of political intimidation and limitations on the freedom of
access of some of the smaller political parties to the media. There is also a reported
bias among the national media towards some parties. In reference to calls by civil
society and political parties for the holding of a political dialogue concerning the
electoral process, President Kabila explained that shortly he would be convening a
meeting of all of the transitional institutions, the four Vice-Presidents, the Presidents
of the National Assembly and Senate and the Presidents of the five institutions in
support of democracy, including IEC. The objective of the meeting would be to
reach a common understanding of the political situation and to reassure the

2

06-39847

S/2006/434

population. He reaffirmed the commitment of the transitional institutions to hold the
elections in accordance with the dates announced by IEC. President Kabila stressed
that the 30 July election date should be respected. The management of State affairs
during the period following the first round of the presidential elections and leading
up to the establishment of the elected institutions, including the Government, would
also be discussed at the proposed meeting.
9.
President Kabila acknowledged the recent deterioration in the political
environment, in particular in the tone and content of the campaigning that has
started before the official period to commence on 30 June. Some political actors had
been encouraging the dissemination of hate messages and the exclusion of some
sections of the population from the electoral process. Some media sources were also
promoting the potentially dangerous national identity concept termed congolité. He
emphasized the commitment of the Government to decisively address these matters.
The President deplored the recent acts of intimidation, which had reportedly
targeted some of the political parties and candidates. He recognized the difficulty in
organizing the first elections held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 45
years. While noting that the elections would likely not be perfect, he vowed to
address the concerns of the candidates and promote a secure environment during the
elections.
10. President Kabila said that the formation of a credible and disciplined army was
an ongoing process. During the transitional period, the Government capacity to
make progress in implementing all of the priorities outlined in the transitional
agenda had been limited. The organization of the elections had been the main focus.
The electoral process had benefited from substantial international technical,
logistical and financial assistance, while insufficient international assistance had
been provided for security sector reform. Many challenges remained in reforming
the security services, including the military and police. The President condemned
the acts of gender-based sexual violence committed by the military and police. He
noted that the Government had taken steps to address the matter, such as arresting of
a number of military personnel, including senior officers.
11. The President acknowledged that many of the priority tasks on the transitional
agenda, including security sector reform and national reconciliation, would not have
been achieved before the elections. The elections, he added, were not an end in
themselves but rather an event that would establish the legitimate conditions for the
continuation of democratic reforms. Post-electoral priorities should focus on the
reconstruction and development process, including improving security, and the daily
living conditions of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the
same time, the process of army integration should continue after the elections.
12. President Kabila noted the high expectations of the population and the need for
the newly elected Government to rapidly deliver peace dividends after the elections.
Public expectations would need to be managed to avoid destabilizing the
Government, which, he acknowledged, would have only a limited capacity to
immediately address the population’s most pressing concerns. Concerted and
sustained international support will be required to assist the elected Government in
making progress on security sector reform, the extension of State authority and good
governance. President Kabila hoped that a level of support similar to that which had
been provided for financing peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo would also be made available for the development of the country after

06-39847

3

S/2006/434

the elections. Further efforts would be required to ensure a high level of
representation of women in the post-electoral institutions.
13. The Security Council mission thanked President Kabila for his assistance to
MONUC towards obtaining the release of the seven Nepalese peacekeepers detained
by a local militia leader in Ituri since 28 May 2006.
14. The Vice-Presidents expressed serious concern at the prevailing climate of
intolerance, caused by acts of political intimidation, and the public incitement by
some parties along ethnic and nationalist lines, including speculation about the
nationalities of some presidential candidates. The Security Council mission urged
the Government to provide the High Media Authority with the financial support
required to carry out its work, including guaranteeing access to the media for all
political parties. Vice-Presidents Bemba and Ruberwa both noted the need to
guarantee equity in the access of all political parties to the media. The Security
Council mission urged Vice-President Yerodia to promote tolerance during the
electoral campaign.
15. While expressing their firm commitment for the holding of the presidential and
national legislative elections on 30 July, as announced by IEC, Vice-Presidents
Bemba, Ruberwa and Z’Ahidi Ngoma called for the convening of a political
dialogue among the main institutions of the transition. They suggested that such a
forum should also include the leaders of the main political parties and would help to
clarify some of the technical constraints affecting the electoral timetable, as well as
to reassure the population as to the commitment of the authorities to implementing
the announced electoral timetable and ease growing political tensions.
16. The Vice-Presidents, in particular Bemba and Ruberwa, emphasized the need
to ensure the credibility of the electoral process, including through the impartiality
of the Supreme Court and the other Courts, which are to resolve electoral disputes,
and the security services. Vice-President Bemba felt that the proposed comité des
sages should play an essentially technical role in providing assistance to the
Supreme Court with the adjudication of electoral disputes. He also noted the
importance of the presence of a large number of electoral observers in polling
stations, particularly during the vote-counting process and the publication of the
results.
17. Vice-President Ruberwa was of the view that the general improvement in the
security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would allow for the
holding of the elections without major security incidents. However, some pockets of
insecurity remained in the Kivus and Ituri. Vice-President Ruberwa welcomed the
deployment of the European Union standby force, which would reassure the
population concerning the security of the electoral process.
18. Vice-President Ruberwa also called for additional efforts, including from
MONUC, to address the continued presence of foreign armed groups, in particular
the former Forces armées rwandaises (FAR)/Interahamwe in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He also proposed that the immediate security priority for the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUC
should be to continue maintaining pressure on the armed groups, to prevent them
from disrupting electoral operations. President Kabila and Vice-President Ruberwa
also acknowledged that the bilateral relationships between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its eastern neighbours had improved in recent months.

4

06-39847

S/2006/434

19. The mission warmly congratulated IEC for the progress made in organizing the
elections, including the registration of over 25 million voters; the successful holding
of the constitutional referendum; and the publication on 30 April of the 30 July date
for the holding of the presidential and national legislative elections. The IEC
Chairman, Father Malu Malu, said that the final electoral timetable would be
published on 28 June, after the completion of the registration of the candidates for
the provincial elections. He also noted that a second round of the presidential
election could be held at the same time as the provincial elections. The Security
Council mission urged IEC to make all possible efforts to minimize the time period
between the first and second rounds of the presidential elections, if a second is
necessary.
20. The Commission explained that there were four major outstanding challenges
in ensuring the successful completion of the electoral process:
(a) The political environment has significantly deteriorated in recent months.
Steps needed to be taken urgently to ensure respect for civil liberties, free and
equitable access to the media for all of the political parties and candidates, the
security of the electorate and candidates, and the integrity of electoral procedures, in
particular the counting of votes and announcement of the results;
(b) Concerns remained regarding the fragile security situation in some areas
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, it was noted that a large
number of national police personnel, who had been trained with MONUC support,
would be providing security during the electoral operations;
(c) Additional international assistance was required for the other institutions
in support of the transition, particularly the High Media Authority, which is
expected to play a critical role in regulating the media environment during the
electoral campaign. The rapid establishment of the comité de sages would also be
important in strengthening the credibility of the electoral process;
(d)

There is a shortfall of some $46 million in the electoral budget.

21. The Commission indicated that it was working with some of its international
partners towards strengthening the capacity and credibility of the Supreme Court of
Justice and the provincial courts, which will be responsible for the adjudication of
electoral disputes. It is also taking steps to widely publicize the rules and guidelines
governing the electoral dispute mechanisms among the population, political parties
and candidates.
22. The Security Council mission urged IEC to increase the civic education
campaign. It was noted that voters across the country should have the best possible
knowledge of the complicated electoral and voting procedures, before the polls are
held. Furthermore, the credibility of the elections would be a determining factor in
ensuring post-electoral stability. The monitoring activities of a large number of
national and international observers, at polling stations and vote-counting sites,
would be critical in helping ensure the credibility of the electoral process and to
minimize disputes over the results. The mission also urged IEC to take all possible
steps to ensure transparency and integrity in the process of result-collection and
vote-counting. The mission suggested to IEC that it test its procedures for this
through the conduct of pilot tests. Commission personnel, who would be deployed at
some 50,000 polling stations, should also be provided with adequate means of
communication.

06-39847

5

S/2006/434

23. In their meeting with the bureau of the High Media Authority, members of the
Security Council mission highlighted the importance of ensuring free and equitable
access to the media by all the political parties and candidates. The High Media
Authority was urged to remain credible, objective and impartial in regulating and
monitoring the media during the electoral process. The Chairman of the High Media
Authority indicated that inadequate support had been received for its operations
from the international community and the Transitional Government, which had
negatively affected its ability to implement its mandate. He also explained that it
faced difficulties in regulating the large number of private media outlets in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, many of which were owned by the main
presidential candidates.
24. At the same time, in the view of the Chairman, the early launch of
campaigning by some candidates before the commencement of the official period on
30 June had contributed to an increase in political tensions, including the unchecked
use of hate and derogatory messages, as well as personalized verbal and physical
attacks against some candidates. While acknowledging the difficulty in regulating
the private media, the Security Council mission called on the national authorities to
work towards ensuring that the electoral campaign was based on programmes
addressing the concerns of the population of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and was carried out in a spirit of dialogue and national reconciliation.
25. The mission recognized the important role played by the religious authorities
in encouraging the peaceful holding of the elections, as well as in providing support
to the population in preparation for the elections. At its meeting with religious
leaders it was informed that Church groups had launched a voter-education
campaign in July 2004. The religious leaders also emphasized the need for all
candidates to peacefully accept the results of the polls. They explained that there
were high popular expectations that the elections would be held on the announced
dates and stressed that any attempts to delay the elections, such as the holding of a
protracted political dialogue or consultations, should be discouraged.
26. In its meeting with a large gathering of representatives of the political parties
participating in the electoral process, including many of the presidential candidates,
the Security Council mission underlined the historical significance of the elections
and indicated that the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had high
expectations regarding the elections. While reiterating the commitment of the
international community to the sustained provision of assistance to the electoral and
peace processes in the country, the mission stressed that the primary responsibility
for the successful completion of the electoral process rested with the population and
political actors.
27. The mission also urged the political parties and their leaders to approach the
elections in a spirit of tolerance, peace and reconciliation, and to promote
programmes which included the post-electoral priorities, including reconstruction,
security, governance and reconciliation, and other issues that were in the best
interest of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Personalized
attacks, hate speech and the intimidation of candidates, including through the use of
the State security apparatus, should be avoided and strongly condemned. The
mission also insisted on strict respect for the results of the polls.
28. The political parties and candidates expressed serious concerns regarding the
deterioration of the political climate, including an increasing lack of respect for civil

6

06-39847

S/2006/434

liberties by the authorities, a lack of equal access to the media by all of the political
parties and the increasing threats against and harassment of candidates. The political
parties highlighted the need for the security services to remain impartial in
providing security for the elections. Security needed to be ensured throughout the
voting process, the counting of ballots and the publication of results. Many political
parties called for the convening of a political dialogue to review the electoral
process, including the electoral calendar.
29. Discussions between the Security Council mission and CIAT focused on the
electoral process, security sector reform and post-electoral issues, including the
issue of ensuring transparent economic management. Members of CIAT called for
strict respect for the electoral timeline. They expressed concern at the increasingly
negative tone of the unofficial electoral campaign and called for measures to ensure
equitable media access for all of the political parties and candidates, including
providing the High Media Authority with adequate support in regulating the media
during the campaign period. Members of CIAT also stressed the need for the
Government to ensure the security of journalists.
30. Members of CIAT shared the concern of the mission regarding the need for the
transitional authorities to ensure continuity in the management of the State in the
period following the first round of the presidential elections, should a second round
be required. CIAT also felt that the stakeholders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should reach a consensus, as early as possible, on the definition of a
parliamentary majority, which would allow for the rapid designation and installation
of an elected Government after the election of the President and members of the
National Assembly. Members of CIAT also discussed the future of their institution,
which will be dissolved when the political transition of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is complete. Several members believed that a successor organization with
similar membership could more effectively support the new Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as it continued its reform process.

III. Security issues
31. All of the mission’s interlocutors emphasized that the authorities needed to
continue working towards ensuring post-electoral stability, including by providing
security for the population and territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
was also noted that progress on security sector reform was critical for the future
stability of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Efforts in that regard must
therefore be intensified. The transitional authorities and the leadership of FARDC
should be encouraged to focus on the quality and discipline of the new army, rather
than on the size of the armed forces. The Joint Commission on Security Sector
Reform could play a useful role in ensuring the coordination of security sector
reform efforts in the post-electoral period.
32. The mission took note of the progress achieved in the integration of the army
since its last visit in November 2005, including the integration of an additional six
brigades. The mission also welcomed the steps taken by the national authorities in
implementing some of the recommendations of the EUSEC report, particularly with
regard to the payment of salaries to the integrated brigades. However, concern was
expressed at the serious lack of discipline of the integrated brigades and the
widespread human rights abuses committed by the army. The mission stressed that

06-39847

7

S/2006/434

military justice should apply to all members of the armed forces at all levels, and
urged the authorities to accelerate army reform after the elections to ensure the
creation of a professional and accountable army, capable of securing the population
and territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The mission also urged the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to carefully monitor lapses in
military leadership in FARDC and demand accountability where individual
responsibility for corruption or other abuses is established.
33. The Security Council mission received detailed briefings on the efforts of
EUSEC and EUPOL. The advance team from the European Union standby force
also briefed the mission on progress made in deploying the advance elements of the
force to Kinshasa. The European Union standby force will work closely with and
provide support to MONUC in implementing its mandate in support of securing the
electoral process, in areas where MONUC military capabilities are limited. The
force will deploy to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a period ending four
months after the holding of the first round of the presidential and national legislative
elections. The mission encouraged the European Union standby force and MONUC
to implement an information strategy so that the role of the force in supporting the
electoral security arrangements is understood by the population and stakeholders of
the country.
34. In its meeting with the Joint Commission on Security Sector Reform, the
Security Council mission noted that the first two phases of the brassage process had
resulted in the establishment of 12 integrated brigades, some of which are currently
deployed and operational in the eastern part of the country. The third phase of the
brassage process had now been launched by FARDC, which should lead to the
establishment of an additional two integrated brigades. However, the integrated
brigades still lacked adequate equipment, discipline and cohesion.
35. The Joint Commission on Security Sector Reform indicated that it was
working towards the integration of 18 integrated brigades which, it was hoped,
would be established in time for the elections. It acknowledged that the brassage
process had been inadequate to create a professional army, as most of the soldiers
had had no formal military training. At the same time, the size of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo made any movement of troops, for integration or
deployment, time-consuming and put considerable demands on the limited resources
of the State. The Government had recently decided to increase from $10 to $25 a
month the salaries of military and police personnel. It was noted that better pay and
training for the units should help improve the discipline of the soldiers. These steps
should help curb human rights violations. The FARDC leadership recognized that
the poor state of military justice had jeopardized efforts to end impunity in the
military. The recent census of the army would provide some basis for further
administrative reforms.
36. The mission welcomed the considerable progress achieved by EUSEC in
securing and supervising the regular monthly payment of salaries to the integrated
brigades. EUSEC has also been successful in obtaining the separation of the salary
payment chain from the command structure of the units. There is some concern that
the political requirement to continue creating integrated Congolese armed forces
following the elections, through the brassage of combatants from the various former
belligerents, may jeopardize efforts to create a professional army with strong
operational capabilities.

8

06-39847

S/2006/434

37. The mission noted with much satisfaction the progress made by MONUC and
EUPOL, in preparing the Police nationale congolaise (PNC) for its role in ensuring
security during the electoral process, including the training by MONUC of some
50,000 police and the mentoring of the PNC crowd control units in Kinshasa by
EUPOL. The mission also welcomed the close coordination between the partners of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that were supporting the police reform
process.
38. The authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo noted that PNC
would be responsible for securing the elections. However, in regions where armed
groups remain active, such as Ituri, the Kivus and northern Katanga, FARDC would
contribute to the security arrangements. The mission welcomed the preparation of a
draft plan for the reform of the police by Congolese and international experts, which
provided for the entry of police personnel into the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, which would be implemented soon after the elections.
39. The mission noted that some 123,159 combatants had joined the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process since the start of the transitional process,
of whom 9,659 had reintegrated into civilian life and 38,293 had joined the army. A
total of 80,000 weapons had been collected and handed over to FARDC. The
Commission nationale de démobilisation et de réinsertion estimated that
approximately 70,000 combatants still needed to enter the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.

IV. Governance
40. The Security Council mission expressed deep concern at the reported
mismanagement of the economy, including the considerable increase in
extrabudgetary expenditures since late in 2005. The mission urged the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities, in particular President Kabila and the four VicePresidents, to take the steps necessary to ensure the transparent management of
State resources. It stressed that this was vital for restoring the confidence of the
donor community, including the World Bank and IMF, which in March had
suspended their assistance programmes to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A
shortfall in donor support following the elections could threaten the stability of the
elected Government, which was expected to be subject to significant public pressure
to rapidly deliver peace dividends to the population. Support for the United Nationssponsored Humanitarian Action Plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
be critical for accelerating the delivery of pro-poor socio-economic programmes.
41. Vice-President Bemba, who presides over the Transitional Government’s
Economic and Financial Commission, explained that the Transitional Government
had been successful in improving macroeconomic indicators. Nonetheless, he
acknowledged a lack of transparency and discipline in the management of some
strategic economic sectors, including the mining and forestry sectors, and expressed
his disappointment at the failure of the National Assembly to review the findings of
the Lutundula Special Parliamentary Commission in charge of evaluating the
legitimacy of the contracts concluded during the 1996-1997 and 1998 conflicts.
42. The Security Council mission was briefed by United Nations Development
Programme, IMF and World Bank representatives on the challenges facing the
Transitional Government and prospects for stability and reconstruction in the post-

06-39847

9

S/2006/434

electoral period. The mission noted the suspension by IMF and the World Bank of
their respective economic and budgetary assistance programmes owing to concerns
regarding the financial mismanagement of the State. The apparent lack of
commitment of the transitional authorities to maintaining strict budgetary discipline
during the period preceding the new Government’s installation was also of concern.
The Fund is currently negotiating a Staff Monitored Programme with the
Government, which should assist the Congolese authorities in maintaining
macroeconomic stability by restoring budgetary discipline, including measures
intended to increase transparency, such as a temporary moratorium on contracts in
the mining and forestry sectors.
43. The World Bank, the United Nations and some bilateral donors are considering
the establishment of a policy framework aimed at improving governance and
strengthening dialogue with the elected authorities, including support for increased
transparency and key reform priorities. The Security Council mission noted that the
cooperation of the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be
critical for ensuring the effective implementation of reforms. The mission appealed
to donors to find ways of providing additional support for security sector reform.
44. In its meeting with FEC, the Security Council mission highlighted that the
growth of local economic activities would be critical for promoting stability and
reconstruction in the post-electoral period. The Fédération noted that it was
preparing a document to be shared with the elected Government, including
proposals on improving the business environment and promoting economic recovery
and the long-term political stability of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including the establishment of an impartial judiciary, investment in infrastructure
and the promotion of good governance. The FEC delegation expressed particular
concern regarding the need for durable improvements in the security environment,
which is critical to the growth of private business, and called for sustained
international support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo after the elections.
45. The mission also received a briefing from Christophe Lutundula on the
findings of the Special Parliamentary Commission in charge of evaluating the
legitimacy of the contracts concluded during the 1996-1997 and 1998 conflicts,
including the illegal exploitation of natural resources. It was noted that the
transparent management of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should be a key priority for the elected Government. Mr. Lutundula also
provided mission members with an analysis and an action plan to address the issues
of corruption and transparency in resource exploitation, including a proposal for the
creation of a national commission under the new Government to control the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
46. The mission subsequently received an informal briefing from the Chairman of
the Group of Experts on the arms embargo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on its activities since the extension of the Group’s mandate under resolution 1654
(2006), for a period lasting until 31 July 2006.
47. Members of the Security Council mission also met, in Kinshasa, with a group
of women’s non-governmental organizations focusing on the issue of sexual
violence. The mission expressed concern at the continued prevalence of incidents of
sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, most of which are
committed by members of FARDC and the armed groups. The adoption by the
elected Parliament of legislation punishing acts of sexual violence would be useful

10

06-39847

S/2006/434

in addressing the matter; furthermore, the Government needed to urgently take
effective action to end impunity within the armed forces.
48. The mission also discussed the future of MONUC and possible changes in its
mandate in the post-transition period with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and MONUC staff. Several members suggested that MONUC
should work with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations as well as the
Congolese authorities to develop specific options for the Security Council’s
consideration in its deliberations on the future of MONUC.

V. Recommendations
A.

Elections
49. The Congolese authorities and stakeholders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are encouraged to ensure that the announced date of 30 July, for the holding
of the first round of the presidential elections and the national legislative elections,
is respected.
50. Should the political actors of the Democratic Republic of the Congo choose to
convene a formal dialogue on the electoral process, which could be useful in
defusing the tense political climate, it is important that such a dialogue not lead to
further delays in implementing the announced electoral calendar.
51. It is critical that the political parties carry out the electoral campaign in
accordance with the code of conduct for political parties, as prepared by the
Independent Electoral Commission, and that the electoral campaign be conducted in
an atmosphere of calm and tolerance. Debates should be focused on the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including programmes prepared in the interest
of the population. Hate language, incitements to ethnic hatred and exclusion should
not be tolerated.
52. The transitional authorities should ensure equitable access for all of the
political parties and candidates to the press and other media, which must remain
impartial during the electoral period. Additional support should be provided for that
purpose for the functioning of the High Media Authority, which should remain
impartial and credible throughout the process.
53. It is also critical that the security services remain attentive to the importance of
ensuring the independence of journalists and providing for the security of the
electorate and candidates. Acts of intimidation and violence cannot be tolerated.

B.

Security sector reform
54. Efforts aimed at reforming and restructuring the army, including the
integration of coherent units and the administrative reform of the military command
structure, need to be urgently pursued.
55. A more systematic effort is required to put an end to impunity within the ranks
of the security services by bringing to justice the alleged perpetrators of human
rights violations among military and police personnel and relieving higher-ranking
officers who show serious leadership deficiencies.

06-39847

11

S/2006/434

56. The international community should be encouraged to increase its support for
security sector reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

C.

Governance
57. The Congolese authorities are encouraged to make efforts to meet the
expectations of the international financial institutions with regard to the
requirements for the resumption of assistance from IMF and the World Bank.
58. The continuation of the functioning of the State and its institutions, including
transparent and responsible economic management, in the period between the
holding of the first polls and the establishment of the elected Government, is critical
to ensuring the stability of the country.

D.

Sexual violence
59. The Government should take steps to address the continued prevalence of
sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including taking urgent
action to end impunity within the armed forces.

E.

Mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
60. The Mission is encouraged to work with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations as well as the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
develop specific options for the consideration of the Security Council in its
deliberations on its future mandate.

12

06-39847
