to pay from the Fund, claims arising from its operation.

Conseil d'administration est autorise a payer, a
meme le budget du Fonds, Ies depenses afferentes
a son fonctionnement.

6. The Secretary-General shall submit to the
General Assembly an annual audit of the accounts of the Fund.
7. The Executive Board shall make periodic
reports of its operations at such times and in such
form as the Economic and Social Council shall
provide.
8. A report shall be submitted to the fourth
session of the Economic and Social Council containing a recommended programme and estimate
of expenses incurred and to be incurred for the
Fund for 1947 which shall be subject to the
approval of the Council.
9. The activities of the Fund shall be reviewed
by the General Assembly at its second session
upon the basis of a special report from the
Economic and Social Council.

6. Le Secretaire general soumet a l'Assemblee
generale la verification annuelle des comptes du
Fonds.
7. Le Conseil d'administration etablit des rapports periodiques concernant son activite aux
dates et dans la forme indiquee par le Conseil
economique et social.
8. Un rapport sera presente au Conseil economique et social, au cours de sa quatrieme session,
exposant le programme recommande ainsi que
)'estimation des depenses effectuees et a effectuer
par le Fonds au titre de 1947, previsions soumises
a l'approbation du Conseil.
9· L'Assemblee generale, au COUTS de sa
deuxieme session, examinera l'activite du Fonds
en se fondant sur un rapport special du Conseil
economique et social.

II. The effective operation of the Fund is dependent upon the financial resources which are
put at its disposal;

II. Lebon £on( tionncment du Fonds e,t subordonne aux ressources financieres mises a sa disposition;

Therefore,
The General Assembly expresses the earnest
hope that Governments, voluntary agencies and
private individuals will give the Fund their generous support.
Fi/ ty-sixth plenary meeting,
1 I December 1946.

En consequence,
L'Assemblee ge11erale exprime le ferme espoir
que Ies gouvernements, les institutions benevoles
et Jes particuliers souscriront genereusem'ent a ce
Fonds.
Cinquante-sixieme seance pleniere,
le 1 r decembre r946.

58 (I). Transfer to the United Nations
of the advisory social welfare
functions of UNRRA ( United
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration)

58 (I). Transfert aux Nations Unies
des fonctions consultatives
exercees en matiere de service
social par l'UNRRA (United
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration)

Whereas Article 66 of the Charter of United
Nations provides:
1. The Economic and Social Council shall perform such functions as fall within its competence
in connection with the carrying out of the recommendations of the General Assembly.
2. It may, with the approval of the General
Assembly, perform services at the request of
Members of the United Nations and at the request of specialized agencies.
3. It shall perform such other functions as are
specified elsewhere in the present Charter or as
may be assigned to it by the General Assembly;

Attendu que l'Article 66 de la Charte des Nations Unies est ainsi con~u:
1. Le Conseil economique et social, dans !'execution des recommandations de l'Assemblee generale, s'acquitte de routes Jes fonctions qui entrent
dans sa competenre.

2. II peut, avec !'approbation de l'Assemblee
generale, rendre Jes services qui Iui seraient demandes par des Membres de !'Organisation ou
par des institutions specialisees.
3. II s'acquitte des autres fonctions qui Iui sont
devolues dans d'autres parties de la presente
Charte ou qui peuvent lui ~tre attribuees par
l'Ass<"mblee generale;
A ttendu que le Conseil economique et social a
recommande, le I er octobre 1946, le transfert
-aux. Nations Unies des fonctions consultatives,
urgentes et importantes, exercees en matiere de
service social par I'UNRRA, en tenant compte
specialemcnt des besoins des enfants;
Atte11du que l'Assemblee generale, ayant examine le rapport et Ies recommandatioru presentes
par le Secretaire general clans le document A/1~2.
reconnait la necessite de transferer aux Natiom

Whereas the Economic and Social Council, on
1 October 1946, recommended the transfer to
the United Nations of certain urgent and important advisory functions in the field of social welfare carried on by UNRRA, special consideration
being given to the needs of children;
Whereas the General Assembly, after examining the report and the recommendations presented by the Secretary-General in document
A/132, recognizes the necessity of transferring to

98

Lhe Uniled Nalions lhe urgeul and imponanl
advisory functions in Lhe field of social welfare
carried on by UNRRA;
The General Assembly, therefore,
A. Authorizes the Secretary-General:
1. In consullation with the Economic and Social Council, to make provision, with lhe co-operation of the specialized agencies where appropriate, for the continuance of the urgent and
imporlant advisory funclions in the field of_ social
welfare carried on by UNRRA; and, for this purpose,
2. to include in the budget of lhe United Nations for 194 7 the funds necessary for lhe assumption of the tollowing functions, all of which are
necessary for the accomplishment of an effective
programme:
(a) For a req uisile number of social welfare
experts to provide, on the request of Governments which show the need for them, such advisory services, and to put into practice, over
an appropriate period, new technical methods
in any branch of social welfare;

Unies les fonctions consultatives, urgentes et importantes, exercees en matiere de service social
par J'UNRRA;
L' Assemblee generate, en consequence,
A. Autorise le Secretaire general:
1. A prendre les dispositions necessaires, en
liaison avec le Conseil economique et social et,
lorsque les circonstances l'exigent, en cooperation
avec les institutions specialisecs, pour la continuation des fonctions consultativcs urgentes et importantes, exercees par l'UNRRA en matiere de
service social; et, a cette fin,
2. A inscrire au budget des Nations Unies pour
194 7 les credits requis pour assumer les fonctions
suivantes, toutes necessaires a !'execution d'un
programme efficace:
a) Pour permettre a un nombre requis d'experts en matiere de service social de fournir, a
la demande des gouvernements qui en montrent
la necessite, de tels services consultatifs, et de
mettre en ceuvre, pendant une periode appropriee, de nouvelles methodes techniques dans
les differentes branches du service social;
b) Pour permettre a un nombre approprie
de fonctionnaires dument qualifies du service
social, d'observer les experiences faites par d'autres pays qui pratiquent des programmes d'as,istance, et de se lamiliari,n aYCC lcun methodes:
c) Pour fournir des a vis, faire des demonstrations, et proceder a l'instruction necessaire pour
la fabrication d'appareils de prothese et a la
formation professionnelle de personnes physiquement diminuees; et pour fournir le materiel
et Jes instruments de demonstration utiles;
d) Pour fournir aux pays Membres qui ont
cte dcvastes par la guerre lcs publications techniques necessaires a la formation du personnel
du service social.
Le Secretaire general devra fournir les experts
d"accord avec Jes gouvernements interesses, et il
£era le choix des boursiers en se basant sur des
propositions faites par les gouvernements. L'etendue des services a fournir aux divers gouvernements sera determinee par le Secretaire general, et
sera revisee par la Commission des questions
sociales a sa prochaine session. Le genre de service
mentionne sous a), b) c) et d) a fournir a chaque
pays sera decide par le gouvernement interesse.

(b) For enabling a requisite number of suitably qualified social wellare officials to observe,
and familiarize themselves with, the experience of other countries administering social
welfare programmes;
(c) For providing advice, demonstration and
instruction in connection with the manufacture of prosthetic appliances and the vocational training of physically handicapped
persons; and for furnishing the necessary
demonstration equipment and tools;
(d) For furnishing to the Member countries
,wich have been devastated during the war,
technical publications helpful in the training
of social welfare workers.
The furnishing of the experts shall be undertaken by the Secretary-General in agreement
with the Governments concerned, and the selection of grant-holders shall be made by the Secretary-General on the basis of proposals received
from Governments. The amount of service to be
furnished to the various Governments shall be
decided by the Secretary-General, and shall be
reviewed by the Social Commission at its next
session. The kind of service mentioned under
(a), (b), (c) and (d) to be rendered to each
country shall be decided by the Government
concerned.
B. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the Social Commission on the measures which he
takes in compliance with the terms of the present
resolution, and requests the Commission during
its first session to formulate recommendations
concerning the continued action required to
carry on the essential advisory activities of
UNRRA in the field of social welfare.

B. Invite le Secretaire general a presenter a la
Commission des questions sociales un rapport sur
les mesures qu'il aura prises en vertu des dispositions de la presente resolution, et invite cette
C0mmission a formuler, au cours de sa premiere
session, des recommandations concernant les mesures necessaires en vue de poursuivre l'activite
essentielle de l'UNRRA en matiere de service
social.
Soixante-cinquieme seance pleniere,
le 14 decembre 1946.

Sixty-filth plenary meeting,
14 December 1946.

N
