General Assembly-Twelfth Session

48

( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by inter-governmental agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations to finance their work, pending receipt by the
agencies concerned of sufficient contributions under
their own budgets; in making such loans, which shall
normally be repayable within two years, the SecretaryGeneral shall have regard to the proposed financial resources of the agency concerned, and shall obtain the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any cash
issues which would increase the aggregate balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and
outstanding) at any one time to an amount in excess of
$1,500,000 and for any issue which would increase the
balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one agency
to an amount in excess of $500,000;

(e) Such sums not exceeding $35,000 as may be required to finance payments of advance insurance premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond
the end of the financial year in which payment is made ;
this amount may be increased with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates of each year, during
the life of the related policies, to cover the charges
applicable to each such year ;
(f) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending accumulation of credits; such advances shall
be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund.

731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1233 (XII). Change in the date of repayment of
the Headquarters loan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the need for financing budgetary
appropriations pending the receipt of contributions, and
taking into account the pattern of payments of contributions,
Believing that the financial situation in this respect
would be alleviated by changing the date of the annual
repayment inade to the United States of America under
the Headquarters Loan Agreement of 23 March 1948
between the United States and the United Nations, 35
Authorizes the Secretary-General to conclude an
agreement with the United States of America modifying
paragraph 4 of the above-mentioned Agreement so that
the date of 1 September is substituted for 1 July for
the years 1958 to 1982 inclusive.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
""Ibid., Third Session, Part I, Plenary Meetings, Annexes,
document A/6'2J, annex.

1234 (XII). Emoluments of Under-Secretaries:
amendments to the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the organization of the Secretariat at the senior
level3 6 and the comments thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,87
Resolves that the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be modified by the amendments annexed
to the present resolution, with effect from 1 January
1958.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
ANNEX
Annex I, paragraph 1
Replace the present text by the following :
"An Under-Secretary shall receive a salary of $US23,000
(subject to the Staff Assessment Plan provided in staff
regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied) and,
if otherwise eligible, shall receive the allowances which are
available to staff members generally."

Annex I, paragraph 2

In the first sentence delete the words "and officials of equivalent rank at Headquarters".
Annex I, paragraph 9 (Post 11djustments)

In the first •sentence replace the words "may adjust the basic
salaries set forth in paragraph 3 and 4 of this annex" by the
words "may adjust the basic salaries set forth in paragraphs 1,
3 and 4 of this annex".
Regulation 3.4 (Dependency benefits)

In paragraph (a) amend the beginning of the first sentence
to read: "Under-Secretaries and staff members in the Principal
Officer and Director category".
Regulations 1.10 and 4.5 (a)
Delete the references to "officials of equivalent rank".

1235 (XII). Secretariat of the Military Staff
Committee

The General Assembly
Requests the Secretary-General, subject to any objection which may be received from the Security Council, to take appropriate steps to effect the integration
of the civilian staff of the Military Staff Committee with
the Secretariat of the United Nations.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
80
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 41, document
A/C.5/728.
., Ibid., document A/3762.
