VII. Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of the Fourth Committee

Recalling resolution AHG/Res.104 (XIX) on Western
Sahara,30adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
nineteenth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6
to 12June 1983,
I. Reaffirms that the question of Western Sahara is a
question of decolonization which remains to be completed
on the basis of the exercise by the people of Western
Sahara of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
2. Reaffirms also that the solution of the question of
Western Sahara lies in the implementation of resolution
AHG/Res.104 (XIX) of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity,
which establishes ways and means for a just and definitive
political solution to the Western Sahara conflict;

3. Again requests, to that end, the two parties to the
conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular
para la Liberaci6n de Saguia et-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, to
undertake direct negotiations, in the shortest possible
time, with a view to bringing about a cease-fire to create
the necessary conditions for a peaceful and fair referendum
for self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, a
referendum without any administrative or military constraints, under the auspices of the Organization of African
Unity and the United Nations;
4. Welcomes the efforts of the current Chairman of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to promote a just and definitive
solution of the question of Western Sahara;
5. Invites the current Chairman of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to exert every effort to persuade the two parties to
the conflict, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de
Oro, to negotiate, in the shortest possible time and in conformity with resolution AHG/Res. l 04 (XIX) and the present resolution, the terms of a cease-fire and the modalities
for organizing the said referendum;

6. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to co-operate fully with the Organization of African Unity
with a view to implementing the relevant decisions of that
organization, in particular resolution AHG/Res. I 04
(XIX);

7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a matter of priority and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session;
8. Invites the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the United
Nations informed of the progress achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the Organization of African
Unity relating to Western Sahara;
9. Invites the Secretary-General to follow the situation
in Western Sahara closely with a view to the implementation of the present resoluticn and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985
30 For the text, see resolution 38/40, para. I.
31 01/icia/ Records of the General Assembl_v, Fortieth Session. Supplement
No. 2.f (A/40/23), chap. VIII.

269

40/Sl. Informadon from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nadons
The General Assembly.
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United
Nations 31 and the action taken by the Committee in
respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question, 32
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to
study the information transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and
to take such information fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 39/41 of 5 December 1984,
in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution
1970 (XVIII),
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government in
terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedures, and to report thereon to the Assembly
at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December I 985

40/52.

Acdvides of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementadon
of the Declaradon on the Granting of Inde-

pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
10 Namibia and in all other Territories under

colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the
32 A/40/629.

270
General Assembly-Fortieth Session
-----------------------''---------------------·---·-·------

implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Namibia and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and
racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the item, 33
Taking into consideration the relevant chapters of the
report of the United Nations Council for Namibia,34
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the item,
Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administering
Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under
their administration and to protect the human and natural
resources of those Territories against abuses,
Reaffirming that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa and other colonial Territories is in direct violation of the rights of the inhabitants and of the principles of
the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of all Territories
under colonial and racist domination are the heritage of
the peoples of those Territories and that the exploitation
and depletion of those resources by foreign economic
interests, in particular in Namibia, in association with the
occupying regime of South Africa, constitute a direct violation of the rights of the peoples and of the principles of
the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the consensus on
Namibia adopted by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples at its extraordinary session held at Tunis from
13to 17May 1985, 35
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Economic Declaration and other documents of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March
1983,36and of the Final Document of the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at
New Delhi from 19 to 21 April 1985,37
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Declaration and Programme of Action contained in the Final
Document adopted by the United Nations Council for

Namibia at its extraordinary plenary meetings held at
Vienna from 3 to 7 June 1985,38
Noting with profound concern that the colonial Powers
and certain States, through their activities in the colonial
Territories, have continued to disregard United Nations
decisions relating to the item and that they have failed to
implement, in particular, the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970
and 39/42 of 5 December 1984, by which the Assembly
called upon the colonial Powers and those Governments
that had not yet done so to take legislative, administrativt
or other measures in respect of their nationals and thl
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in
Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the inhab
itants of those Territories, in order to put an end to such
enterprises and to prevent new investments that run
counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financial and other interests which continue to
exploit the natural and human resources of the colonial
Territories and to accumulate and repatriate huge profits
to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants, particularly in the case of Namibia, thereby impeding the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their legitimate
aspirations for self-determination and independence,
Strongly condemning the support which the racist
minority regime of South Africa continues to receive from
those foreign economic, financial and other interests which
are collaborating with the regime in the exploitation of the
natural and human resources of the international Territory
of Namibia, in the further entrenchment of its illegal racist
domination over the Territory and in the strengthening of
its system of apartheid,
Strongly condemning the investment of foreign capital
in the production of uranium and the collaboration by certain Western and other countries with the racist minority
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field which, by providing that regime with nuclear equipment and technology, enables it to develop nuclear and military capabilities
and to become a nuclear Power, thereby promoting South
Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
Reaffirming that the natural resources of Namibia,
including its marine resources, are the inviolable and
incontestable heritage of the Namibian people and that the
exploitation of those resources by foreign economic interests under the protection of the illegal colonial administration, in violation of the Charter, of the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council and of
Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia, 39 enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974, and in disregard of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of
21 June 1971, 40 is illegal, contributes to the maintenance
of the illegal occupation regime and is a grave threat to the
integrity and prosperity of an independent Namibia,
Concerned about the conditions in other colonial Territories, including certain Territories in the Caribbean and
the Pacific Ocean regions, where foreign economic, financial and other interests continue to deprive the indigenous
populations of their rights over the wealth of their
countries, and where the inhabitants of those Territories

33 Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session. Supplement
No. 2.f(A/40/23), chap. V.
34 fbid.. Supplement No. 24 (A/40/24), part two, chap. II, sect. C, and
chaf. IX, sect. C.
3 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/40/23), chap. IX, para. 12.
36 A/38/132-S/l 5675 and Corr. I and 2, annex.
37 A/40/307-S/17184 and Corr.I, annex.

38 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Semon, Supplement No. U (A/40/24), para. 513.
39 !bid., Thirty-fifth Session. Supplement No. U (A/35/24), vol. I. annex II.
40 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa
,n Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution
276 (1970), Advisory Opinion. l.C.J. Reports. 1971, p. 16.

VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

continue to suffer from a loss of land ownership as a result
of the failure of the administering Powers concerned to
restrict the sale of land to foreigners, despite the repeated
appeals of the General Assembly,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world
public opinion against the involvement of foreign economic, financial and other interests in the exploitation of natural and human resources, which impedes the independence of colonial Territories and the elimination of
racism, particularly in southern Africa, and emphasizing
the importance of action by local authorities, trade unions,
religious bodies, academic institutions, mass media, solidarity movements and other non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, in exercising pressure on
transnational corporations to refrain from any investment
or activity in the Territory of Namibia, in encouraging a
policy of systematic divestment of any financial or other
interest in corporations doing business with South Africa
and in counteracting all forms of collaboration with the
occupation regime in Namibia,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of
their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of those
resources in their best interests;
2. Reiterates that any administering or occupying
Power that deprives the colonial peoples of the exercise of
their legitimate rights over their natural resources or subordinates the rights and interests of those peoples to foreign economic and financial interests violates the solemn
obligations it has assumed under the Charter of the United
Nations;
3. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits for the
enrichment of foreign settlers and the perpetuation of colonial domination and racial discrimination in the Territories, the activities of foreign economic, financial and
othet interests operating at present in the colonial Territories, particularly in southern Africa, constitute a major
obstacle to political independence and racial equality, as
well as to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those
Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Condemns the activities of foreign economic and
other interests in the colonial Territories impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), and the
efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination;
5. Condemns the policies of Governments that continue to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and other interests engaged in exploiting the natural
and human resources of the Territories, including, in particular, illegally exploiting Namibia's marine resources,
violating the political, economic and social rights and
interests of the indigenous peoples and thus obstructing
the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in
respect of those Territories;
6. Strongly condemns the collusion of the Governments of certain Western and other countries with the
racist minority regime of South Africa in the nuclear field,
and calls upon those and all other Governments to refrain
from supplying that regime, directly or indirectly, with
installations that might enable it to produce uranium, plutonium and other nuclear materials. reactors or military
equipment;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on

271

the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to monitor closely the situation in the
remaining colonial Territories so as to ensure that all economic activities in those Territories are aimed at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the interests of
the indigenous peoples, at promoting the economic and
financial viability of those Territories and at speeding their
accession to independence, and, in that connection,
requests the administering Powers concerned to ensure
that the peoples of the Territories under their administration are not exploited for political, military and other purposes detrimental to their interests;
8. Strongly condemns those Western and all other
countries, as well as the transnational corporations, which
continue their investments in, and supply of armaments
and oil and nuclear technology to. the racist regime of
South Africa, thus buttressing it and aggravating the threat
to world peace;
9. Calls upon all States, in particular certain Western
States, to take urgent, effective measures to terminate all
collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa in the
political, diplomatic, economic, trade, military and
nuclear fields and to refrain from entering into other relations with that regime in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and of the Organization of
African Unity;
10. Calls once again upon all Governments that have
not yet done so to take legislative, administrative or other
measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa, which
are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises and
to prevent new investments that run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories;
11. Calls upon all States to terminate, or cause to have
terminated, any investments in Namibia or loans to the
racist minority regime of South Africa and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other economic relations with that regime;
12. Requests all States that have not yet done so to take
effective measures to end the supply of funds and other
forms of assistance, including military supplies and equipment, to the racist minority regime of South Africa, which
uses such assistance to repress the people of Namibia and
their national liberation movement;
13. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of
Namibia, leading to the rapid depletion of such resources,
in complete disregard of the legitimate interests of the
Namibian people, for the creation in the Territory of an
economic structure dependent essentially upon its mineral
resources and for its illegal extension of the territorial sea
and its proclamation of an economic zone off the coast of
Namibia;
14. Declares that all activities of foreign economic
interests in Namibia are illegal under international law and
that consequently South Africa and all the foreign economic interests operating in Namibia are liable to pay damages to the future lawful Government of an independent
Namibia;
15. Calls upon those oil-producing and oil-exporting
countries that have not yet done so to take effective measures against the oil companies concerned so as to terminate the supply of crude oil and petroleum products to the
racist regime of South Africa;
16. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering of
the marine and other natural resources of Namibia by
South African and other foreign economic interests, inclu-

272

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

ding the activities of those transnational corporations
which are engaged in the exploitation and export of the
Territory's uranium ores and other resources, in violation
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, are illegal, contribute to the maintenance of the illegal occupation regime
and are a grave threat to the integrity and prosperity of an
independent Namibia;
17. Condemns the plunder of Namibian uranium, and
calls upon the Governments of all States, particularly
those whose nationals and corporations are involved in the
mining or enrichment of, or traffic in, Namibian uranium,
to take all appropriate measures in compliance with the
provisions of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, including the practice of requiring negative certificates of origin, to prohibit and prevent
State-owned and other corporations, together with their
subsidiaries, from dealing in Namibian uranium and from
engaging in uranium prospecting activities in Namibia;
18. Requests the Governments of the Federal Republic
of Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which operate the
Urenco uranium enrichment plant, to have Namibian
uranium specifically excluded from the Treaty of
Almelo, 41 which regulates the activities of Urenco;
19. Requests all States to take legislative, administrative and other measures, as appropriate, in order effectively to isolate South Africa politically, economically,
militarily and culturally, in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981, 36/
121 B of 10 December 1981, 37/233 A of 20 December
1982, 38/36 A of 1 December 1983 and 39/50 A of 12
December 1984;
20. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue all
economic, financial and trade relations with the racist
minority regime of South Africa concerning Namibia and
to refrain from entering into any relations with South
Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning
Namibia, which may lend support to its continued illegal
occupation of that Territory;
21. Invites all Governments and organizations of the
United Nations system, having regard to the relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, contained in General
Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI) of l May 1974, and of
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure, in particular, that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial Territories over their natural
resources is fully respected and safeguarded;
22. Urges the administering Powers concerned to take
effective measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable right of the peoples of the colonial Territories to their
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
over their future development, and requests the administering Powers to take all necessary steps to protect the
property rights of the peoples of those Territories;
23. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned to
abolish all discriminatory and unjust wage systems and
working conditions prevailing in the Territories under
their administration and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of wages to all the inhabitants without any
discrimination;
41 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 795, No. 11326. p. 308.

42 AJ40/318 and Add.I.
43 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement

No. 3 (A/40/3/Rev. I), chaps. I and VI.

24. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, a sustained and broad campaign with a view to
informing world public opinion of the facts concerning the
pillaging of natural resources in colonial Territories and
the exploitation of their indigenous populations by foreign
monopolies and, in respect of Namibia, the support they
render to the racist minority regime of South Africa;
25. Appeals to mass media, trade unions and other
non-governmental organizations, as well as individuals, to
co-ordinate and intensify their efforts to mobilize international public opinion against the policy of the apartheid
regime of South Africa and to work for the enforcement of
economic and other sanctions against that regime and for
encouraging a policy of systematic divestment in corporations doing business in South Africa;
26. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to examine this question and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/53. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and
the international institutions associated with the United
Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and the Plan
of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
contained in the annex to its resolution 35/ 118 of 11
December 1980, as well as all other relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on this subject, including in particular resolution 39/43 of 5 December 1984,
Having examined the reports submitted on the item by
the Secretary-General, 42 the Economic and Social Council 43 and the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 44
Recalling also its resolutions ES-8/2 of 14 September
1981 and 39/50 of 12 December 1984 on the question of
Namibia,
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia, 45 adopted at the International Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, and the Declaration and Programme of Action
contained in the Final Document adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary
meetings held at Vienna from 3 to 7 June 1985, 38
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the Political
Declaration adopted by the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
44 Ibid., Supplement No

23 (A/40/23), chap. Yli.

45 See Re[)ort of the lntematiunal Conference i_n Support of the Struggle of
th<' Namibian People for Independence, Pans, 25-29 April 1983 (Al

CONF.120/ 13). part three
