UNITED

NATIONS

AL RECORDS
THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

st

MEETING:

23 AI’&

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2271)

. ...., ..... ... ....... ........ ....... .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .,..,,

1

. ..,..

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) . . * . . . . . . . * . * . . . . * . . . * . . . * * . . . . . . . . * * * . * . . . .I............

1

SlPV.227 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~cppleme~m of the Official Records qf the Security Courdl. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohrtiom
and
Decisions of the Secwity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2271st MEETING
in New York on Thursday, 23 April 1981, at 3.30 pm.
pre,~idm:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

Mr. Niassc (Setwgal), Mr, Conteh (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Fourie (South Africa), Mr. Hanwed (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Akakpo-Ahiauyo
(Togo), Mr. Salirv (United
Republic qf Tamania),
Mr. Vrhovec (Yugoslavia),
Mr. Karmrx~a wa Kanmuda (Zaire), Mr. Gonza
(Zambia), and Mr. Mangwen& (Zimbabwe) took the
places reserved for them at the side of’ the Comcil
chanther.

preserrt; The representatives of the following States:
China,France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan,Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia,Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
UnitedKingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
UnitedStatesof America,

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh and Democratic Yemen
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (SlAgendaI2271)

1, Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed ta the President of the Security Council (S/14434)

Adoption of the agenda

At the iw’tatiou of the President, Mr. Kaiser (BnggIadesh) artd Mr. Ash&l (Democratic Yemen) took the
places reserwd for then? at the side qf the Council
chamber.

Thesituation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken at the 2267th meeting,,I invite the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
delegation of the Council to take places at the Security
Council table.

(S/14434)

+

I. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisionstaken at previous meetings 12267th to 2270th
f)?eethlgs], I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola,Benin, Brazil, Canada, Cuba, Ethiopia, the
FederalRepublic of Germany, Guinea, India, Indonesia,Jamaica,Kenya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Romania,Senegal,Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
‘l%% the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia,
Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe to participate in the
discussionwithout the right to vote.
At the iwitcrtion

o/’ the Preside/It,

At the invitatiorz of the President, Mr. Lusaka
(Prcsicfent cf the Uttited Nations Cowwil for Namibia)
anti the other nwnbers of the delegation took places
at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision
taken also at the 2267th meeting, I invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation qf the President, Mr. Mueshihartge
took a place at the Council table.

Mr. Bcnyahia

5. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the Minister
for External Relations of Angola, Mr. Paula Teixeira
Jorge, I welcome him here and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
6. Mr. JORGE (Angola)(i~~terprrtrrtionjTom
French):
For 20 years now numerous relevant resolutions have
1

10. In the same context, the extraordinary ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries held recently at Algiers issued a
pressing appeal to the international
communitY for
binding comprehensive
economic sanctions to be

t-cc11 .I~IO~I~~I 111.\.;lricws i~~~~l~~~i\~i~~t~i\I
bodies, on the
r~~lc hind. rccoqli/inp 111~right of the Namibian people
1~1I~~~IC~CII~C’IICCd.
on 111~other, denouncing and
ctrnllcmning 111~illqul occupation of Namibia by the

r;rcist :md terrorist
Prctorin regime, its shameful and
criminnI s!.s~cm ofrrl,lr,.//rc%/, its intolerable arrogance
:md its scorn of the international community, as Well
i1S Ihe scnndnlous
connivance of certain
Powers in the maintenance of that regime.

imposed
pursuant

on the racist

and terrorist

Pretoria

rkgime

to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations [S/14458, annex, pan. 21 fl.

Western

11, The Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration
of Human Rights, the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the International
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the

7. Since the founding of the United Nations Council
for Namibia in May 1967 [General Assembly resohri0t1 2248 (S-V)] as the legal Administering Authority
of Namibia until independence and the decisionmaking body of the United Nations for that Territory,
the Pretoria regime and its accomplices have been
bent on undermining fulfilment of that Council’s
mandate and have been orchestrating a series of
manoeuvres aimed at delaying as long as possible the
inevitable independence of Namibia and in particular
the assumption of power by the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO).

Crime c&Apartheid

[General

Assembly r’esolutior?3068

(XXVIII)],
as well as numerous resolutions and decisions of the United Nations, make it clear that apartheid is a crime in terms of international law. However,
there are those in the Council who maintain close relations with a regime of criminals.
12. The brutal repression of the majority in South
Africa carried out within the framework of ccpartkeid
expresses the colonial nature of the South African
regime and violates the principle of the right of peoples
to self-determination.
Accordingly,
acts of armed
combat and resistance on the part of SWAP0 and the
African National Congress of South Africa (ANC)
against the illegal South African authority can in no
way be equated in law with the “terrorism”
invoked by
South Africa and, more recently, by the United States.

8. In spite of all the patient efforts of the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and the non-aligned countries to find a just solution to
the Namibian question, the racist and terrorist Pretoria
regime, enjoying as it does, the support of certain
Western Powers-always the same ones-and Israel in
the economic, military and nuclear fields, and consequently profiting from their lack of firmness, their
selfishness and their hypocrisy, feels free to continue
insolently to defy the international community and to
consolidate the establishment in Namibia of a socalled council of ministers entirely in the service of its
attempts to lead SWAP0 out of the process of independence and the intensification of its criminal acts of
aggression against the front-line States, and particularly the People’s Republic of Angola.

13. In its resolution 439 (1978) the Security Council
not only reiterated its resolutions 385 (1976), 431
(1978), 432 (1978) and 435 (1978) but warned South
Africa that the Council would be compelled
“to meet forthwith to initiate appropriate actions
under the Charter of the United Nations, including
Chapter VII thereof, so as to ensure South Africa’s
compliance with the aforementioned resolutions”.

9. In the face of the failure of the Geneva meeting,
which was intended to ensure within the framework
of the United Nations and on a basis of total impartiality
the implementation of the plan produced and negotiated
by the Western Powers within what is known as the
contact group, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 435 (1978), the thirty-sixth ordinary session
of the Council of Ministers of the OAU decided to
invite the African Group at the United Nations to call
for an urgent meeting of the Security Council in order
to adopt binding comprehensive economic sanctions
against the Pretoria regime so as to compel it to put an
end to its illegal occupation of Namibia [S/14.?90,
amex, para. If I. It was within the same context that
the Council of Ministers of the non-aligned countries
took its stand at the meeting held at New Delhi in
February 1981. However, it required a great deal of
perseverance on the part of our representatives in the
United Nations to overcome resistance on the part
of certain allies of South Africa to this series of meetings of the Security Council.

14. Furthermore, in its resolutions 428 (1978), 447
(1979), 454 (1979) and 475 (1980) concerning the many
premeditated,
persistent, prolonged acts of armed
invasion committed by South Africa in flagrant violation of the airspace, the national sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola,
the Council inter da, condemned the acts of aggression by South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola and demanded that it
“SCrupulOusly
respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola;” [wsolution428
(1978), porn. 41.
The Council also demanded
“that South Africa cease immediately its provocative
armed invasions against the People’s Republic of
Angola” [resolution 447 (1979), para.

and requested
2

31

19. Accordingly, in the face of the intransigence of
the Pretoria rtgime and its refusal to put an end to its
illegal occupation of Namibia, in the face ofthe criminal
acts of aggression committed against the front-line
countries, which constitute a serious threat to international peace and security, we should like to know
how many new acts of violation of the s,overeignty
and the territorial integrity of our country we must bear
before the Security Council finally shoulders its
responsibilities, by imposing comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions, because, unless that is
done, the very credibility of the Council will be called
into question, along with its own resolutions.

“Member States Urget’ltly
t0 eXknd
all necessary
assistanceto the People’s Republic of Angola and
other front-line States [rl~so/r/tio/, 454 (/979),

pml. 51.
The Council also decided to request the SecretaryGeneralof the United Nations
“to obtain available information from the People’s
Republic of Angola on the human casualties and
material and other damage resulting from repeated
acts of aggression committed by the racist rigime
of South Africa” [wsolrctio~t 447 f/979), pwtr. 61,

20. If all our efforts must be directed towards the
search for a negotiated solution of the Namibian
question, that is something that can be contemplated
only within the exclusive framework of the United
Nations, and that in turn entails the implementation
of the United Nations plan, in accordance with resolution 435 (1978), as was clearly reaffirmed by the heads
of State of the front-line countries at their meeting at
Luanda on 15 April last [S/14464,CIIZK~,par’cr. 81.

andcalled for
“the payment

by South Africa of full and adequate
to the People’s Republic of Angola
for the damage to life and property resulting from
compensation

these acts of aggreSSiOfl"

[W.SOll~tiOtt 475 (I@#),

pro. 61.
The Council decided also
*‘to meet again in the event of further acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
People’sRepublic of Angola by the South African
racist rbgime, in order to consider the adoption of
more effective measures in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, including Chapter VII thereof’ [ihid.,
para. 71.

21. Under your presidency, Mr. President, as the
representative of Ireland, the Security Council will
have at this crucial moment to take decisions which
may become historic. Your recognized diplomatic
qualities give us grounds for hoping that such will
indeed be the outcome.

15. In spite of all that, the people of Angola have had
to makeenormous sacrifices over the last three years
andare continuing, almost alone, to pay an extremely
high price for doing its internationalist duty as well
ascomplying with the relevant resolutions of international bodies on Namibia so that the Namibian
peoplealso can become independent.

23. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Benin, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

22. The fight continues! Victory is sure!

24, ‘Mr. HOUNGAVOU (Benin) (irtterp~etntion~ofn
Mr. President, I should like to thank you,
as well as the other members of the Council, for allowing the delegation of the People’sRepublic of Benin
to participate in this historic debate on the question of
Namibia.

Fretwh):

16. During this period, South African armed forces
havecarried out 1,400 reconnaissance flights, 290 air
raids, 56 debarkations of helicopter-borne troops,
72land attacks, causing the death of more than 1,800
Persons
and the wounding of about a thousand persons
and material damage estimated at $7 billion. With
extremelyfew exceptions, all the international solidarity we have enjoyed has been indifference or
passivity.

25. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin
welcomes the presence in the Council chamber of
Ministers from many African and other non-aligned
countries. I should like to convey to them the fraternal
greetings of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Benin, Comrade Simon If&d& Ogouma,
who, for reasons beyond his control, was not able to
be here today to speak in the Council personally.

17. However, the position and the approach of the
People’sRepublic of Angola have been and will always
remainthe same on the Namibian question. They are
clearand well known, and we therefore do not intend
to repeatthem.

26. My delegation would like to congratulate Ambassador Florin of the German Democratic Republic,
who presided over the work of the Council last month.
My delegation is pleased to see that this important
debate, which is to lead to the liberation and independence of Namibia, is being conducted under the presidency of a son of Ireland, whose people set a striking
example of courage and of struggle against British
colonialism.

18. As will have been noted, the Security Council
hasrepeatedly decided “to consider the adoption of
more effective measures” against the racist and
t@roristr&ime of South Africa “in accordance with
therelevant provisions of the bharter of the United
Nations,including Chapter VII thereof”.
3

27. Your country, Mr. President, waged a long
struggle; it gave itself a language, shaped a culture for
itself, and built and strengthened an independent
nation. Those are the same noble objectives being
pursued with staunch determination
by the heroic
people of Namibia. Thus, Sir, we are particularly
heartened by your presence in the presidential chair
at this historic time.
28. That is why my delegation ventures to believe
that under your leadership the Council will at last
understand that the time has come to put an end to the
deceit, the hypocrisy, the lies and the arrogance of the
Pretoria racists and their patrons, who are accomplices
in the humiliation,
the crimes and massacres committed against the oppressed people of Namibia, in the
acts of aggression perpetrated against Angola, Mozambique and Zambia, and in the repeated defiance of the
international community, which supports the struggle
of the Namibian people.
29. The history of the long struggle of the Namibian
people forcefully shows that the question of Namibia
is in no way a complex one. The question is quite
simply one of the right of colonial peoples to selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignty.
That right was unanimously proclaimed in 1960 in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). But the
irrational, desperate schemes of the racist r6gime of
Pretoria, and the unspeakable treachery of its Western
patrons, are a partial explanation for the delaying
tactics which are aimed, on the one hand, at complicating this very simple problem and, on the other, at
seeking neo-colonial solutions to it. That is why the
efforts undertaken thus far by the international community, revolving around the initiative of the five
Western Powers [S/12636] have yielded no results.
That can come as no surprise, for those Powers and the
racist rkgime of Pretoria are joined together to perpetuate the stcltlls quo in Namibia, so that they may
continue to indulge in the shameless plunder of that
Territory’s immense resources.
30. This is a serious challenge, which must be met
without delay, to save Africa from being dragged into
an imminent catastrophe, a catastrophe which would
spare no State in the international community, Yes,
the conditions for an armed conflict of unforeseeable
dimensions are present in southern Africa, It is clear
that no African State feels secure. It is enough to listen
to radio broadcasts from Pretoria and to certain warmongering statements by its racist leaders to understand that the situation has become extremely serious.
All of Africa-fighting
Africa-is
counting on its
many friends, who are ready to intervene by its side
in case of need.
31. Africa’s patience has worn thin. The Namibian
people can wait no longer. The presence in this chamber of many Ministers for Foreign Affairs who have
come directly from Algiers, where an extraordinary
ministerial meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the

Namibia
was
Non-Aligned
Countries concerning
held, is clear evidence of the seriousness of the situation and the urgent need to achieve the rapid decolonization of the Territory.
32. The Security Council is the guardian of international peace and security. What, then, has the Council done since 1968, when the question of Namibia was
brought before it? Before answering that question, we
should like to recall that, by its resolution 2145 (XXI),
the General Assembly terminated
South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia.
In 1971, the International
Court of Justice confirmed, in a unanimous advisory
opinion,’ the illegality of the situation in Namibia and
the obligation to put an end to it. The Council, since
that time, has certainly adopted many resolutions, but
experience has now shown that all those resolutions are
without teeth and thus have no effect on the seriousness
of the situation in Namibia.
33. Namibia is today a highly militarized Territory,
owing to the presence of many South African troops
and of mercenaries, those hired killers who come from
the West to commit abominable crimes against the
civilian population of Namibia. Throughout Europe
and the United States, South Africa has set up recruitment centres to engage mercenaries to serve in its
armed forces and to protect the facilities of multinational corporations, which are the instruments of
oppression and exploitation, and of the plundering of
Namibian resources. This is an extremely serious
circumstance. It clearly amounts to indirect military
assistance given to Pretoria by the West in flagrant
violation of Council resolution 418 (1977). Racist South
Africa, relying on its troops and its mercenaries,
engages in all sorts of inhuman acts: the massacres in
Cassinga in Angola and the many acts of aggression
against neighbouring countries bear the most eloquent
witness to the brutality of the racist rkgime and to the
seriousness of the situation in Namibia.
34. The time has come for the Council to act. Action
must be commensurate with the seriousness of the
situation in Namibia,
a situation which threatens
international
peace and security. Comprehensive
sanctions must be adopted against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Those sanctions are aimed at helping the oppressed
people of Namibia to recover its fundamental freedoms, especially its self-determination,
independence
and national sovereignty.
35. We know that the repeated and abusive use of
the veto hangs over the outcome of this debate like a
sword of Damocles. We should like to say to those in
question that this immoral behaviour is nothing but a
demonstration of racism towards the black indigenous
population of Namibia, which is struggling to recover
its human dignity. Using a categoric veto to block our
legitimate
demand for binding sanctions against
racist South Africa would again unveil the duplicity of
the Western Powers, which stop at nothing to satisfy

theneedsof their short-term interests, The use Of a
categoric
veto to block our demand for binding sanetionsconstitutesa genume declaratron of Fostility
towardsthe whole of Africa in these purtlcularly
diffcu]tcircumstances.The use of a catcgork veto
tOblockour demand for sanctions is 8 denial to the
NamihianS
of their basic human rights, rights prodaimedwith great hue and cry bY a certain democracy:
“WesterndemocracY”.

disposal until the oppressed Namibian people recovers
all its rights guaranteed by the Charter,
42. The Security Council must cease to be a tool in
the hands of Africa’s oppressors and those who deny to
other individuals the basic freedoms enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, The Council
must not protect the Pretoria racists and back illegality
in Namibia. The Council must be a tool of struggle for
human freedom-for the freedom of all individuals,
regardless of the colour of their skin, The Council must
now shoulder all its responsibilities by courageously
decreeing sanctions against racist South Africa. To
act this way meansremoving oneself from the senseless
acts of Pretoria: it meansobliging Pretoria to accept the
international verdict: it means working for international peace and security, the very rwisort d’8tre of the
Council. To act in that fashion means working in
favour of respect for human rights, saying no to war,
massacreand genocide in Africa.

36, It is time for action, concrete action, effective
action,
Wewant no more useless chatter, pious wishes
orcrocodi]etears, We want n0 Fore manoeuvring or
soporifictalk. We want-now, rmmed~ately--n free,
independent
Namibia, sovereign in the integrity of
itsterritory.
37, la supportingSWAP0 we wkmt n free,, t,roly indepeadeatNamibia-a Namibia for Namtbrnns, and
forNamibiansalone. In rejecting the puppets Of the
Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) and the tribal
psnieswe are saying no to neo-colonialism and to
theothershamarrangements that make it possible to
perpetuate
the exploitation and plundering of Namibia.
Whencertain members of the Council defend DTA
andevengo so far as to support its illegal appearance
before
theCouncil-indeed, against the letter and spirit
ofresolution439(1978)--we can clearly see their neo*
colonial
ulterior motives, their short-sighted calculationsandtheir machiavellian strategy. But they can
foolonlythosewho let themselves be fooled. We are
nottakenin by it.

43. Ready for revolution: the struggle continues!
44. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (i/rt~,,‘l,rctcrtic,II,~onl Russirut): The resumption in the Security Council of discussion of the question of Namibia, this most urgent issue of the final
elimination of the shameful systemof colonialism from
the African continent, is long overdue,
45, The extreme importance attachedto this question
by African and by non-aligned countries as a whole is
reflected by the participation in the work ofthe Security
Council of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of many
African, Asian and Latin American countries,

38, Why does not racist South Africa accept free
elections
guaranteedby the United Nations pursuant
loCouncilresolution 385 (1976) and 435 (1978)? Why
doSouthAfrica’s sponsors use all manner of stratagems
to challengeresolution 435 (1978), which they
themselves
imposed on the Council‘? Why all these
manoeuvres?

46, The Soviet delegation has listened most attentively and sympathetically to the statement of the
representative of SWAP0 [227&h nweti~~g] and to
those of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs who have
come here, all of whom with a great deal of emotional
force have called for the freeing of Namibia from racist
occupation. The time has come to take a decision that
would promote the ultimate removal of this item, the
question of Namibia, from the agendas of both the
General Assembly and the Security Council. But of
course, this is possible only if the people of Namibia
achieves genuine independence. In the view of the
Soviet delegation, that is precisely the standpoint from
which we should view this series of meetings of the
Council. We must finally take effective measures
against the racist rbgime of Pretoria so as to compel it
to comply with the relevant decisions of the General
Assembly and the Council.

39, Thereis but one answer to all those questions.
‘fkefailure of the Pretoria racists and their Western
filliesisinevitable. The liberation of Namibia is inevitables
Thedismantlingof the bastion of imperialism and
Oftherampartsof the South African racist regime is
cenain,
No veto, no conventional or nuclear military
forceta0 monied power, no imperialism can halt the
normal
courseof history.
40+The Namibian people is perfectly aware of its
interests
andknows that SWAP0 is its sole authentic
‘epresentative.
The elements of DTA and those of the
tribalPartiesare like the Muzorewas and Sitholes of
Rhodesial
who are today forgotten because they have
beenthrowninto the wastebin of history, The tribal
PaRies
andDTA are tools of the neo-colonialist policy
OfPretoriaand its protectors. No African State recOgnizes
Orsupportsthem. To do so would be to betray
thesacredinterestsof the Namibians.

47. In so far as concerns the racist regime of South
Africa and its stubborn ambition to prevent the genuine
independence of Namibia, everything in this is crystalclear to us. Far too much time has gone by for us to be
able to harbour any illusions whatsoever in this regard.
The system of rrpctrtheid denies the natural,
inalienable human right to freedom and equality

41* Asfor the People’s Republic of Benin it will
contin”eto support SWAP0 by all the means at its

48.

5

the unattainable: to bar the way to Progressive
changes in the world and to reassume the role of
masters of the destinies of nations.”

without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.
By elevating apnrrheid to the status of its State policy,
the Pretoria racists have extended it also to the Territory of Namibia, which they illegally occupy.

54. The situation with regard to the Namibian question has now become really critical. For many years
the African countries and the United Nations have
been ready to show patience and sensible restraint in
so far as concerns the Namibian problem and to agree
which certain
to negotiations-something
upon
Western Powers have laid considerable stress. Initially, representatives of those countries opposed the
adoption of effective measures with regard to South
West Africa, asserting that they could persuade South
Africa to agree to a settlement in Namibia,

49. Furthermore, the rulers in Pretoria are making
wide use of the territory of Namibia as a military springboard for carrying out systematic acts of aggression and
provocation against neighbouring independent States.
They are trying in this way to intimidate the peoples Of
those countries and to compel them to refrain from
helping the national liberation movements in southern
Africa.
50. The reasons for such provocative conduct on the
part of the rulers of South Africa and for their refusal
to comply with the numerous decisions of the Security
Council and other organs of the United Nations are
not difficult to discern. Those reasons are that the
racists feel powerful support behind them; the preservation of that hot-bed of colonialism and racism in
southern Africa serves the political, strategic and
economic interests of a number of members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization-primarily
the
United States.All this, as it were, is a matter of elementary political ABCs, and if we mention it again today
it is simply because the time has come once and for
all to draw the necessary conclusions from all this.

55. In this regard, I should like to remind the Council of the following. Nine years ago-as long ago as
that-in February 1972, in the course of a series of
Security Council meetings held in Africa 11627th to
1639th meetings], those countries gave us the assurance that all they would need would be six months to
resolve the Namibian problem by means of negotia.
tions and they stated that, should South Africa no1
agree to that, then the necessary serious conclusiona
would be drawn, The Soviet delegation in the Security
Council even at that time-nine years ago-had serious
doubts about the sincerity of those assertions and
expressed them. Indeed, months went by, years wenl
by but no important changes in the conduct of those
Powers with regard to the Namibian question ant
South Africa were actually forthcoming.

51. The position of the United Nations on the question of Namibia has always been and remains clear
and unambiguous; it has been enshrined in numerous
authoritative decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly: Namibia is a Territory illegally
occupied by South Africa; the presence of South
African troops and the South African administration in
Namibia is illegal; it is contradictory to the elementary
norms of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. The inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to achieve freedom, independence and selfdetermination, by all means available to it, including
armed struggle, has been repeatedly recognized.

56. At the next stage-when the earlier promises o
those countries had already been forgotten, it woulc
appear-they proposed another version of a Namibia1
settlement, which was adopted with certain qualifica
tions in Security Council resolution 435 (1978) almos
three years ago. At the same time the Council in its nex
relevant resolution-resolution
439 (1978)-warnet
South Africa that, if it were to refuse to comply with the
Security Council resolution on Namibia the Counci
would meet to adopt appropriate measures unde
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Thr
Western Powers at that time did not object to outlawiq
all actions of South Africa with regard to the estab
lishing of puppet authorities on Namibian territory,

52. At its resumed thirty-fifth session, the General
Assembly reaffirmed that the national liberation movement of Namibia, SWAPO, is the sole lawful representative of the Namibian people [resofutim 35/227 A 1.
These decisions should be recalled by those who are
attempting to fasten the label of “international terrorism” on the national liberation movement and in
particular, in this case, SWAPO.

57. It would appear that no further loop-holes wer
left for South Africa. But after the failure of the Genev
negotiations, which were the culmination of all th
manoeuvring and the procrastination on the part c
South Africa, the representatives of the Wester
countries once again showed how extremely resource
ful they were-a resourcefulness worthy of a bette
cause. They openly adopted a course of virtual1
backing down from resolution 435 (1978). Now it i
proposed to the United Nations that the Organizatio
should virtually recognize the existing rdgime i
South Africa and also legitimize the puppet partit
in Namibia.

53. On that score, the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Comrade Brezhnev, in his report to the
Twenty-Sixth Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union made the following comment:
“In demonstrating their utter disdain for the
rights and aspirations of peoples, they are attempting
to represent the liberation struggle of the popular
masses as a manifestation of ‘terrorism’. In actual
fact, they have set themselves the task of attaining
6

58, So two months ago-in February this yearmembersof the Council discussed the question of a
statementon the part of their President in connection
with the death sentences imposed upon three fighters
againstthe qmrthcitl
system. The new element here
wasthat, the same Western
Powers were now Overtly
attempting to extract a price for such a statement
-that is, making other members of the Council reco&e the Fascistjuridical system of q?wthid.

power to the people of Namibia as embodied in
SWAPO, which is recognized by the OAU and the
United Nations as the sole lawful and authentic representative of the people of Namibia.
64. The Soviet delegation entirely shares the view
of previous African and other non-aligned speakers
that it is high time to put an end to all procrastination
and delay in the matter of a Namibian settlement. We
believe that the Council must support proposals contained in the documents of the OAU and the nonaligned movement and adopt comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations.

59, A month ago in the United States at the very
highest
level a statement was made to the effect that
SouthAfrica was for it “a friendly country”. But there
was not a word of condemnation said by the United
Statesabout new acts of aggression by South Africa,
including those from the Territory of Namibia against
independent African StateS.

65. The Soviet delegation is ready to vote in favour
of the adoption of such measures. We are also convinced that all friends of Africa will vote in this way,
because there is no alternative to vigorous pressure
on these out-and-out racists and a resolute boycott
of them.

Finally, just two days ago [2267/h nweting] an
overt attempt was made to provide the puppets of
SouthAfrica with an opportunity to speak here in the
SecurityCouncil. Surely that is just one more link in
this revealing chain. Surely those actions on the part of
the Western countries demonstrate that time and
again-how many times now?-they have been prepared to favour South Africa at the expense of the
Natnibian people and the interests of Africa. The fact
that those attempts have not succeeded here in the
Council in no way means that we should forget the
direction in which those delegations want to push the
SecurityCouncil.

60,

66. But there is one question to which the world community should now find an answer, It is the following:
Are the Western Powers, together with the other
members of the Council, ready to agree to the adoption
of genuine and effective sanctionsagainst South Africa
or are they going to continue to try to procrastinate,
invent subterfuges and even directly undermine this
process?
67. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Guinea. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

61. The position of the Soviet Union on the Namibian
question is a position of principle and is consistent.
The Soviet Union does not seek for itself any particular rights or privileges in Africa or in any other continent.It has unfailingly been of the view that in Africa
peaceand tranquillity should reign, that every African
countryshould enjoy the fruits of freedom and become
masterof its own resources and that the roots of racism
andapartheid should be eradicated from every corner
of African soil.

68. Mr. COUMBASSA (Guinea) (interpretation
French): Mr, President, before discussing the
item before us, we should like to say how grateful the
delegation of the Party-State of Guinea is to you and to
the members of the Security Council for giving us this
opportunity to participate in this debate. May we also
congratulate you most warmly on the fact that ,you
are presiding over the Council at the very time when
it is considering the highly important question of the
situation in Namibia. Your personal qualities as a
seasoned diplomat and your thorough experience in
international issues give us reason to hope that the
present deliberations will be successful.

from

62. In this regard, Comrade Brezhnev stated:
“The Soviet Union believes that in the field of
Promoting the national liberation of peoples the
United Nations at the present time has no more
urgent task than ensuring genuine independence
for the Namibian people, the sole lawful representative of which is SWAPO, and eliminating the crparthfid rbgime in South Africa”.

69. Pleaseallow us also very warmly to congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Florin, representative
of the German Democratic Republic, for the competence and serenity with which he presided over the
work of the Council last month.

6% The Soviet Union has always been in favour of
ensuring for the people of Namibia their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence on the
basisof the preservation of the unity and territorial
integritYof that country, including Walvis Bay. We are
in favour of the immediate total withdrawal of the
trooPsand administration of South Africa from Namibia, including Walvis Bay, without any conditions
whatsoever. We are in favour of the transfer of all

70. The latest events in connection with the question
of Namibia confer clear urgency on this debate. They
indicate to the international community that the time
has come for it to re-examine its means of action
in
order to direct them towards more concrete and
effective measures to hasten the accession of the
Namibian people to independence and national sovereignty.
7

77. Fourthly, the Western countries, especially the
countries of the contact group, have always uPhel(
the need to establish and maintain dialogue with the
Pretoria regime for the peaceful settlement of the
Namibian problem. In that connection, did not the
settlement plan contained in resolution 435 (1978) offe;
broad possibilities for a peaceful solution?

71. For 35 years the problem of Namibia has been
on the agenda of the United Nations, and it is still
there in spite of the adoption 20 years ago of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples [Gc~ncrc~l Assembly twolufion
I.514 (XV)]. In the course of that long period, the
Security Council, as well as the General Assembly and
the International Court of Justice, has spoken out on
many occasions on this question. Their statements
acquired particular importance with the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), by which the
Assembly put an end to the Mandate of South Africa
over Namibia and transferred the administration of the
Territory to the United Nations. Pretoria’s rejection
of that decision and its defiance of all subsequent resolutions adopted by the Organization have placed South
Africa in a position of constant rebellion and defiance
vi,&-v/s the international community.

79. What range of measures now remains to be pro.
posed to persuade an increasingly intransigent and
unreasonable South Africa, which has gone so far as tc
reject the settlement plans submitted by its allies?

The persistance of this anachronistic situation
and the close links between the Namibian problem
and the aporrheici policy of the South African regime
have meant that throughout these years a grave situation has been created in that region which endangers
the international peace and security which this lofty
Council is entrusted with safeguarding.

80, We can no longer bide our time and issue verbal
condemnations. We must act and with even greatei
resolve, since the international community has no
choice but to decree the imposition of mandatory corn.
prehensive sanctions pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter against the racist regime of South Africa. Those
sanctions must include the strengthening of the arms
embargo, an oil embargo and an economic embargo.

73. We should like here briefly to recall a few of the
principles on the basis of which attempts have been
made-in vain-to find a peaceful solution to this
important question.

81. Members of the Council will recall that already
in 1977resolution 418 (1977) had decreed a mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa. But what have we
observed since the adoption of that decision? Not only
has South Africa been able to meet its military needs
by importing equipment, but we have even witnessed
a dizzying development of the military industry in that
country, to the point that it has become today an
exporter of weapons. It is a secret to no one that the
increase of the military resources of the South African
regime have been favoured and supported by the
wide-scale assistance of certain Western Powers.
Hence, the arms embargo imposed on South Africa
has been deliberately violated.

72.

74. First, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), the inalienable right of the Namibian people to
self-determination, freedom and national independence has been recognized and enshrined. None the
less, South Africa has opposed the exercise of that
inalienable right in Namibia.
75. Secondly, since the adoption of resolution 2145
(XXI), which we have already mentioned, Namibia
and its inhabitants have been the direct responsibility
of the United Nations. Since then the administration of
the Territory has been conferred, until it attains independence, upon the United Nations Council for Namibia, which is presided over with competence and
devotion by the Ambassador of Zambia, our brother
Paul Lusaka. South Africa has rejected that decision
and has continued with impunity to occupy the Territory of Namibia.
76. Thirdly, Security Council resolution 385 (1976)
provides in its paragraph 7 that in order that the people
of Namibia may be enabled freely to determine their
own future “it is imperative that free elections under
the supervision and control of the United Nations be
held for the whole of Namibia as one political entity.”
It is those same racist authorities in Pretoria which
have prevented the normal development of that constitutional process.

78. The answer to that question is widely known
The continued defiance of Pretoria, characterizec
by bad faith, arrogance and obduracy, have system,
atically blocked all negotiations on the question 01
Namibia up to the failure of the recent Geneva meeting.

82. This is compounded by the South African racist
regime’s zealous endeavours to acquire the nuclear
weapon. An exchange of scientific experts and other
forms of assistance from the Western countries has
made it possible for the opnrtheid regime to obtain the
technology to develop nuclear devices, thus encouraging the Pretoria regime in its repeated acts of aggression against neighbouring African countries, inter
din, Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia, and
has thus seriously threatened the peace and security of
Africa and the rest of the world,
83. The same failures, the same weaknesses registered in the application of the arms embargo against
South Africa have been observed in connection with
the oil embargo decreed by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries against Pretoria’s racist
regime, because that country has also managed to
meet its oil needs, thanks to the co-operation of certain
Western oil-producing countries,

London on 22 and 23 April 1981, to review the situation concerning Namibia. They received a complete
report from Mr. Chester Cracker, United States
Assistant Secretary-Designate for African Affairs,
on his visit to 12African States,including the African
front-line capitals, South Africa, Nigeria, Zaire,
Kenya, Swaziland and the Congo.

84, South Africa is the only country in the world
where racism is institutionalized, the only country
where skin colour determines what place a category
of nationalsoccupies within the social hierarchy, That
rkgime is based on repression and on violence and is
foundedon the systematic denial of human rights and of
therights of peoples. The abject regime of South Africa
has been repeatedly condemned by the General Assembly, the Security Council and the international
communityas a crime against all mankind.

“The Five agreed that it was of the utmost importance to bring Namibia to independence at the
earliest possible date and reiterated their commitment to an internationally acceptable settlement.
In that context, they also agreed that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) continues to provide a solid
basis for a transition to independence in Namibia.
They considered possibilities for strengthening the
existing plan and agreed that expeditious progress
towards a settlement would be enhanced by measures aimed at giving greater confidence to all of the
parties on the future of an independent Namibia.

85, The continued illegal occupation of Namibia by
SouthAfrica is a challenge which must be met by the
international community. The Security Council must
assumeits responsibilities during the present series of
meetings.That is why we venture to hope that all the
countries which sincerely support the liberation
struggleof African peoples will unfailingly demonstrate
thisby supporting the adoption and strict implementation of comprehensive mandatory sanctions. We
urgentlyappealto the Western countries which operate
directly or indirectly through transnational corporations in South Africa and Namibia to join the international community in adopting and firmly and concretelysupporting these sanctions.

“The representatives agreed that it was necessary to develop more specific proposals for discussion with the concerned parties, It was decided that
intensive consultations among the contact group
representatives would continue, and it is intended
that the five Foreign Ministers will consider the issue
further when they meet at Rome.” [S/14457,annex,]

86. In any event, our delegation remains convinced
that the valorous people of Namibia, under the courageousleadership of SWAPO, its sole and authentic
representative, which enjoys the unconditional support of all peoples which cherish freedom, peace and
justice, will triumph in its just national liberation
struggle.

The meeting at Rome, I might add, is due to take place
on 4 and 5 May-in 10days’ time.
90. We understand why the patience of so many who
have addressed the Council is sorely tried. Most of
those who have spoken in this debate are now advocating, without further delay, that we proceed to
mandatory measures against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

87. Mr. WHITE (United Kingdom): My delegation
haslistened with great care to the statements which
haveso far been made by such a distinguished companyof Ministers for Foreign Affairs and others in this
debate.We have heard-indeed we could not possibly
have failed to hear-the disappointment, the anger,
aboveall the frustration which echoes and re-echoes
in nearly all those statements.

91. We appeal to all those concerned to resist the
temptation now to abandon the possibility of negotiation. We do this becausewe are totally convinced that
going down the road of sanctionswill not bring closer
the independence of Namibia on an internationally
acceptable basis.

88. We understand these sentiments. We went to the
pre-implementationmeeting at Geneva in good faith.
Wedid not succeed.

92. Comparisons have been drawn between the
search for independence by Namibia and the achievement of independence by Zimbabwe. The differences
between the two are perhaps as significant as the
similarities. But there is, it seems to us, one fundamental similarity. Throughout the months and indeed
the years of negotiation, often infuriating and frustrating, which preceded the successful Lancaster
House Conference on Zimbabwe, it was always clear
that it was in the long-term interest of all the parties
that Zimbabwe should proceed to independence by
negotiated settlement rather than by ultimate resolution through armed struggle.

89. Sincethen, in our attempts to pursue negotiations
towardsan internationally acceptable settlement for
Namibia,we have been given pause, principally by the
Processesinvolved in installing a new Administration in Washington, But the contact group is still in
business.We have just held a meeting over the past
two days in London with our partners in the contact
ProuP,and I shall, with the Council’s permission, on
behalfof the five Western Powers, read out the followingcommunique which was issued in London today
at the conclusion of that meeting:
“Senior officials of the five Western Governments
(Canada,France, the Federal Republic of Germany
the United Kingdom and the United States) met in

93. It is surely likewise in the interests of all the
parties that have been involved in the protracted nego9

1

tiations over Namibia
that the Territory
proceed to independence
by a negotiated
internationally
acceptable.

too should
settlement,

South Africa has continued to reject and even challenges the authority of the United Nations over the
Territory.

94. I therefore repeat, that, despite the frustration,
let us resist the temptation
to pull up the drawbridge
and settle down for the long siege; let us instead affirm
our determination
to make negotiation succeed.

101, From all that it is quite clear that South Africa’s
presence in Namibia is illegal and that everybody
except South Africa accepts the responsibility
of the
United Nations for the Territory.

95, The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Kenya. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

102. Despite South Africa’s defiance of the United
Nations and all the frustrations in which it has, as a
result, culminated over the last 33 years, hope was
entertained that a political solution that could lead
Namibia to self-determination
and independence
was
feasible. We recall that in April 1978 the five Western
countries then serving on the Security Council worked
out what we were told was a settlement proposal which
could lead Namibia to independence.
The proposal
[S/12636] was a product of lengthy discussions
that
produced resolution 435 (1978) of the Council. Although we had reservations and misgivings about the
settlement proposals and the consequent resolution
435 (1978), we accepted in good faith the proposals OF
the five Western countries. It was our understanding
at that time that the Group of Five had applied the
necessary pressure on South Africa to accept the
United Nations plan.

96. Mr. KASINA (Kenya): First, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for inviting Kenya to participate in this important debate. I should also like to express to you my
delegation’s pleasure and satisfaction at seeing you
presiding
over the Council’s
deliberations.
Your
personal experience and skill in international
matters
will, no doubt, be of great value in the current debate.
Kenya, although not a member of the Council, will
endeavour to co-operate in the debate to see that the
Council comes up with a concrete and immediate solution to the long and vexing problem of Namibia.
97. Once again the Council is considering the question of Namibia. It is indeed regrettable that the racist
rtgime has constantly chosen not to comply with the
resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security
Council on the question of Namibia.

103. The result of the Geneva meeting early this year
confirmed our fears and doubts and the misgivings we
had had all along. South Africa has never been sincere
in negotiations for a peaceful political
solution re.
garding the independence of Namibia.
Clearly South
Africa’s duplicity and arrogance resulted in the failure
of the Geneva meeting. During those talks SWAP0
declared its willingness to sign a cease-fire agreement
and to reach an agreement on the date for the implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. South Africa, on the other hand,
characteristically
exhibited its usual intransigence
by
rejecting the United Nations plan for the independence
of Namibia. It was clear from the beginning that South
Africa went to Geneva just to wreck the United Nations plan.

98. As is well known to ail of us, the United Nations
has been dealing with the question of Namibia from its
inauguration. The problem of Namibia is as old as the
United Nations itself, and the facts of the problem have
been well recorded. It is therefore not necessary for
my delegation to recall in detail all the relevant facts,
event if we had the time to do so in the course of this
debate. Tn 1946, by a resolution of the General Assembly [restllntion 65 (I)], South Africa was requested
to bring Namibia within the United Nations Trusteeship System. South Africa refused to comply with
that request; instead it has continued colonizing the
Territory and extending its npcrrtheid policies to it.

104. Since the General Assembly terminated
the
Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and placed the
Territory under its responsibility,
numerous resolu+
tions have been adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Council urging South Africa to terminatb
its illegal occupation of Namibia. All those resolution5
have simply been ignored by the Pretoria rkgime.
,

99. In the years that have passed South Africa has
consistently
refused to recognize
United
Nations
authority over Namibia.
It has extended the criminal
policies of apa/*t/?eicl and is busy planning the policies
of bantustans and the so-called homeland in Namibia.
These policies are clearly aimed at violating the unity
and territorial integrity of Namibia.

105. The continued
illegal occupation
by SouttJ
Africa no doubt frustrates the efforts of the NamibiaQ
people to exercise its right to self-determination.
ThQ
racist rCgime has organized an elaborate machinery of
repression and suppression,
thus advancing
tha
dreadful npnrthrid policies into the Territory.
Th@
people of Namibia
cannot, therefore, become fret
until the complete and unconditional
withdrawal u F
South Africa from the country. The people of Namibia’

100. In 1966, as I have just said, the General Assembly terminated the Mandate of South Africa over
Namibia [,*csol~rion 2/45(X.X1)] and placed the country
under the direct responsibility
of the United Nations.
The responsibility
of administering
Namibia
until it
became independent
was entrusted to the United
Nations Council for Namibia [rcsofuh.m 2248 (S-V)].
Despite those pronouncements
by the United Nations,
10

like other peoples that have emerged from colonial rule
to freedom, have every right to the same freedom.

of the Security Council for allowing me to participate
in this debate. Permit me also to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the current month and to wish you success in the discharge of your difficult and important task.

106. The occupation of Namibia by South Africa is
even more disturbing when the rtgime establishes
military and air bases in the Territory, We are all aware
of the military attacks which have been launched from
Namibia
against the neighbouring
countries, The
United Nations is fully aware of the acts of aggression
that have been committed
by the Pretoria rbgime
against Angola, Botswana and Zambia.

113. I also wish to pay a tribute to Ambassador
Florin of the German Democratic Republic for having
skilfully conducted the Council’s business last month.
114. These meetings are indeed of historical significance: for the circumstances in which they are being
held, for the expectations they have created throughout the world and for the widespread recognition that
they usher in a new phase in the struggle for the carrying out of the independence process for Namibia.
That being so, Brazil could not fail to lend its modest,
though unambiguous, contribution to this debate.

107. The United Nations has reached the stage for
decisive action to eliminate the illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa. The programmes laid down
by resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978) still remain to
be executed. Why is it that for the last 15 years the
United Nations has not seen fit to take punitive measures against a State that has defied its authority for
35 years? For how long are we going to allow this one
racist nation to challenge our collective authority?
Where do we go after 15 years of peaceful negotiations and fruitless efforts?

115. The history of Brazilian foreign policy unequivocally shows that Brazil has always been an unconditional supporter of the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, and that the often painful and
frustrating process of bringing closer together diverging
views, even on the most difficult and critical issues,
is always a better option than resorting to extreme
measures which do not allow for an adequate facesaving way out of the resulting impasse.

108. The United Nations has assumed a moral and
political duty towards the people of Namibia. We have
a duty to see that the people of Namibia exercises its
inalienable right to independence.
109. After 35 years of peaceful negotiations, only to
be confronted with duplicity and naked aggression by
South Africa so that it may continue to hold the people
of Namibia in perpetual slavery, my delegation calls
upon the Security Council to impose comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against South Africa as provided
for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
This should also include an oil embargo, which if fully
implemented will bring about South Africa’s immediate
compliance with the resolutions and decisions of this
body.

116. On the other hand, Brazil also believes with the
same degree of conviction that if international peace
and security are to be maintained, the provisions of
the Charter must not only be abided by but also applied
whenever appropriate. Of course, we recognize that
the appropriateness of applying a specific provision
of the Charter may well be a matter of judgement.
117. In the case of Namibia, however, as the result
of the Council’s present debate will clearly evince,
the international community, with perhaps one or two
exceptions, concurs in its judgement on the need for
further action to expedite Namibia’s
freedom and
independence.

110. On many occasions we have said that without
the support and encouragement
of various kinds
coming from some Members of the Organization that
have a strong exploitative
interest in Namibia and
South Africa, the Pretoria regime would have long ago
complied with the decisions of the Organization, quit
Namibia and dismantled ~ptrrthcid structures in South
Africa. We want again to repeat that it is those States
having strong military and economic ties with the
rkgime that encourage it to behave in the way that
it does. Indeed, in the same manner, the way in which
~’ some members of the Security Council vote on the
several draft resolutions to be proposed here may
cause South Africa to continue to feel encouraged in its
defiance of the resolutions of the Council.

118. I shall refrain from delving into the past history
of South Africa’s disrespect for United Nations resolutions on Namibia. I did so at length at the resumed
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly earlier
this year2 and many speakers who have preceded me
in this debate have set the record straight on where we
stand at the present moment. I shall confine iny brief
remarks to just a few aspects of the situation.
119. The Brazilian Government entertained the hope
that the negotiations for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 435 (1978) would eventually yield
positive results and lead to the long-awaited independence of Namibia. We did not delude ourselves; we
knew that many difficult obstacles would need to be
overcome and that predictable setbacks would require
redoubled efforts to keep the negotiating process alive,

111. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the reprej sentative of Brazil. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
I
t 112. Mr, CORRQA da COSTA (Brazil): I should like
to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members
11

we sincerely hoped that, with South Africa’s
having accepted in principle the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia, and bearing in mind
the efforts at persuasion by the contact group of Western States, South Africa’s stubbornness and anachronistic policies might well follow the stream of modern
history.

But

120. Nevertheless, as events turned out, we proved to
have been unrealistic arid perhaps naive. As soon as
an agreement seemed to be at hand, South Africa
stalled the negotiations by claiming that the illegal
authorities installed in Windhoek should be given a say
in the way the independence process was to be conducted. At the Geneva pre-implementation
meeting,
after SWAPO, the sole, legitimate representative of the
Namibian
people, had expressed its willingness
immediately
to conclude a cease-fire agreement,
South Africa flatly shattered whatever illusions might
have existed that it was committed to an internationally
acceptable settlement of the Namibian question.

125. Presumably, that goal is to produce an independent, stable, self-governing Namibia. As I understand
it, there is no disagreement on that goal.
126. A number of charges have been made in the past
few days, and I have followed those charges with
interest. There have been charges that the Western
countries-the
contact group-have
failed to achieve
the goal of an independent, stable, self-governing Na:
mibia. There have been charges that the Western
countries-the
contact group-have
failed to bring
South Africa to its knees. There have been charges
that the Western group-the
contact group-is
responsible somehow for the continuation of racism and
colonialism in Namibia, in South Africa; indeed, in
Africa. It has been suggested that because the contact
group of Western States-like
the African countries,
like the Eastern bloc of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance-has substantial economic relations
with South Africa, it is somehow responsible for the
continuation of repression in South Africa.

121. The second aspect of the situation on which
I should like to comment has to do with the distorted
way in which Pretoria has been attempting to present
the situation in Namibia to world public opinion. By
accusing the United Nations of partiality in favour of
SWAP0 and of neglecting the views of an illegal
government, South Africa is pretending that the Organization all of a sudden picked SWAP0 as the Namibian
people’s authentic representative,
as though the
question of Namibia had no antecedents and as though
more than 30 years of United Nations resolutions could
be wiped out. South Africa and its supporters should
know better and should acknowledge that every new
step taken by the Organization could have been avoided
if only South Africa had vouchsafed even a tenuous
signal of receptiveness. For us now to take a step
backward and to disavow our previous statements
in favour of SWAP0 would be tantamount to relieving
South Africa of the responsibility it unquestionably
bears for the present state of affairs.

127. I have asked myself repeatedly in the course
of these negotiations and discussions how the charges
which are being made here relate to the accomplishment of the goal on which we are presumably all
agreed: the goal of an independent, stable, democratic
Namibia. Repeatedly it has been suggested in the
course of the past few days that because we have not
already succeeded, we should not try again, that we
should try some other course than the continuing
search for an internationally acceptable peace, arrived
at through peaceable negotiations an internationally
acceptable, independent Namibia arrived at through
international negotiations; that we should adopt some
other course-for
example, make a declaration,
commit ourselves to comprehensive
compulsory
sanctions.
128. But I think that if we are realistic-and
if we are
not realistic we waste our time and that of everyone
else present-then
we will understand that resolutions do not solve problems, sanctions do not solve
problems, declarations do not make peace, declarations do not secure independence. Is it not past time
that we considered here, realistically, the practical,
actual alternatives to a continuing search for an internationally acceptable solution in Namibia?

122. A long and peaceful process of exhortation,
persuasion and negotiation has thus been frustrated.
South Africa gives us no hope of effectiveness if we
try, against all evidence and particularly against the
evidence of the Geneva meeting to limit ourselves to
this process. There seems to be no other road open to
the Organization but the Security Council’s consideration of measures against South Africa under Chapter
VII of the Charter. However much we might have
favoured other solutions, they have been tried, again
and again, to no avail.
123.

129. My Government has no other objective than to
achieve authentic independence and self-government
for Namibia: indeed, I believe that the whole of the
contact group of Western States has no other objective
than this. We have no territorial objectives in Africa.
We have no aspiration to station thousands of our
troops in African countries. We have no desire to send
armed surrogates to subject the independence of the
new States of Africa. We have no desire to divide this
body, or to divert its attention from the problem of selfgovernment for Namibia to the creation of divisive
diversions here.

The time has come for further action.

124. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I have thought repeatedly, as I have followed these
discussions, about the goal of these meetings. It seems
to me that it is perhaps time that we focused again on
the goal of this special series of meetings of the Security Council.
12

Solving problems is much more difficult than
resolutions. But the problem of an independent, stable, self-governing, democratic Namibia
will be solved because it must be solved. And it will
be solved, eventually, only by the force of arms or by
the exercise of reason.
130.

adopting

131. No one has spoken much here about the true
alternatives to the continued search for a negotiated,
internationally acceptable solution to the Namibia
problem, but I think it is past time that we faced those
alternatives squarely. I should like, on behalf of my
Government, to pledge ourselves, through continued
effort at the maximum of our ability and our ingenuity,
independently and with our colleagues in the contact
group and with our associates here in the United

13

Nations, to the unflagging search for an internationally
acceptable, truly, authentically independent, stable,
democratic Namibia.
T/w nwefing

I’OSCJat 5.45 p.m.
