Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling especially the decision in principle to
establish a United Nations capital development fund,
contained in resolution 1521 (XV),
Having considered the second report of the Committee on a United Nations Capital Development
Fund, 8
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 921 (XXXIV) of 3 August 1962,
1. Commends the Committee on a United Kations
Capital Development Fund for formulating the draft
legislation (statute) of the Fund in accordance with
resolutions 1521 (XV) and 1706 (XVI);
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
draft legislation (statute) to the Governments of States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies so as to receive their comments
and observations by April 1963;
3. Endorses the appeal addressed by the Economic
and Social Council, in its resolution 921 (XXXIV),
to the economically advanced countries to reconsider,
in consultation with the Secretary-General, the possibilities of undertaking measures designed to ensure
the establishment, at the earliest possible date, of a
United Nations capital development fund and its employment in the field of capital development;
4. Decides to extend the mandate of the Committee
on a United Nations Capital Development Fund established under resolution 1521 (XV):
5. Instructs the Committee:
(a) To study the replies of the Governments mentioned in paragraph 2 above;
( b) To continue to study the need for international
financing with a view to ensuring the attainment of
the objectives of the United Nations Development
Decade, taking into account the study prepared by the
United Nations Secretariat ;9
( c) To propose practical measures designed to ensure the beginning of the operation of the United
Nations capital development fund, with special emphasis on, inter alia, the possibi'lity envisaged in section
III of resolution 1219 (XII) and in resolution 1240 C
(XIII):
( d) To co-operate with the Secretary-General in
preparing the report provided for in Economic and
Social Council resolution 921 ( XXXIV) ;
6. Requests the Committee to report to the Economic and Social Council at the thirty-sixth session
and requests the Committee to transmit the report,
together with its comments, to the General Assembly
at the eighteenth session, for action.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1827 (XVII). United Nations training and research
institute
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the close interrelationship between economic and social development and the achievement
of peace and security and the dependence of both of
these on international co-operation in various areas,
Noting with, appreciation the offer of the Netherlands
Government to provide $1 million for a research in8 Ibid.,
Thirty-fourth Session, rlnnexes, agenda item
document E/3654.
ll United :'Jations publication, Saks No.: (,2.II.D.3.

6,

19

stitute for social development to be established under
the aegis of the United Nations for the purpose of
conducting a study of the fundamental relationship
between social development and economic progress in
the developing countries,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the measures proposed for the United
Nations Development Decade, 10 and in particular
chapter III relating to the mobilization of human
resources,
B elicving that the provision and training of personnel of the highest calibre, particularly from the
developing Member States, for national service atid
service with the United Nations and specialized
agencies are important in order to fulfil the objectives
of the Decade,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the measures proposed for
the "Cnited Nations Development Decade, and to the
specialized agencies and other institutions which helped
in the preparation of that report;
2. Recognizes the basic needs of the developing
countries and their expressed wishes to increase substantially their highly trained personnel in various
fields;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the existence of other programmes and institutions
active in this and similar fields, and taking into account the views of the specialized agencies, to study
the desirability and feasibility of establishing a United
Nations institute or a training programme under the
auspices of the United Nations, to be financed by
voluntary contributions, both public and private, and
to transmit his study to the Economic and Social
Council at its thirty-sixth session and to the General
Assembly at its eighteenth session; the frame of reference of the institute or programme might include such
fields as:
(a) Training of personnel, particularlv from the
developing ~if ember States, for administrative and operational assignments with the United Nations and
the specialized agencies, both at Headquarters and in
field operations, and for national service;
( b) Advanced training for persons now serving m
such posts;
( c) Research and seminars on operations of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1828 (XVII). Lancl reform
The General ,lssembl:y,
Recalling its resolution 1426 (XIV) of 5 December
1959,
Rccogni:::ing that the implementation of land reform
is an integr;1l part of economic and social development,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council contained in resolution 887 (XXXIV) of
24 July 1962;
2. Dra'WS the attention of the Governments of States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies to the importance of implementing
land reform in conjunction with adequate me;i,sures of
community development;
10 United

"\"ations publication, Sales No.: 62.Tl.1\.'.'.
