S/PV.7949

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7949th meeting

Wednesday, 24 May 2017, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bermúdez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14797 (E)
*1714797*

S/PV.7949

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/443, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Austria, Bahrain,
Belarus, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Chile, China,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Lebanon, Libya, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation, Saudia
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Nothern Ireland, the United States
of America and Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2354 (2017).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking all Member States for their
2/5

24/05/2017

support for Egypt’s efforts to achieve consensus in
the Security Council regarding a comprehensive
international framework for countering terrorist
narratives. We have achieved consensus on resolution
2354 (2017) so as to establish such a framework.
Countering terrorist narratives and the ideologies
of terrorist groups is one of the most important aspects
of global counter-terrorism efforts. It is critical for the
international community to emphasize this aspect in
the international fight against terrorism, in particular
as terrorism draws upon its narratives and ideologies
to spread its poison, justify its crimes, mobilize young
people and push them to kill themselves, convincing
them that they are undertaking a heroic act of selfsacrifice.
Egypt was one of the very first countries to understand
the importance of combating terrorist narratives and
makes crucial contributions here and internationally, in
particular through its religious institutions, Al-Azhar
University first among them, acting in a noble manner
and enjoying international respect.
Egypt reiterates that the global drive against
terrorism requires us to take into account all terrorist
organizations without exception, as well as all factors
that could lead to terrorism, including financing,
weapons, politics, ideologies and media support. We
reiterate that what we are doing today is not simply
adopting another document to join the pile of others
that have already been adopted by the Security Council.
What is at stake is implementing what has been agreed.
There is political will to comply with all resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, first and foremost in
the framework of counter-terrorism.
The will of the international community cannot
be translated into Security Council resolutions when
a small group of States continues to violate said
resolutions clearly and unambiguously and to maintain
their support for terrorism. In that regard, I would refer
to President Al Sisi’s statement at the Arab-American
Islamic Summit in Riyadh to the effect that a terrorist
is not just a bearer of weapons, but someone who trains,
finances and provides ideological cover for terrorism.
In conclusion, the approach to countering terrorism
must be decisive and unified. We must convey a
message to the entire world and to terrorists, who must
be made to understand that they are mere dust in the
eyes of humankind and that they certainly represent
no religion and are doomed to disappear. Terrorists
17-14797

24/05/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7949

must understand that their narratives, propaganda and
ideologies run counter to logic, nature and all religions.
I reiterate that Egypt will always remain at the forefront
of counter-terrorism efforts.

2354 (2017), reiterating the international comprehensive
framework here, and was a sponsor of the resolution.
We should like to thank the delegation of Egypt for its
initiative last year to draw up the framework.

Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): We welcome the
adoption this morning of resolution 2354 (2017), on
countering terrorist narratives. We especially welcome
the fact that the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
will be involved in compiling good practices from
Member States and other actors for the benefit of
the wider membership. More research is also needed
to know what strategies actually yield results in
countering terrorist narratives. We encourage publicprivate partnership in the development of strategies and
approaches, as Governments are not always the best
originators of such messages.

We think that the document prepared by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (S/2017/375, annex)
also reflects in a balanced manner existing ideas of the
Council and Member States on the matter of countering
incitement to terrorism and fortifying such ideas with
relevant recommendations.

We take this opportunity to underline that any
measure aimed at combatting terrorism must be
undertaken in full respect for international law,
including international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law. This
is, of course, also applicable in terms of the prevention
of terrorism, including in relation to countering
terrorist narratives. Freedom of information, freedom
of expression — online and offline — and freedom of
association are essential to fostering critical thinking
and societies resilient to terrorist propaganda.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, terrorist attacks using suicide
bombers brainwashed by hatred continue across the
globe in many cities. Last month, the casualties of these
bloody crimes included citizens in Saint Petersburg,
and Copts and Orthodox Christians in Egypt were
attacked. Recently, concert-goers in Manchester were
subject to such attacks. Unfortunately, the list of
these attacks could go on for some time. In this and
many other cases, suicide bombers are guided by an
ideology of violence that is totally disconnected from
any religion or shared human values. This is a targeted
ideology skilfully propagated by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other
terrorist organizations. These thugs utilize the Internet
and social networks, which are the means of choice
used by young people.
We have consistently called for the improvement
of the toolkit to counter terrorist narratives. Our
delegation voted in favour of the adoption of resolution

One of the most important elements of the resolution
is the list of principles that should guide such efforts.
First and foremost, these are the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, including the
inadmissibility of interference into the internal affairs
of States. As we have seen in practice, disregard
for these principles, including to carry out various
geopolitical schemes, plays into the hands of terrorists.
The resolution enshrines the frontline role of States
in counterterrorism. Of course, when necessary and
in the light of national priorities, civil-society bodies
could participate in this work, as well as religious and
education institutions. As is rightly noted in the very
framework, a pivtoal deterrent to terrorism and terrorist
narratives is the implementation of comprehensive lawenforcement measures. Here, we believe that ample
capacity could be tapped to improve the international
legal basis for counterterrorism.
The adoption today of resolution 2354 (2017)
cannot be seen as the final outcome of the Council’s
work to counter terrorist narratives. On the contrary,
we are of the view that the creation of a framework
allows us to better understand the tasks before the
Council in this sphere. There is a need to improve
the legal and sanctions toolkit enshrined in Security
Council resolutions, including criminalizing the public
justification of terrorism and spread of materials
of a terrorist nature, establishing relevant sanction
criteria and strengthening international cooperation in
this field.
We think that this type of endeavour would not
run counter to prevalent human rights standards. On
the contrary, tackling these challenges would ensure
one of the most important of them — the right to life.
Without firm and effective measures to counter terrorist
narratives, we will not get rid of suicide bombers or
other phenomena. We stand ready to engage in that
regard.

17-147973/5

S/PV.7949

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2354 (2017). We express our
thanks and appreciation to Egypt for its important role
as facilitator, and to Council members for demonstrating
flexibility and a spirit of compromise in achieving
consensus on this important draft resolution.
There are a lot of measures taken in the areas of
law enforcement, intelligence sharing and cooperation
at different levels to counter the rise of terrorism and
violent extremism, but obviously these measures should
be adapted to the evolving and sophisticated strategies
that terrorist groups have employed increasingly to
pursue their extremist agendas. The propagation of
false and fallacious narratives, including through the
exploitation of the Internet and other information
communication technologies, has been one of the latest
strategies used by terrorists to recruit supporters and
foreign terrorist fighters, and to secure their finances.
It is in that context that the comprehensive international
framework to counter terrorist narratives was presented
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
accordance with presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6,
adopted by the Security Council on 11 May 2016.
The resolution we have adopted today welcomes
the comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives, with recommended guidelines and
good practices to effectively counter the ways in which
terrorist groups use their narratives to encourage,
motivate and recruit others to commit terrorist acts.
It takes into account the three core elements of the
framework: legal and law enforcement measures, publicprivate partnerships, and counter-narrative measures.
It also strengthens transitory provisions in different
resolutions in the field of counterterrorist narratives.
We believe that the resolution will help to facilitate
greater cooperation in countering terrorist narratives,
and that is why we decided to vote in favour of and
co-sponsor it. No doubt, the involvement of relevant
stakeholders, such as religious and community
leaders, youth, women, victims of terrorism, civilsociety organizations, private-sector entities and the
media, is critical to efforts in this regard. The role that
education can play in countering terrorist narratives is
also significant.
Finally, we believe that Member States and all
relevant United Nations entities should respect the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
4/5

24/05/2017

of other Member States in developing and executing
counter-narratives.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to express
our sincere gratitude to Ambassador Amr Abdellatif
Aboulatta for his excellent and skilful facilitation
of the negotiations on resolution 2354 (2017) on the
comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives.
Such narratives are used by terrorists, in particular
populations that are marginalized and disenfranchised
and in nations that dream of a good life, as an escape
from their pitiable plight and as a promise for better
prospects. We can address this threat efficiently by
combining our best practices and creating synergies
between all the main stakeholders and actors. Those
include States; international organizations; religious,
cultural, education and community leaders; young
people; families; and women.
My delegation just voted in favour and
co-sponsored the resolution. That well-balanced
document describes a comprehensive approach to
countering terrorist narratives that, based on false
interpretations, misrepresent the religion in order to
justify their violence.
Kazakhstan, having a Muslim-majority population,
has been convening the Congress of Leaders of World
and Traditional Religions since 2003. The population
of our country is witnessing how the Astana platform
has become significant to the leaders of world religions,
as well as political leaders, for open and constructive
dialogue on a wide range of issues. As a country with
multi-cultural and -ethnic traditions, we strongly
believe in the importance of the voice of each and every
member of its society, especially minority groups. An
important element of the Kazakhstan political system
is that it ensures the interests, rights and freedoms of
citizens and minority groups, irrespective of ethnic
affiliation, are respected.
Through our creative counter-narratives, we can
create a different vision of the world. At the same time,
we believe that effective methods to combat narratives
should include vulnerable groups and their participation
in the social and political life of their countries. Such
approaches will gradually lead to the deradicalization
of individuals, who then decide to come back into the
fold of society. Such a strategy would, in accordance
with the basic principles of peace and sustainable
development, help to ensure that no one is left behind.
17-14797

24/05/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): One year
ago, on 11 May 2016, the Security Council, under the
Egyptian presidency, held an open debate on the issue
of countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism
(see S/PV.7690). Last month the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, in line with the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/6) adopted following that debate,
approved a comprehensive international framework
aimed at combating the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism, which was welcomed by the delegation of
Senegal.
It is only natural, then, for me to thank the
delegation of Egypt for having submitted to the
Council a draft on the very same issue, which we have
just adopted unanimously as resolution 2354 (2017).
Indeed, this resolution concerns a topic that is vital to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Senegal joined the consensus and was a sponsor of the
draft.
However, given the importance and sensitive
nature of the issue, as well as the crucial need to take
into account national and regional specificities, the
Senegalese delegation would have preferred a more
inclusive negotiation process. That being said, now that
the resolution has been adopted, Senegal would like
to see its effective implementation, as my country is
part of a region facing the spread of violent extremism,
which, as we all are aware, is fuelled by the proliferation
of fundamentalist groups that promote radicalization.
These groups’ strategies for the dissemination of
their violent ideologies are based on an improper, even
fallacious, interpretation of religion and instrumentalize
it for very different purposes. We should therefore take
the appropriate preventive measures to counter this
violent extremism based on religion and its corollary,
international terrorism. Thus resolution 2354 (2017),
adopted unanimously, is an important step in that
direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative
of Uruguay.

S/PV.7949

Once again I should like to convey the heartfelt
solidarity and condolences of my Government to the
families of the victims of the Manchester attacks, most
of whom were children and young people, as well as to
the Government and the people of the United Kingdom.
Uruguay emphatically condemns this terrorist act as
well as all attacks perpetrated by Da’esh, Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups
whose recent actions have shocked the international
community. Their heinous crimes make clear their
profound contempt for human life and dignity, the
values of peaceful coexistence, and religious, cultural
and social tolerance.
The elaboration of a discourse countering narratives
that promote and motivate terrorist acts and help recruit
individuals to commit them is a key aspect of preventive
action in countering terrorism and violent extremism
when it leads to terrorism. These efforts are part of
the battle that is being waged in the field of ideas, to
which Uruguay attaches particular importance. For it
to be successful, it is necessary to seek and promote
channels for dialogue among Governments and various
non-State actors. We must also encourage cooperation,
promote tolerance and peaceful coexistence, and
respect international law, the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and fundamental freedoms.
We understand that resolution 2354 (2017), which
we have just adopted today and which Uruguay
co-sponsored, lays the foundation for the elaboration
of such narratives in accordance with the principles
and best practices contained in the document entitled
“Comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives” (S/2017/375, annex). We therefore
wish to thank the delegation of Egypt for its initiative
and its efforts in leading the negotiations that made
possible both the adoption of the resolution and the
realization of document S/2017/375.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

17-147975/5
