UNITED

NATIONS

COUl!uCIL
ECOR
TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

21 JUNE

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Amdopkm

agenda (S/Agenda/l729)
of the agenda

t

.,. .

.. ,.. . ....t,

.

,. ,, ., .. ,*,,. ., ..,. . . .,... ., ,

.

Adtission
of new Members:
(n> AppIication of the German Democratic Republic for admission to membership in
the United Nations:
Letter dated 12 June 1973 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the
German Democratic Republic to .the Secretary-General (S/10945);
(b) Application of the Federal Repubk of Germany for admission to membership in
the Unite’d Nations:
Letter dated 13 June 1973 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
R,epublic of Germany (to ,the Secretary-General (S/10949)
1 ,.. .
,

s/w.

1

..

1

1

1729

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council Qsymbol S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Oficinl Records of the Security Council. The d,ate
of the document indicates ‘the suppkment in which it’ appears or in which kformation about it is given.
The dissolutions of the Security Council, numbered ,in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council, The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.,_

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

Held in New York 011Thursday,
President: *Mr. Y. MAL,IK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following S,tates:
Australia,
Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Iadonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom #of Great Britain
aind Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Yl1goslavia.
Provisiomral

agenda (S/Agencla/l729)

1.

Adoption

2.

Admiasicm of new Members:
(a> Application of the German Democratic Republic for admission Q membership in the United
Nations:
Letter dated 12 June 1973 from <theMinister
for Foreign Affairs cof the German Democratic
Republic to the Secretaq-General (S/ 10945) ;
(6) AppEcation of the Federal Republic of Germany for admission to membership in the
United Nations:
Letter dated 13 June 1973 from ‘the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Germany to the Secretary-General (S/10949),

of the agenda.

Adoption
The

of the agenda

MEETING

21 June 1973, at 10.30 am.
of the applications of two States not Members of the
United Nations for admission to (membership in the
United Nations. These are (tithe ‘application of the
Government
of the German Democratic Republic
[S/10945]
and the application of the Government of
the Federal Republic of Germany [S/10949].
2. As we all know, under rule 59 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Secmity Coulncil, unless the
Security Council decides otherwise, an application for
membership in the United Natiions shall be referred by
the President of the Security Council to the Committee
on the Admission of New Members.
3. Consultations
between members ,of the Secutity
Council have resulted in an understanding that in the
present case both applications for admission to membership in the United Natilonis should be trans8mi$ted
to the Committee on jthe Admission of New Members
without beilng discussed at today’s ,meeting of the
Counoil. Accordingly, if there are no other suggestions
or proposals, I should like to #request *that the Seourity
Council Committee on the Admission of New Members
should meet immediately after today’s Counoil meeting
in ofrder to examine each of these applicationIs separately
and thereafter report to the Council its conclusions m
the two applicaticms and its proposals for a final decision on this matter by the Council.
4. If no member of the Security Council wishes to
speak at this stage of the discussion of ithe item before
us, I shd1 asfssumethat these observation.s and proposals
have been agreed to and adopted by the Council.

agenda was adopted.

AcIlx&eion

of new IWembers:

Application
of the German Democratic
Rcpublic for admission
to membership
in the
United Nations :
Letter clatcc? 12 June 1973 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German Dcmocratic
Republic
to the Secretary-General
(S/10945)
;
AppIication
of the Federal Republic
of Germany for admission
to membership
in the
United Nations :
Letter dated 13 Jnne 1973 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republiie of Germany
to the Secretary-General
(S/10949)

‘The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian) : The
;ecurity
Council1 has placed on its agenda the question

..

TWENTY-NINTH

It was so decided.

5. In con&sion,
I should llike to remark that by its
present a&ion the Security Council is {today undertaking the considaation
of a question which is of
especially great importance both for the situation on
the European continent and for the international situation as a whole, and also for the activities of the United
Nations. In accordance with the understa#nding reached
during the consultations between #the members of the
Security Council, they will have an opportunity to
state their v!ews on ‘this itern at ‘our *next meeting,
when the &um.%l will di.senss the substance of the
question of the aIdmission of the GeEman Demooratic
Republic anld the Federal Republic of Germany to
membership in the United Nations,
6. I should like to add ‘that the consultations between
the members of (the Security Council have allso resulted
in the understancncling that the Cou,ncil wi.ll meet again

,

tomorrow, 22 June, to considm the brep~~.%
of the Cornmittee on the Admission of New Members. I therefore
request that, after lthe con&km
of the Counti meeting,
the members of the Committee should hold a meeting to
examine the applications of the German Democratic

Printed in U.S.A.

Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany for
admission Ito ‘membership in the United Nations. Since
there aTe no further speakers, this meeting of the
Security Counoil is concluded.

The meeting rose catII .05 a.m.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

82226-August

lW%--2,050
