S/PV.7489

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7489th meeting

Wednesday, 22 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mrs. Alingue
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Seventh report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2015/518)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
2169 (2014) (S/2015/530)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-22753 (E)
*1522753*

S/PV.7489

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Iraq’s political process is moving forward, but
without the needed vigour. The Government has achieved
many successes and deserves our acknowledgement and
support. Prime Minister Al Abadi is seeking actively
to fulfil the promises of the Government’s programme,
but has not always met with success. The political forces
that have backed the Government and its programme
often cooperate reluctantly, as if the existential threat
posed by ISIL and the economic and social difficulties
were already a thing of the past. The unity behind the
creation of the current Government has not yet fully
been translated into unity of purpose or action.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Seventh report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2015/518)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2169
(2014) (S/2015/530)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/518, which contains the seventh
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013). I also
wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/530, which contains the fourth report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 2169 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: During my first briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.7443), last May, I conveyed my
initial impressions as mixed but cautiously positive.
Two months later, my initial impressions remain valid,
although I increasingly appreciate the scope, depth and
complexity of the problems and challenges.
Since last summer’s onslaught by terrorists of the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Iraq has been living through one of the most difficult
phases in its modern history. While the problems may
seem daunting and persistent, there is hope, and there
are opportunities and, notably, a vision for the way
out of the crisis, as expressed in the national political
agreement. The real issue is its implementation.

2/7

22/07/2015

There are signs of a growing understanding, though,
that the time has come for comprehensive political
agreements, particularly for, as some leaders have
described it, a historic national reconciliation. Several
plans and blueprints have emerged recently, promoted
by key leaders and political forces. Also, the national
reconciliation commission has developed an action
plan, an initiative owned and led by the Government.
The so-called Baghdad document is currently being
widely consulted and will benefit from inputs from
all Iraqi components, allowing for further ownership
of and inclusion in the process. This could provide a
starting point for further consultations, including
with different opposition groups. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) supports these
processes.
This development is most welcome, although
political compromises are urgently needed to accelerate
the implementation of the national political agreement
and ministerial programme. In this regard, institutional
and legislative reforms remain key to preserving
Iraq’s unity, encouraging political reconciliation
and defeating ISIL. Regrettably, the absence of
consensus has halted the reform process. The national
reconciliation legislative package, which includes key
bills such as the national guard, the general amnesty
and the justice and accountability laws, has seen
limited progress since my previous briefing to the
Council. All three bills are currently before the Council
of Representatives, but progress has been stalled due
to lack of trust between Iraqi communities and the
absence of the necessary political will. I have informed
my interlocutors in Parliament and in the Government
that painful compromises are needed to ensure that
these bills are passed instead of being returned to the
Council of Ministers. Iraq and its people do not have
the luxury of time.

15-22753

22/07/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

Effective partnership between Baghdad and
Erbil is equally critical to Iraq’s unity and stability
in fighting ISIL. In the recent period, the two sides
have increasingly expressed disappointment with
the implementation of the oil and revenue-sharing
agreement signed last year. The period was also marked
by the taking of some unilateral steps that work against
the interests of both sides and the country as a whole.
Both sides urgently need to renegotiate the deal and
reach a truly sustainable and comprehensive agreement.
UNAMI supports any option that will provide for such
sustainability, reinforce confidence and partnership
among the two sides, and keep them united in fighting
ISIL.
One year after the fall of Mosul, a third of Iraq
remains under the control and governance of ISIL.
In the reporting period, the military offensives of the
Iraqi security forces, with the critical support of the
popular mobilization forces, tribal Sunni volunteers
and the international coalition, have yet to significantly
change the situation on the ground. Tikrit was liberated
in March, but Ramadi fell in May. The Government’s
ongoing offensive in Anbar aims to reverse this setback.
The human cost of the conflict remains far too high.
Since I last briefed the Council, UNAMI recorded a
minimum of 1,200 civilians killed and more than 2,000
wounded as a result of armed conflict or terror attacks.
UNAMI continues to receive widespread reports of
attacks targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure,
extrajudicial killings, abductions, rape and other forms
of sexual violence, forced recruitment of children,
wanton destruction and looting of civilian property, and
denial of fundamental rights and freedoms. Minorities,
women and children continue to be particularly
vulnerable to the horrors and indignities inflicted
by ISIL. The recent terrorist outrage during the Eid
holidays near a Shiite mosque in Khan Bani Saad, in
which over 120 civilians were reported killed and some
170 injured, bears further witness to this tragic fact.
Iraq is a mosaic of different ethnic and religious
communities. Each component of the Iraqi people
has suffered from a range of violations and abuses
perpetrated at various times over recent decades. These
violations and abuses have undermined trust among
communities and eroded national identity. Exacerbating
this sense of injustice are actions taken in the current
phase of the conflict by ISIL and by some armed groups
fighting against it, which aim at or result in forced

S/PV.7489

demographic changes and the targeting of communities
considered to be undesirable.
To restore trust and to rebuild unity among the
various communities that form the Iraqi people, it is
necessary to ensure justice and accountability for
violations and abuses, whenever they have taken
place and by whomever they were perpetrated, and to
eliminate discrimination and marginalization wherever
it occurs. Taking action to ensure the protection of
diverse ethnic and religious minority communities
and their full and equal participation in the economic,
social and political life of Iraq will be challenging, but
such action is required of the Government if the future
cohesion of Iraq is to be assured.
The humanitarian situation is of the gravest
concern. At least 8.2 million, roughly one in four Iraqis,
need urgent assistance, and half of them need food
assistance. More than 3 million people are internally
displaced, and partners estimate that nearly 1 million
more are likely to be displaced by continuing conflict
and violence in the months ahead. Close to 300,000
refugees, mostly from Syria, have sought safety in
the country. The Government is continuing to lead
the operation, providing resources for cash stipends,
distributing assistance and helping to erect camps for
populations fleeing violence. Humanitarian partners
are working around the clock to provide assistance, but
funds are running short. Close to 80 health facilities
will be closing in the weeks ahead unless support is
received. Food rations have already been cut and scores
of life-saving programmes are scheduled to shut down.
The implications of this situation are enormous
and profoundly worrying. I thank the donor community
for its pledges in response to the recent humanitarian
response plan launched in cooperation with the
European Union in Brussels on 4 June, but I urge the
international community to do more to help desperately
vulnerable Iraqi communities. We are very worried by
reports that communities and families are being forced
to look to ISIL for life-saving assistance, even as United
Nations-sponsored programmes are closing for lack of
funding.
At the same time, internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in increasing numbers are starting to return to liberated
areas. The stabilization efforts led by the Government
with the support of the United Nations family using
the United Nations Development Programme Funding
Facility for Immediate Stabilization are commendable,

15-227533/7

S/PV.7489

The situation concerning Iraq

but much more remains to be done to ensure that
returns are voluntary, sustainable and dignified and
that conditions are in place for people to be able to go
out once they return to their homes. We are encouraging
the Government to take all the necessary steps to
guarantee their safety by exerting further pressure on
armed elements temporarily controlling liberated areas
in order to prevent occasional revenge attacks and
other violations committed against IDPs and establish
effective local control over security.
Permit me now to turn to the seventh report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013) (S/2015/518), on the issue of missing Kuwaiti
and third-party persons and property. Iraq-Kuwait
relations are on the ascendant. Iraqi leaders and the
United Nations have noted with gratitude the generous
donation of $200 million for the needs of IDPs. There is
much goodwill between the two sides, which can only
grow if tangible results are achieved on the issue of the
missing Kuwaiti persons and property. I intend to visit
Kuwait to discuss this matter.
I would now like to turn briefly to the issue of the
residents of Camp Hurriya. We need to alleviate Iraq’s
burden. I urge all countries to consider hosting the
Camp’s residents or to use their influence in assisting
in their relocation.
I have one more reminder to make: on our United
Nations national staff member taken hostage. In
his report, the Secretary-General urges the Iraqi
authorities to redouble efforts to secure his release. I
strongly support his appeal. We should remember that
88 days have already elapsed without having received
any credible information about our colleague, with no
positive resolution of the case.
From the lessons learned over the years from the
implementation of UNAMI’s mandate and through a
consultative process, the Secretary-General has spelled
out his recommendations on where emphasis should
lie with respect to future UNAMI and United Nations
country team mandates and activities. The Council’s
decision later this month on our mandate will provide
clear guidance and establish a refocused political
framework for the United Nations, including UNAMI.
With the continued support of the Council, I
remain confident that we can and we will work hand
in hand with the Government of Iraq, political forces
and civil society to achieve results in all areas, while
in paraticular increasingly mobilizing regional

4/7

22/07/2015

support and cooperation. At this critical juncture, the
Government of Iraq, its leadership and, most of all,
Iraqis themselves need continuous and massive support
and assistance from the international community.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate New Zealand
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for all its efforts to ensure transparency
in the conduct the Council’s work in July. I also thank
Malaysia for its similar efforts during its presidency
of the Security Council in June. I also welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq, Mr. Ján Kubiš, head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I thank him and
all his team for all their efforts, particularly in the very
difficult circumstances currently facing Iraq.
Iraq attaches great importance to the work of
UNAMI. Once again, we reiterate the importance
of the key role played by the United Nations in its
support to the Government and the people of Iraq, and
in its efforts to foster democratic institutions, provide
support to refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs), and promote human rights — including those of
young people, children and women — and judicial and
legal reforms in the country. We thank them for all that
broad-based support.
The Government of Iraq submitted to the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council a letter calling for an
extension of UNAMI’s mandate, in line with the wishes
of my country that the Mission’s mandate be extended
until 31 July 2016, on the basis of the principles of
resolution 1770 (2007). We believe that it is important
for the Mission to continue to provide aid and advice to
the Government of Iraq in order to guarantee a dignified
life for the families of displaced persons in particular.
As we have in the past, we underscore once again
today the need to address terrorism and for international
cooperation to achieve that goal. Any procrastination
allows terrorist organizations to further infiltrate other
countries and regions, and to entrench their presence
in those areas where they are already operating. The
deplorable and tragic events that have taken place in
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Tunisia, Syria, France
and elsewhere attest to this. We would therefore like
to reiterate once again the importance of promoting

15-22753

22/07/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

international cooperation and for States to honour
their commitments under resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178
(2014) and 2199 (2014), which condemn the activities
of Daesh and foreign terrorist fighters, and identify the
obligations and commitments of States in combating
terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and in cutting off the funds available to Daesh,
for example through oil funds and trafficking activities.
We therefore welcome the Additional Protocol to
the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism, adopted by the Council of Europe on 19 May.
Our hope is that all the members of the Council of
Europe will move swiftly to implement the provisions
of the Additional Protocol and that they will duly enact
corresponding domestic legislation.
The Daesh attacks on cities and villages in the
provinces of Iraq have led to huge internal displacements;
more than 2 million Iraqis have had to flee Daesh
violence. The Iraqi Government is working hard to
meet their needs and to create relevant mechanisms
to provide assistance to the victims of Daesh attacks,
in particular the displaced and vulnerable persons,
such as women, children and members of ethnic and
religious minorities. We are also working hard to create
the conditions for a safe and secure environment to
allow the return of those displaced persons. The Iraqi
Council of Ministers has earmarked half a billion
dollars for support in meeting the needs of displaced
persons. We look forward to providing more according
to our ability.
We pay tribute to the role played by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which has been working closely with the Council of
Ministers and the Government of Iraq in supporting
IDPs and refugees. We are also grateful to the agencies
that have been working hard to ensure that humanitarian
aid is supplied to those in dire need.
We call on Member States to support the
humanitarian response plan for Iraq and to work
with the Government of Iraq to provide the necessary
assistance to victims who have endured the terrorist
scourge. We welcome the efforts of Member States and
their contributions to supporting humanitarian efforts
in Iraq thus far, which we hope will continue. We are
also very grateful to Japan, the United Arab Emirates,
the United States of America, Australia and Kuwait for
providing Iraq with human and humanitarian resources
to alleviate the humanitarian suffering, particular

S/PV.7489

that experienced by displaced persons in Iraq. The
Government of Iraq also thanks all members of the
international alliance and the European Union for all
their help in combating terrorism. We welcome their
military and logistical assistance in support of the
operations of the Iraqi security forces. We thank the
Security Council for its persistence in calling upon
the international community to provide the necessary
support to Iraq to combat Daesh and other armed
non-State groups affiliated it.
We call on the countries of the region to agree to
exert greater efforts and vigilance in combating the
terrorist threat and ensuring that we can extirpate it. We
reiterate terrorism can be effectively countered only if
we are persistent and unified. States and international
and regional organizations need to work together and
towards the same ends. That is the only way we can
effectively and efficiently tackle the terrorist scourge.
The efforts undertaken to tackle Daesh have been
supported by the Iraqi army and police, as well as by
members of the popular mobilization forces and the
tribes. That is proof of the courage of the Iraqi people
and their rejection of Daesh’s occupation of their cities
and villages. All of these people and groups have been
mobilized to support the efforts of the the international
forces that are already working hard to combat and
to extirpate those terrorist groups. We are working to
liberate Fallujah and Ramadi in a two-front. We believe
that this is proof of the power of the anti-terrorism
coalition.
Over the past few years, Iraq has made considerable
progress in the promotion of women’s rights by adopting
various national strategies, policies and programmes
of action to that end. As for the fight against violence
against women, the promotion of women’s rights and the
appointment of women to senior posts in Government
institutions, we have established a unit within the
Ministry of Human Rights to monitor and follow up
violations of the rights of women in Iraq. We have also
rolled out a directorate for the promotion of women and
women’s rights, which works at the level of the Council
of Ministers, and a number of gender-specific units
within various ministries and institutions. Today women
are seen as essential partners in the decision-making
process and we have appointed women to key posts in
State institutions. Women are also represented in the
Iraqi Parliament and in various decision-making posts
in ministries and State institutions.

15-227535/7

S/PV.7489

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq faces challenges of great magnitude as a result
of the ferocious attacks carried out by terrorist groups
on major urban centres, markets, schools and hospitals.
In other words, they target civilians, including women
and children. The armed groups are also recruiting
children, which we are working hard to prevent. It is a
source of great concern. We are also working to address
the underlying causes of child recruitment. The Iraqi
penal and counter-terrorism codes lay out general rules
and regulations for sanctioning and punishing anyone
who recruits children as fighters or participants in
criminal terrorist activities.
There have been very positive developments
recently in the bilateral relations between Iraq and
Kuwait, as demonstrated by high-level visits between
both countries aimed at promoting and encouraging
improved links between them. We are currently
discussing the establishment of an emergency fund to
support rebuilding and reconstruction in areas that have
been liberated from Daesh. The fourth joint ministerial
meeting between Iraq and Kuwait saw significant
progress in our bilateral relationships, including the
signing of memorandums of understanding promoting
cooperation in the areas of security, maritime issues
and trade links, all of which should have a very positive
effect on political, economic and other links between
us.
In the context of the importance we attach to
implementing resolution 2107 (2013), particularly
paragraph 4, which focuses on efforts to follow up
on missing Kuwaiti nationals and property, we have
set up various units within our Ministry for Human
Rights aimed, where necessary, at finding the grave
sites and exhuming the remains of Kuwaiti citizens.
Our efforts have also been supported by international
expertise. Iraq will continue to make every effort to
provide support for finding such disappeared Kuwaiti
nationals and to find witnesses who can provide us with
credible information on their possible burial sites so we
can exhume their remains. The Iraqi people understand
that the relatives of those who have disappeared are
suffering from not knowing the fate of their loved ones,
so we continue to make every possible effort to discover
the fate not only of Kuwaitis but also of the thousands
of Iraqis who lost their lives under the former regime,
in order to give their families closure.
Regarding the restitution of Kuwaiti property and
the Kuwaiti national archives, every three months
the Minister for Foreign Affairs has published

6/7

22/07/2015

announcements in various journals, newspapers and
elsewhere in the press requesting information on
missing Kuwaiti nationals and goods. We believe
this to be a key humanitarian issue. We will pursue
our efforts to develop the capacity to streamline and
improve the process of searching for and investigating
missing persons and property. We welcome the support
of UNAMI in that regard and hope that it will continue
to provide the technical support and cooperation
necessary to improve Iraq’s capacity in that area.
Also, we are continuing to work with Kuwait and with
specialized agencies of the United Nations to complete
the mapping of the border.
It is crucial that we find a way to deal with events
in Syria and end the carnage being endured by the
Syrian people. We must do whatever we can to find a
political solution that will satisfy the demands of all
parties to the conflict while preserving the country’s
territorial integrity and unity, which can best be
reached by establishing assurances of non-interference
from outside Syria in its internal affairs. We must also
do all we can to cut off the flow of foreign fighters
into the country. We must find a solution that is fair to
all Syrians and that will enable them to pursue a life
of dignity in a democratic country, achieve national
reconciliation and deal with the armed groups in the
country. We believe that will have the added effect of
improving our fight against terrorism in Iraq, since
terrorism does not respect borders and can be found in
every region and country in the world.
We welcome the agreement on nuclear capacity just
signed in Vienna between the P-5+1 and Iran. Iraq is
making every effort to support them, as we have been
since they began working to find a peaceful solution to
the Iranian nuclear issue, and we look forward to giving
them our support in the future. Baghdad was one of the
cities hosting meetings of the P-5+1 and Iran, because
we were convinced of the importance of the meetings
for peace and security in the region as a whole. The
agreement is also another weapon in the arsenal that can
help us to end all possibility of war in the region. We
welcome the Council’s unanimous adoption this week
of resolution 2231 (2015) in support of the agreement
and call for its implementation.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and his team for their tireless
efforts to provide information and advice and to support
displaced Iraqis, and for working with the UNAMI and

15-22753

22/07/2015

The situation concerning Iraq

country teams to enable us to establish the capacity we
need to implement our mandate.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

S/PV.7489

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

15-227537/7
