UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2237”

MEETING:

’

.

26 JUNE 1980

..

NEW YORK

‘.‘.
‘.

,I

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2237) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 June 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14022) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2237

*.

_

:

:.
-.

NOTE
..
.-

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OJfkial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

2237th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 26 June 1980, at 6 p.m.
Pr~~idm: Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

26 June from the representative of Angola, which is
contained in document S/14022.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional
1.

3. The first speaker is the representative of Angola,
and I call upon him to make his statement.
4. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO (Angola): Thk classics tell
us of the oratory that resounded through the agora of
ancient Greece and the declamations that rang through
the .halls of imperial Rome. ‘Historians have left us
vivid accounts of the battICs of Olympian heroes.
Dramatists have skilfully woven history into poetry
and plays.

agenda (S/,Agenda/2237)

Adoption of the agenda

2. Comulaint by Angola againit South Africa:
Leiter datkd 26 June-1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14022)
.:
The meeting

wws called

to order

at 635

Adoption

of the agenda

5. I have neither the pen nor the brush to evoke foi
the audience the scenes of mighty battles, fallen
heroes, mourning wives and weeping Hecubas. I am
not Homer, nor am I Ulysses. But today the people
of Angola,are angry, bitter and frustrated, and I shall
try to convey the revolutionary passion that fires
them, the sorrow that fills them and the determination
that inspires them.

p.m.

The agenda was adopted.

_

6. The Government and people of the People’s Republic of Angola have petitioned the Security Council
many times since our admission to the United Nations, but to no avail. At least one may admire persistence:
the persistence of the racist South African attacks
against the People’s Republic of Angola, the persistence of my Government in bringing our case before
the Council and the persistence of the international
community in doing precisely nothing about it.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 June 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14022)

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Angola, Cuba, India, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Romania and Yugoslavia
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

7. In November 1979I came here and asked the Council a number of questions 12169th and 2170th meetings]. In fact, many other representatives have done
the same. All of us wonder why the United Nations
was created, why the Security Council was established. It is not that the Council is impotent; it is
immobilized by the lack of will of some of its mem.bers effectively to implement what are supposed to
be mandatory resolutions. I received no answers to
my questions in November, and I am still waiting.
I also remember answering my own queries, arguing
that this body was formed so that our conflicts could
find a forum for debate, dialogue and eventual resolution.

At the invitation of the President, ‘Mr. de Figuciredo
(Angolu) took a place ut the Cormcil tuhle and Mr. Rou
Kouri (Caha), Mr. Mishra (India), Mr. Loho (Mozumhique). Mr. Tinoco (Nicarugtra), Mr. Naik (Pukistun),
Mr. Murinescu, (Romuniu)
and Mr. Mujezinosic
(Yugosluviu) took the places reserved for them.at the
side of the Council chamber.

~

8. If I indulge in a little bitterness, that is surely
understandable. Surely it is not normal for men,
women and children to be massacred as a matter of
routine. And yet that is what happens with alarming

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today
in response to the request contained in the letter dated
1

Y

I

frequency to the Angolan people at the hands of the
racist South African troops. My Government keeps
the international community informed of these attacks.
Do we have new principles in international law that
one may kill with impunity? Not exactly; I must correct myself. Certain people may kill with impunity;
certain States may do anything with impunity. And
the victim is further punished, while the accused is
acquitted or exonerated. That is the only conclusion
we can come to when we see the racist South African
regime go unpunished for its crimes inside South
Africa itself, inside Angola
. . and in southern Africa
as well.

12. The South African ‘Parliament had already in
1976 passed the Defence Amendment Act, extending
South Africa’s defence periphery up to the equator.
After the dismantling of the Smith regime in Salisbury
and the emergence of independent Zimbabwe, the
infamous terrorists, the Selous Scouts, were disbanded. They are now being added to South African
forces. Jobless mercenaries are being wooed and
recruited for duty in southern Africa. A massive
transfer of combat equipment has taken place from
South Africa to Namibia, ‘with the military strengthening of Caprivi base.
13. These are not merely war preparations; this is
war. Our war was declared a long time ago. It was
declared when the first settIer set foot on our continent, when he came to loot, to plunder, to kidnap and
to kill. And this.war shall continue until the last racist,
the last imperialist and the last puppet is defeated by
the forces of revolutionary justice.

9. I will get to the point, one I have made so often
in this chamber. The racist minority regime in Pretoria,
with its capitalist, colonialist and imperialist ambitions, has once more attacked the People’s Republic
of Angola. They have killed over 370 men, women
and children. They have.wounded more, than 255 persons, many of whom will succumb to their injuries.
They have destroyed vehicles, bridges and houses.
They have killed much of the livestock, depriving the
remaining populace of its food and livelihood. They
have mined roads and fields. In the days ahead they
will kill many more barefoot children and women
tilling the land. Seventeen patriots belonging to FAPLA
[Forgas Armadas Populares

14. Africa has ample room for those who wish to live
with us on terms of mutual respect. But our vast continent has no room for settler colonialists or overseas
rule. We will not tolerate minority rule and aparrheid
and we will fight imperialist attempts to destabilize
our region.

de Libertaqr?o de Angola]

15. To quote a cliche, 1 million killed is a mere statistic, one person killed is a national tragedy. Fifty
persons held hostage plunged the Western world into
a reassessment of policy, into a hunt for military
bases, into boycotts; into sanctions, into military
actions. But thousands of persons massacred by
racists merits no response other than sanctimonious
resolutions without teeth.

have sacrificed their lives in defense of the motherland. Since 23 June, two days ago, amotorized infantry
brigade of the racist South African armed forces has
been on Angolan territory. There is one infantry battalion in Eval, another in Mongua and a third north of
Cuamato. Then there are two battalions of paratroopers,, one on the road between Ankuaka and
N’giva and the other on the road north of Neone. One
company of armoured cars is north-east of Ongo and
one motoxized infantry battalion supported by 32 artillery units of 155mm mortars and AML-90 armoured
cars is in the area of Xifufua.

i6. Can Africa expect no justice? Sanctions are
imposed on small nations which cannot be considered
a threat by either Western Governments or Western
transnational corporations. But the biggest fiend of
them &II-a racist structure that brutalizes and dehumanizes its own majority inhabitants, a military Power
with nuclear capability enough to threaten all of
Africa-this monster in our midst goes unchecked and
unpunished, despite strong demands from the third
world.
/

10. I have dispassionately described the positions
ofthe racist troops. I have recited the number of dead
and wounded. But I cannot adequately convey the full
dimensions of the national tragedy we face as the
racist minority regime in Pretoria uses our territory
as its battlefield and our people as its sport.

17. What South Africa does cannot be entirely
divorced from the larger context in which South
Africa plays itshand. For every child killed in Soweto,
in Namibia and in Angola, responsibility must be
accepted by those Western friends of Pretoria who
help the aprrrrheid regime to survive, and survive
rather well.

11. The Secretary-General sent a letter to the racist
Botha on 20 June [S/140/1]. This is Botha’s answer.
This is his reply to the international community on
what sort of South African participation to expect in
United Nations efforts towards the independence of
Namibia. It is South Africa’s warning to the Angolan
commitment to liberation, self-determination, majority
rule and a revolutionary path of national development.
It is South Africa’s answer to Africa. It is South
Africa’s response to the commitment of the front-line
States. And it is South Africa’s announcement of
what sort of neighbour it intends to remain in the years
ahead.

18. I have repeatedly pointed to South Africa’s
various strategies for the survival of its system within
its iaager. The timing of the latest series of attacks
is designed to present ajkir accompli to the intemational community; a group of puppets and renegades
who would have no existence were it not for the char2

ity given them by their masters in Pretoria, who have
no legitimacy
outside the safe retreats and bases
provided for them inside Namibia by the minority
regime, who have no support but that provided by
the South African armed forces.

beginning. But I was and still am too full of the tragedy
brought by the racist Pretoria regime on my people
to pay much attention to form.
25.

Until

the final victory, (I Iuta c’ontinutr.

26. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique,
who wishes to make a
statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Group
of African States at the United Nations for the month
of June. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table .and to make his statement.

19. Jose Eduardo dos Santos, President of the
MPLA-Workers’
Party and President of the People’s
Republic of Angola, together with the Central Committee of the MPLA-Workers’
Party and all the militants of the Angolan Revolution stand steadfast in the
-face of imperialist attempts to sabotage the march of
liberation in southern Africa. The people of Angola
will not betray their revolution, nor will they allow its
corruption by others. The earth of Africa is stained
with the blood of freedom fighters and the air is filled.
with their exhortation.

27. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique):
Mr. President, on
behalf of the African Group, I should like to thank
you for giving us this opportunity to participate in the
debate on the invasion of Angola by South Africa.

20. It is a pity that the Council can neither see that
earth nor hear those cries. However, if something is
not done, and soon, about the explosive situation in
southern Africa, the whole world will see and hear
and smell blood-the
rebellion against exploitation,
the rejection of imperialism,
the denial of colonialism
and the destruction of apartheid. It will be the masses
of the third world, and not only of Africa, who will!
fight for justice, equality and security against imperialist intervention.
And we can be sure that the people of Angola, led by their vanguard party, the MPLAWorkers’ Party, will be in the forefront of the fight,
as they have been demonstrating
in southern Africa.

28. The heroic struggle waged by the people of
Angola under the leadership of the Movimento Popular
de LibertacZio de Angola (MPLA) against Portuguese
colonialism
has been carried on from the beginning
with unreserved solidarity from the entire African
continent as well as from progressive peoples the
world over. Africa went along with the freedom fighters.,,
of Angola in the most difficult struggle against an
enemy supported by strong organizations and countries of the Western world. When victory was finally
achieved, the people of Africa rejoiced everywhere
because it was an African victory.
29. Whatever happen’s in Angola, and for that matter
anywhere else in Africa, will greatly affect the mood
of the African Group in the United Nations. Since
the beginning of this month, we have been, re,ceiving
the sad news that the People’s Republic of Angola
has been the target of massive armed aggression perpetrated by the racist tigime of Pretoria. Then, as late
as yesterday, we learned from the representative of
the People’s Republic of Angola that since last Monday,- 23 June, a brigade of racist South African’armed
forces had been inside his country. As a result of that,
civilians were massacred and villages, houses;bridges,
roads and vehicles destroyed.

21. War cannot be contained or confined and, if the
West wants to save itself and its shores, then it must
not bolster the minority regime that is causing the
chaos in southern Africa. The only way to prevent
a holocaust in southern Africa is to make South Africa
realize the necessity for change. And the only way to
do that, since all other methods have been tried and
have failed to yield results, is through implementation
of total sanctions against the minority regime.
22. ,Africa is running out of patience; Africa is running
out of time. If the Council does not act beyond the
adoption of yet another resolution, if the Council does
not effectively
implement
these resolutions,
then
southern Africa will be the match that will ignite the
world, and only the archives of the United Nations
will be left to bear a silent testimony to our repeated
pleas and warnings.

30.. There is no doubt that the armed ;&gression
and occupation of Angola by South African forces is
part of an imperialist strategy against the liberation of
Africa. The regime of South Africa is the direct agent
in this imperialist
aggression against Angola. South
Africa is the same regime that has given shelter and
arms to lackeys of the Uniao National
para’ a Independ2ncia Total de Angola (UNITA)
and has trained
them militarily
in the service of imperialism
against
African liberation.

23. The people of Angola stand vigilant from Cabinda
to the Cunene, but they expect support from the
international
community.
Maybe that was why the
United Nations was created. Maybe that is a simple
answer, indeed. After all, the people of Angola will
know in a few hours if the United Nations justifies
its creation.

31. I go back to the information
about the massive
South African invasion of Angola. We are told that
South Africa has inside the territory one infantry
brigade, which corresponds to three battalions; two
battalions
of paratroopers
and one company
of
armoured cars. Now, we ask, is this senseless show

24. Finally,
Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. The usual procedure is to do so at the
3

but Will have’se&& ‘cons’eqhences for international
peace and securitj;;.‘:The ‘“Secui;ity ‘Co&l
should
respond with one voice, not only to condeqmfrpqth&
Sduih Africafor committiig yet axiotheradt’iif aggres32. The armed aggression against Angola i&directed. sioii’btit&d td devisl’&%-&i%& m’easur& to ensure
against ‘all peoples looking foi a just and peaceful sol& : thtii thtise a&.of agg&‘ssiov are not ‘rep&ite$ The
tion of the Namibian problem, because it comes’thr&
titie’<,is &‘hafid foi’ this ‘Cdtincil to ,detiise“‘ingenious
days after the letter sent by: the. Secretarjl%eneral; ‘) methods .&of dealing with ,inter&iional r&al&rants
which wtis the synthesis. of world-wide opitiion ‘ihd; likb Sotith ‘Africa to dei$‘the?n thk means.tith which
wisdom. ‘Therefore, this : body,L%m behalf ‘of .warld :’ they commit n&id %gi;re&n ‘gg8inst neiihbbiiring
public opinion, ‘should Coridemn’ South Africa: ~in’&$ indegendtint African, Stat&.’ It ’ i’s tidi enough therely
strongest possible- terms’and demand that it uncbndi-: to, tiati lthe ,ticistS’ ifi :South Afti& ‘that ‘unspecified
tionally withdraw all its military forces .froti *‘Afi@la . actibti*tiill be&&en agaihst them if they do ndt &mply
and scrupulously respect the sovereignty and terri-, wiihCoti%l ‘decisions. Theie is mdre than tidequate
torial iritegrit) of the People’s Repiiblic’of‘Angola.
prtiof ‘of Sduth.Africa?s intransigence and defiaiice of
..d
. ,:’ -::,’ : I ::c ,
‘. ‘,’ _. -I, .‘( ; .. I.l’I, ,
United’Nations
iesoluiionl.
‘+,
” ” 1.’ “, :‘,‘., . .
.- ,.,:I~.~,. _..a
33.: -.We know that $hese).ycriminal
.actiohs
of
.S&th
.,.
Africa against +ngola‘ are meant td disc&@? the 37. ‘.;It ,id impdtiant’ &t ‘ilie dciuncil ‘had to intkrrufit
peodle :of rthat _,sister country:. from supborting’.ihe
its cbn$deratl&n:of ih& reckless‘and d&ant beha$our
struggle of-the nation21 libefatioh of the petiple^zof qf .Israel; which is an aili’ of %ouih “Africa, to. turn
Namibia udder the *leadersliip of the *South West’ to yet ahot& i&&less act of aggr&$dn by the P-toria
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO). However,
tigitie; Would it not be only logical to conclude, given
these. criminalc.aktions will only reitiforce the ,deter- all the titiiden& a\iiiIable to us, th&i the’ South African
mination *‘and involvement . of Arigola (_and Afridan
and ‘Israeli r&$mesi are; the’ ‘most riggressive rind r&i
States ixi their fraterrial -support of the colonized arid pressive regimes ‘in”the cohtemporary world? A casual
oppressed peoples of Namibia and South
glance.at the iFsues brought before the Council in any
:‘ .Africa. I’,:* : one.‘calend&i:
,.;
y&r bears testimony to the danger to
34. *Angola, as a part of.Africa, will continue to play int&iitional pe&ti’and security Caysed by the policitis
its fundamental role in the history of our continlnt’s
and .I.
practicCs
South Africa and Israel.
* ., bf” racist.,..
liberaticin. Africa knows that Angola is under’ittack’
for taking a just stand in the hatters of the continent
38. LMe’mbers’o’f the Couficil :will recall that Sduth
in the struggle against colonialism, imperialism and Africa had puisued a policy of permanent aggressidn
oppression; And since the present militaw aggressi,on against Angola even before that country became
of the.racist forces *against Angola arisks in the con- independent. It is pathetic that t&e South African:
text of imperialist actions in southern Africa and, ,in authorities ha’v&.not y&, recondile’d themselves to the, .
particular, in Namibia, Africa will fight side by side utichaiigeable’ reality’ of the free existence of an indewith Angola.: Africa is certain that the peoples of
pendent ‘Angola. South Africa nii$ be,fdrced to a&ept ~
Angola; Namibia and South Africa will be victoridus
and rkspect the,kqvereignty of Angola.
:.
1
because their struggle is the just struggle of Afritia%
peoples.
*
39.. Since’ the independence df Atigola, the Counc$’
..
‘ (
has bekn called upon at regular ‘intervals to consider *
35. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): As we have heard
repeated cases of aggression against Angola by Sduth
from. the representative of Angola, since 23 June
Africa. Since November of last year, the Coutitiil
several -battalions of the racist South African armed
has held two sessionsto deal with racist South African
forces have been operating inside Angolan territojl
aggression ” against Angola and my own count,y, :
on a mission of plunder and genocide. After violating
Zambia. These .armed attacks’and subsequent mili,tary
Angolan territory, the South African troops massacred activities involving ‘planted land-sines and the use of’ ’
well over 370 people, mostly old men, women and
incendiary weapons of destruction have resulted ‘in’
children. Two hundred and fifty Angolans \ivere either
the death and wounding of hundreds of our people in.
wounded or maimed. The destruction of property
Angola and Zambia; We strongly deplore this gene- ‘.
cannot be measured. Bridges and livestock have been
tide. We demand help from the international cornmu-‘,,’
destroyed and roads mined. That is the sad record of
nity, ,and not ‘equivocation and duplicity, especialljl,
what racist South Africa can do to other humti beings.
on the part df those States which arm South Afiida.
It is a sad account of genocide. We convey our sincere
We are victims of violence; and any talk of cycles ,Of
condolences to the bereaved families in Angola.
. violence coming from certain Western capitals muSti.
be condemned and denounced.
,I,)i, 1
36. The latest unprovoked and brutal massive invasion of Angola by the armed forces of racist South
40. South Africa’ niust be aware that aggression”
Africa is a flagrant violation of the sovereignty, inde-’ against any independent African country only servts’
pendence and territorial integrity of the People’s
to strengthen Africa’s resolve to free our continent
Republic of Angola. It is a very dangerous developfrom racist oppression. Indeed, the timing of this.
ment, which not only threatens peace in our region
attack, coming as it does during the meetings of ih’i

of power the reply to the Secretary-General’s letter of
20 June addressed to the Foreign Minister
of South
.
.I I ,.,
Africa [ihid.]?

4

Organization; of African ,Unity )(OAU), ,will, serve to I: has informed the Council that right now within the
., ,:,:,,,:, territory of hiscountry there are South African troops,
mobilize_ A&a
to rise’ to-the occasion.,
, .*,
.
*..
artillery units, paratroopers and tanks.
4$.,Jlearly Jhis is a deliberate act of .aggression
against an independent sovereign African country .by a
Africa wants‘the eyes of the &i-Id to be:tuied’ak$
I: F&$t .State in ..which;racism is the official policy.
from ‘the brutal repression which that regime ~.haq.:: The.Acting Chairman of the Special Committee.against
unleashed against peaceful, protesters and ,strike.rs.,a& ) A$&$zeid h,a,sin, his statement published today deciover South,;Africa. Fortunately, the world cannot be : sivei’y,.condemned the fresh I act of aggression by
deceived by. these ,devilish manoeuvres.. qg .intef-,,,I South’kfrica committed at a time when we are ,marking .’
national,,community is fully &are thatthe. problems.,z the .an,nijrersary of.the signing .of the Charter;,of .the
whichracist, South Africa faces today are ahmade +,nd,,, U.$t&d~Nations.,,
,‘., .,,,,
.:
:
,, .‘I,
manufactured in South Africa. It-.is the oppressed ,
people of South Africa that are struggling for freedom.. ‘: 47: ’ “)t&*$e$$$~ C&n&.-has” several times ,issued
from &m&id. ’ It is also the ,Namibians ,under.,the . 1 warnings to South Africa and demanded the cessation
leadership of SWAP0 that are lighting from inside the
of all,ac+, ofaggregsion,.against neighbouring countries, but Pretoria ,has..remained deaf to all demands
territory of Namibia itself to liquidate South Africa’s:
illegal occupation of Namibia. Only an end toapartheid ., by,;the. world community. and .United .Nations bodies
and the.establishment of a democratic State,%based
on, to-desist.from’the criminal.policyiof aggression, which
the principle. of .universal suffrage’ can end”..South. V is.a-,threat’to ,intemationalpeace and.security.
‘%.,
,,:,. _~: I‘ I : ,I
Africa’s problems, The racist South African rulers:.
must know from- ‘simple geography that Soweto,.; 48, :-‘&e: ask& .rhy has.Prk&a not heeded the rea- :
Langa; Sasolville and .Sharpeville’ are not on Angolan., sonable;desires of, the African States,to live in .peace
territory, nor are.,they’located in Zambia., , J , ..#..;.. .>+, and ,secyi,ty,? Qbviously, .the policies .of the leading
.,../ . circles ,.of gSouth; Africa. are :-not ..directed .towards,:
42. : African countries’want peace. .Thky have offered .: seekingpeace. They are directed in principle towards
olive branches to all ,-those who .genuinely .&sire: to, committing. .aggression against other countries. *Even
resolve southern. Afrtcan problems peacefully. We , ., the .,letter
....> of the Foreign Minister, ,of South Africa
continue to act in good faith on all issues. Yet, I subaddressed to the Secretary-General dated 12 May
-(
mit, what do we get in return from racist South -Africa?.- [.SJ@5], demonstrates that criminal policy..
,. 1
..
.__
Who ‘is acting in bad faith, other than the racjst .and _., ,....
intransigent Pretoria regime?
-,
,:, ,, J :-. _,,,, 49, The’Council has no choice: it must not only deci-. _
<..
I. sively. condemn Pretoria’s acts of aggression against
43, ’ :Qn behalf of Zambia 1 wish ‘to appeal’& mem:
African countries but also seriously take up the matterbeiS of this Council collectively and individually to’ of ,enforcement action which, is provided for in the
do. everything in their .power to stop South ‘African
Charter in cases of acts of aggression. There is already
aggres’s’ion against. .Angola and the j other front-line
a ban on arms ,deliveries to South Africa; yet that
States. The Council should as a matter of urgency
aggressive country continues to arm itself and to use
demand the immediate and unconditional ,withdrawal
those arms against sovereign African countries. The
ofSouth African troops from Angolan territory. South
arms embargo should be stepped up. African counAfric% should be censured
for its numerous acts of
tries have repeatedly pointed to the need to stop oil -I
,
aggression.
deliveries
to South Africa. It is high time for’ that
.s
matter to .be taken up as well. The delegation of the
44:“’ We join the people of the sister Republic of
German Democratic Republic favours its settlement.
Angola in mourning. We stand beside them in their
We call upon all countries not to deliver. oil to the I.
resolve to maintain their hard-won independence and
aggressor country, that is, South Africa.
sovereignty.
k
~
50. Then there is the general matter of increasing
45:“ Mr. FLORIN (German hemocratic Republic)
the isolation surrounding the aggressive forces of
(iniekpretation
from Russian): Once again the SecuPretoria. Those countries which maintain relations
rity’Counci1 has to take up the question’ of South
with South Africa should seriously consider the fact
Africa’s acts of aggression against the People’s Rethat South Africa views that situation, whether or not
public of Angola. For several days now the incursion
the Western countries like it, as a form of encourby the armed forces of the racist’regime of Pretoria
agement allowing it to violate international law by
into the territory of Angola has been : continuing.
committing acts of aggression against neighbouring
Built-up areas even 90 kilometres within Angolan tercountries.
ritory have been bombarded. There are victims among
the civilian population, including women and children.
51. The abuse of the occupied Territory of Namibia
Many buildings and bridges have been destroyed, and
by South Africa, which uses it as a springboard for
the interventionists have mined a number of roads.
armed attacks against the People’s Republic of Angola,
Tht:representative of the People’s Republic of Angola
is also a violation of international law. The Council
5

-.

latest act of gross and naked aggression’bythe armed
forces of South Africa against the People’s Republic
of Angola has compelled the Security Council once
again to take up the aggressive policies of the racist
regime of Pretoria. For several days‘now in the territory of an independent sovereign country, Angola,
there have been a motorized infantry battalion, two
battalions of paratroopers and also units of armoured
troop-carriers belonging to South Africa. In fact,
South African troops have occupied part of the territory of an independent State.
,
.,
“’
59. As a result of the acts of aggression by the regular
troops of the Pretoria. regime, 370 people have been
killed, most of them old men, women, and children:
255 people have been wounded: -30 vehicles have
been demolished; bridges and .houses have been destroyed; and almost all the livestock in that region
have been killed. Thus, it is quite clear that South
Africa’s acts of aggression were perpetrated against
the civilian targets and population of Angola.

should severely condemn such use of the Territory,
for which, as members know, the United Nations is
responsible. There is no doubt that the actions of
South Africa are creating an obstacle to a (peaceful
solution of the Namibian question.
,
52. The delegation of the German Democratic. Republic is certain that the Council will.call upon South
Africa immediately to withdraw its armed forces from
the entire territory of the People’s Republic of Angola
and to respect the territorial integrity of that inde:
pendent country. South Africa should bear responsibility, for its criminal actions and give compensation
for the damage sustained by the People’s Republic
of Angola. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic supports the just demand of Angola.
53. In conclusion, the delegation of fhe (German
Democratic Republic would like to assure the ‘representative of the People’s’Republic of Angola ‘that our
country will continue in the future to give all possible
assistance to his country in its struggle to preserve
its independence and territorial integrity. The IGerman
Democratic Republic is faithful to the Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation which was signed last year by
the heads of our States.

60. This armed incursion by the troops of the racist
regime of South Africa is not an isolated case..The
Council has a detailed list of the many acts of aggression by South Africa against Angola. Yet, South ,African troops quite recently committed an incursion into
Angolan territory which caused many victims ‘and
considerable material damage. The documents of the
Council show that South Africa has turned the People’s Republic of Angola into a target of continual
bombing raids; incursions and armed acts of aggression which are perpetrated in violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country.

54. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): Once
again Angola has been the target of a most serious
incursion by South Africa’s military forces. Given
the historical links between our two countries’and the
friendship that unites our two peoples, the Portuguese
delegation would be failing in its duty if it :did not
immediately join its voice with those who have
expressed their solidarity with the Government and
the people of Angola in these trying moments.

61. By making continual armed attacks against
Angola, the Pretoria authorities are aiming to subvert
the process of social and economic reform which is
successfully taking place in that country, to make the
economic situation more complicated and to hamper’
the successful development of that country along its.
chosen path. Pretoria uses UNITA counter-revolutionary gangs in its activities aimed at subverting
Angola’s popular regime. Those gangs are being maintained, armed and reinforced by the South African
racists. It is known that they are supported by certain
sponsors overseas.

55. We deeply feel the loss of life that has Resulted
from these attacks, and the Portuguese delegation
wishes to avail itself of this opportunity to extend to
the families of the victims and to the Government
and the people of Angola its most heartfelt condolences.
56. The climate of violence in southern Africa must
be eliminated. The hope of the international community has been raised in recent times by the solution
of some of the conflicts in the area, while, it would
seem, important progress has been made in relation
to others. Let us hope that this is the last reflex in a
cycle about to be closed, and not the start of a new
one.
57. The Portuguese delegation states again that it is
imperative that all aggressive acts across intemational borders cease forthwith and appeals to the
South African regime immediately to withdraw its
forces from Angolan soil and refrain from further
action of this nature against Angola, in full respect for
the territorial integrity of that country.

62. It is quite obvious that the enormous scope of
the recent operations by the South African racists,
the use of regular army troops and the wide use of
various types of offensive techniques amount to a
dangerous escalation of the acts of aggression by
South Africa against Angola-and not only against
Angola. In April of this year the Security Council
decisively condemned the racist regime of South
Africa for its continuing, ever-growing and unprovoked acts of aggression against Zambia, representing a scandalous violation of the sovereignty and
r‘~
territorial integrity of that country.
, ,’

58. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): This

63. Until quite recently, South Africa gave active
support to the illegal racist regime in Southern Rhode-

I

6

sia in an attempt to prevent the victory of the patriotic
forces of Zimbabwe. Moreover, it is recognized that
the danger of South African interference in the affairs
of that new State of ,Zimbabwe has not been eliminated; there are still large concentrations of South
African armed forces on the border with Zimbabwe.

68. The delegation of the Soviet Union reaffirms its
unswerving support for the People’s Republic of
Angola in the struggle that it is waging against encroachments by the racist regime of South Africa on
its sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Soviet
delegation decisively condemns the armed incursions
by South Africa into Angola. We consider that the
Security Council should not merely roundly condemn
acts of aggression and demand the withdrawal of the
armed South African units from Angola, as it has
already done in previous resolutions, but also envisage
the adoption’ of effective and specific measures
stemming from Chapter VII of the Charter to put an
end to such actions by the aggressor. The experience
of recent years has shown that
,, there is no other way.
to attain that goal.

64. The ‘acts of aggression by the racist regime of
Pretoria against the People’s Republic of Angola and
other African States -pose a serious threat-indeed,
a growing threat-to their sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and to peace and security in southern Africa.
65. An important element of South Africa’s strategy
aimed against independent Africa is its occupation of
Namibia, which is being used by Pretoria as a trampoline from which to launch acts of aggression against
Angola and other African States. The Pretoria regime
is doing its utmost to hamper the attainment by the
people of Namibia of genuine independence and ‘freedom. We have recently seen the ever more obvious
attempts by South Africa to stop the coming to power
in Namibia of the patriotic forces under the leadership of SWAPO, which has been recognized by the
United Nations as the sole authentic representative
of the Namibian people. The Pretoria regime has
undertaken further actions to strengthen’ the puppet
groups in Namibia, to create there what in the final
analysis would amount to a neo-colonialist regime.
Those attempts are being made in defiance of. the
explicit provisions of Security Council ‘resolutions
which stated, inter ah, that the results of the illegal
elections held in Namibia by the South African regime
were null and void and should not be recognized by
anyone.

69. ‘Mr. ‘CHOU Nan (China) (interpretation
from
Chinese): On 23 June, the South African. racist regime
flagrantly launched another large-scale military invasion of ,the People’s Republic of Angola from the
Territory of Namibia, which it has illegally bccupied,
brutally slaughtering innocent people and causing
very serious damage to the lives and property of the
Angolan people. This is the third time that the South
African racist &gime has grossly encroached upon
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola,
following its armed attacks on Angola in the latter
part of May and the middle of June this year, seriously
threatening the peace and security of the region. The
Chinese delegation expresses great indignation at the
aggressive acts committed by the South African
authorities and strongly condemns them. Our deep
sympathy goes to the Angolan people who are the
victims of aggression.

66. In deliberately making unacceptable demands
to the United Nations, Pretoria is obviously trying to
use its participation in negotiations with the Organization to gain time and to prepare conditions which
would be conducive to the implementation of its own
racist plans for the so-called internal settlement: to
set up in Namibia a puppet regime and to entrench a
neo-colonialist order in that Territory. South Africa’s
true plans for Namibia have been quite blatantly
demonstrated in its acts of aggression against Angola.

70. It is by no means accidental that since the beginning of this year the South African racist regime
has intensified its armed invasion of Angola, Zambia
and other front-line African States, because this is a
component of its criminal scheme to sustain its illegal
occupation and colonial rule of Namibia. It is well
known that under the leadership of SWAP0 the
Namibian people have initiated and persisted in protracted and effective armed and political struggles,
dealing heavy blows to the South African racists. In’
spite of the threats and repeated attacks made by
South Africa, the front-line States, regardless of
heavy sacrifices, have given tremendous support and
assistance to the just struggle of the Namibian people.
At the same time the just cause of the Namibian people is obtaining ever broader international sympathy
and support. Particularly since the independence of
the people of Zimbabwe, there has been a growing
call from the international community and public
opinion for a negotiated peaceful settlement of the
Namibian question and the immediate attainment of
the independence of Namibia.

67. It is quite obvious that the defiant behaviour of
South Africa, its perpetration of acts of aggression
against Angola and other African States are explained
by the fact that the Pretoria racists know they have
the support of the United States and certain other
countries members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), which call for tolerance and
understanding of the South African racists. By pandering to the South African regime, the monopoiistic
circles of the NATO countries are trying to prevent
the adoption of effective measures in the Security
Council in respect of that racist regime. As a result,
the Pretoria authorities are stepping up their acts of
aggression against neighbouring independent States,
in particular the People’s Republic of Angola.

71. SWAP0 and the front-line States have exerted
tremendous and sincere efforts to promote the early
implementation of the United Nations plan for a set7

tlement of the Namibian question, thus winning broad
acclamation and support from the international ‘cornmunity. This has landed the South African :ratiist
authorities in ever greater isolation. In these circumstances, while continuing to obstrudt ;tind delay :-a
negotiated settlement -and stepping up. the’moveszfor
: a, so-called internal settlement, .$he-~S~uth .Africdn
racist authorities are repreSsing the armed .Struggle
of. the Namibian people with -increasing,bizitality-and
have repeatedly launched armed invasibns irito frontline,States in an attempt to weaken and stamp out the
armed struggle. of the Namibialr peopleland ‘co&e the
front-line *,States into ceasing their :stippod for%he
just struggle of the Namibian people,:so*as to achieve
their ferocious aim of continued illegal occupation .of
Namibia.
t : :,,,.{“‘ y ; I:
,.
.; _’
72.~’ However; as a Chine’ie‘saying @esf ‘+&i&e &e
people! are noi afraid of death, why %itimidgte ‘them
with death?” The I’heroic ptioples; of, Natibia’%nd
c Africa carinot be cowed Or c&hed:The v&ton’%%
committed by ‘the South Atrican racist atithdiities.can
&ly evoke greater .-indig&& ‘oil., the Ij$i ‘of the
Namibian arid other African peoijles ‘itid ‘&au&“ih&n
to ‘tmite further tind carry on theit’ stti&$e more
sttiunchly; thtis accelerating the collapse of the &lonial rule of the South African : ,authoriti&?
,,
c 5 T,. . .”. .; :‘/.;..
,’
: 73. ‘The Chinese .Govemment’ and pe?ple h&e
always fir&y supported the Nam%iati seople ‘in {h&r
just struggle for nation’al independeii& Bnd libetition
and firmly supported the front-line Staies’ in their jtist
position of giving assistance to.the Namibian people.‘s
struggle: ,In the view of the Chinese delegation, the
CounCil should strongly condemn the, South African
authorities ,for their military invasion of Angola’, iie‘mand that they ‘put an immediate .end to their acis’of
aggression, withdraw forthwith all their invading
forces and ensure against the recurrence of similar
incidents. The Security Council should also demand
I the immediate ending of the South African racjst
authorities’ illegal occupation of Namibia. It is also
our view that the Security Council should suppOrt
the variqus correct ideas put forward by the African
States, including the demand for South Africa” to
compensate for the losses incurred.

‘, 76.,* It is .a*matter for deep -regret that that country
‘;rshould be the,victlmaf repeated and b&al ‘aggression
:^by South Africa. This latest act, which is %hesubject
:::of the Council’s tieetifig.todayi’Ps ‘yet another mani.-:festation of the bitfei:eiperierices”of Asgold and of
the; nature of the ‘racist regime .of South
Africa:
-.: .;ii .-;;* .;.* ;‘
:.:
.. ..I.’ , ’ .
\‘.77:. .Jamaica has ~gi&& ‘i& unqualified’ SuppOit.to the
i request:by tht Govermne’nt of Angola ,for the con:.,vening of this ,urgint meeting,of the Couhcil. By so
3doing, the Govemmenr and’ pedple .tif Jamaica reiterate their strong indignation and their condemnation
of these acts by South Africa, which constitute not
‘%tily a serious +iolation of the principles of the Charter
but equdlly ,‘of internatiotial law respecting the sover-,‘eignty ‘and territorial (‘1integriiy
._ ,bf ill ,’States. *.’)
78: The’ fill1 magn&& ‘of South Africa’s latest
ag&eSsiv‘e -actiotis is ‘highlight’ed in the letter dated
26 June from the representative of Angola, atid was
further elaborated in the,elqquent and detailed prey:sent&ion ‘which he gave this .e&ing. They *have
rei&aled that South Africa’s unprovoked and un’ warranted aggresiion has ‘caused, considerable loss
%f lif$;?nd wanton destruction of property. We deplore
; $elcpntinu’ed ddployment of the rdcist South African
armed forces inside the te+ory, of the People’s’ Republic of Angola. ~
’
“.
79.. ‘All this Lames at a time’irvhen the world is still
‘reacting aith deep satisfaction atid with underst&ling
to,!h& recent victory of Zimbabwe in its struggle for
! freedoin. It ,is a time when’ we all watch with active
‘ihterest the’ .development of ‘the movement by -ihe
pebble of Namibia‘and by the United Nations to wrest
Namibia frdm the clutches of South Africa. But i’t is
also a$me“ when the people of Sotith Africa itself are
‘;‘dembiistraGng their determination to change the evil
system of apartheid under which they suffer.
80. ’ By’ &$ latest act, South Africa seeks to rer&d
Angola, ihe. people of Namibia and its own people,
as tie11 as the rest of the world;,that it will not yieid
to the forceqof history and will continue to defy world
.op@ion. :. i
,.,
81. The story of South Africa’s aggression against
Angola-and other independent African States is not a
new one. Many speakers in past deliberations and
during this debate have spoken of atrocities perpetrated by South Africa against Angola even before
its emergence as a sovereign State. This Council itseif,
,by its resolution 428 (1978) and resolution 454 (!979),
strongly condemned the racist rigime for its acts ‘of.
aggression ‘committed against Angola and firmly
warned that further acts of aggression could lead <to
the adoption of enforcement measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.

74. We are dekply convinced that the Namibian
people and other African peoples, with their rich experience in struggle, will fight on to thwart the schemes
of the South African racist authorities, overcome the
interference and sabotage by outside hegemonist
forces and win the final victory of national independence and liberation.
75. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): The ueoD!e of Angola
have won the admiration of.peoples-all bver the w&Id
because of their heroic struggle for liberation and
independence. We are all aware of their efforts to build
their nation in the face of continuing difficulties in a
world full of problems.

82. My delegation is encouraged by the speed with
which the Council has responded to the request:by
the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola
8

to hold an urgent meeting on.this niurderous action 89;. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
by South rAfrica. But the failure of .some,members of
representative of Yugoslavia whom I invite to take a
the’ Council in ,.the past to; agree to the necessary place at the Council table and to make his statement.
strong. measures provided .-for, in the : Charter ‘has j 2:.,j :.
undoubtedly emboldened Pretoria to persist .in. co.m- 90.. .,,Mr. MUJEZINOVIC (Yugoslavia): Mr;,Presimitting a.cts of aggression; lrhose. acts should not
dent, the representative of the Socialist Federal Repubonly be condemned; they must be stopped. The Counlic of Yugoslavia has already congratulated you on your
cil must call for the immediate withdrawal of all South assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
Africa forces occ.upying Angolan territory and it must ‘.month of June. I wish to thank you and,the other membegin j the process whereby .effective enforcement
bers of the Council .for having given me this,oppormeasures underchapter VII of the Charter may be tunity to present the views ‘of my country regarding
applied to halt such acts of aggression.
.’ 8 ,,-.
‘,the development of the situation in southern ‘Africa,
where ‘non-aligned ,Angola ,has again become the
,83. Mr. GARBA, (Niger) ‘~‘&&~r&ion
$&z
victim of aggression committed ,by, the racist .regime
French): The South African racists. have again sent
in,preto&
,
: ,’
‘,
.
.;
‘, ”
their murderous bands into Angola. The,Angolan people have for several days been under the artillery fire
91. We have not received the news of aggression
of several South African battalions.. Bridges have been by .South Africa either with disbelief or with astonishdestroyed, roads have beenmined and cattle have been ment. The aggressor, whose conduct has been repeatslaughtered.
edly,investigated by this organ of the United Nations,
1 1 ;... ‘. _,&..,.k -.’
‘.
I
‘/
has ,again violated the sovereignty and territorial
84. Coming after the merciless ‘repression ,of the
integrity of a peaceful neighbouring country. According
student demonstrations’ that recently took’ place in
to the first accounts and explanation given to, us this
several South African towns, thislarge-scale’attack
evening by the representative of Angola, the aggreson an independent, African State denotes the’ incor+
sors, in their onslaught, inflicted vast material damage,
gible character of the‘south African’ racists,‘who .are . destroying objects of infrastructure, demolishing
resolved to put Africa to fire and the sword in order to
buildings and bridge.s which had been constructed
safeguard their abusive privileges. I>
” ..‘,” ‘ ,’ ‘. ,:, ’ j
with so much effort and, what is most dreadful, killing
more than 370 innocent people. I think that there is
85. This is also a grotesque demonstration of the
no
need to emphasize in particular what all this means
Pretoria authorities* scorn for the ‘decisions of the
while
we express the profound feelings of indignation
Council. Should it be’seen as eviden&of the solidarity
that
these
dastardly acts have aroused
I and collusion which have always existed between
a. in us.
Israel and the South African racist minority r&ime?
9i.’ This most recent form of state terrorism is delibHas South Africa wished to associate itself, in’its own
erately
aimed at creating a ,situation which could
way, in the discussion on Jerus-alem‘the subject’ of
easily
turn
into a tragedy of wider proportions, liable
which is the catastrophic consequences of Israel’s
directly
to
threaten
peace and security iu that part of
repeated aggression against the ‘occupied
: ,,::. Arab, and
Africa and in the world at large. The Council has’conPalestinian territories?
:..
eluded several times that the racist regime in Pretoria
is endeavouring, by complicating the situation in the
86. The South African attack against Angola and the
region, to create conditions for the perpetuation of
recent Israeli measures on the future of Jerusalem are
its existence and the continuation of its policy and
parts of the same conspiracy which, from the Cape. to
practice of racism, racial discrimination, crpurrhcid
Beirut, mobilizes the energies of the enemies of the
and colonial exploitation. South Africa’s most recent
African and Arab peoples, with the blessing of proaggression has resulted in a further deterioration of
tectors who are powerful and insensible to the appeals
an already complex and tense atmosphere in interfor help of the oppressed masses.
,’ ;
:
national relations, threatening the foundations of
.87. Vigorous action by the Council“is necessary to
peace and security. In cases such as this, the Council
prevent the hangmen of Pretoria from,stepping up the
should resolutely fulfil its role as guardian ‘of the basic
massacre in Angola. The South African racists must
principles and achievements realized since’ the
know that time is against them and that the fires of
founding of the world Organization.
revolt, ignited and sustained by many centuries of
humiliation, will never be extinguished. They will
93. We are convinced that the Council will react in a
forever illuminate, in southern Africa, in the Middle
proper manner to the situation created by South
East and elsewhere, the road to .true freedom and
Africa, which amounts to a challenge to the Council’s
independence.
prestige and authority. The response of the Council
should be such as to arrest the current aggression as
88. The Government and the people of the Niger
well as to check and prevent once and for all all poswish to express here, through me, their sympathy and
sible future acts of aggression by the Fascist South
their active solidarity with the Government and peoAfrican regime against peaceful African countries.
ple .of Angola, who without any doubt will triumph in
We believe that it is high time to adopt without delay
the,liberation fight against the enemies of Africa.
the effective measures provided for under Chapter VII
9

of the Charter, as it is clear that all the efforts exerted
so far by the Security Council in cases where the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of other
African countries in addition to Angola-namely
Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana-were threatened or violated have failed to produce the desired
results.

interference and non-use of force in relations between
States. We are actually faced with a new attempt at
destabilizing the region .of southern Africa, at suppressing the liberation struggle of the. people of Namibia under the leadership of SWAPO, at breaking
up the unity and solidarity of African countries and
at weakening solidarity with and support for the struggle of the peoples of southern Africa against the
oppressive South African regime, against crprrrrhd,
racism and racial discrimination.
,. ‘.
97. The Yugoslav delegation wishes to express once
again its solidarity with Angola at this moment of trial.
My country is linked with the people of Angola by
close ties of friendship and co-operation which were
forged during the long liberation struggle of the Angolan
people and further developed and consolidated through
all-round co-operation since the liberation of that
country. Yugoslavia will lend full support to every
action taken by the Security Council aimed at arresting
the aggression of the racist South African regime
against the independence .of Angola and at creating
conditions liable to prevent the racist regime from
repeating similar acts and threatening the sovereignty
of neighbouring States and international peace and
security. The behaviour and actions of the racist
regime are all the more absurd in that they are taking
place at a time when efforts are being made to find
ajust and peaceful solution to the problem of Namibia.
The Yugoslav delegation would like to believe that
these most recent acts of aggression will have a sobering effect on those international factions which
exercise direct influence on the racist regime and will
impel them to endorse the appeal of non-aligned countries, and the countries of Africa in particular, calling
for the elimination of the racist regime, which is a
permanent source of instability. in the region and a
threat to the independence of neighbouring countries.

94. Yugoslavia insists on an urgent solution of the
problem-of Namibia, which is closely connected with
the most recent developments in Angola. We ‘are witnesses to a situation in which the relevant decisions
of the United Nations* particularly the decisions of
the Security Council, have not been implemented over
a period of many years, and in which South Africa
is resorting to tactics clearly aimed at allowing, it to
procrastinate and to postpone the start ofthe process
of the decolonization of Namibia, a Territory which
it continues to hold under illegal occupation, while it
endeavours to create conditions that would ensure
its continued presence and further exploitation of the
natural resources of that rich country. As a member
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia, Yugoslavia
urges the Security .Council to make use of its rights
and competence and take effective action for the
implementation of its own decisions.
95. At all their gatherings, and at the summit Conferences of the heads of State or Government in particular, the non-aligned countries have pledged their
full and unreserved support for ,a!! United Nations
actions and especially for actions aimed at finding just
solutions to problems in the southern part of the African continent. The Sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana, pledged, infer aliu ,
“all forms of support and assistance to the frontline States that, in spite of all kinds of difficulties,
give their militant solidarity to and serve as the safe
rearguard for the liberation struggle of the peoples
of southern Africa. It condemned all acts of armed
aggression and destabilization carried out by South
Africa . . . and reaffirmed that such actions represent an attempt by the enemy to block the support
given by the front-line States to the liberation struggle. The Conference reaftirmed that the front-line
States are not and will not be alone in their courageous determination to resist the racist enemy and
resolutely contribute to its total defeat.“’

98. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Hardly three weeks
ago the Council met and had an exhaustive debate on
southern Africa and South Africa’s racist policy of
uprrrtheid perpetrated against the majority population
of the country. Today we are again meeting to discuss
the mayhem of raids, bombings, indiscriminate killings
and armed aggression by South Africa against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola. As we were told by the representative of Angola, the latest raid of South Africa has
resulted in the deaths of hundreds of Angolan citizens
and the maiming of hundreds of others.

96. The South African neo-Nazi regime, in cooperation with forces that are reaping huge profits as
a result of the exploitation of southern Africa or are
striving to secure permanent strategic strongholds,
is endeavouring to undermine the freedom and independence of peoples who have won, through immense
sacrifices, their right to free and unhampered development, to an equal place among sovereign States and
co-operation with all peoples and States on the basis
of the principles of equality, non-intervention, non-

99. We have supported the request of the Govemment of Angola to convene this urgent meeting to
consider this latest act of aggression launched by
South Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola.
We have done so to express our indignation, anger
and unreserved condemnation of this aggression,
which violates the most rudimentary principles of
international law respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States.
10

100. The central problem in the entire episode of
death and destruction, man’s inhumanity to man,
emanates from the ruthless determination of the white
minority regime in South Africa to maintain its privileged position, no matter the cost. As I have said
previously, in spite of the remarkable restraint of
the front-line States, particularly Angola, South African aggression against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola continues unabated. To say the
least, the latest act of aggression has created a situation
fraught with dangerous and serious consequences. It
is the firm belief of my delegation that this Council
must condemn the racist regime of South Africa for
its continuing aggression against ail the front-line
States, particularly Angola. Further, the time has come
for this Council to move beyond mere condemnation and consider further measures, including those
under the relevant provisions of the Charter. There is
an imperative need to render all assistance to the
front-line States to strengthen their sinews, so that
they can maintain their struggle against South Africa.
This Council must therefore demonstrate forcefully
that the process towards peace in southern Africa
can no longer be impeded by South Africa.

and protection. Therefore, to my delegation, this is
plainly a cynical and defiant act by the crpartkid
South African regime at a time when the international
community had been entertaining sincere hopes that
progress could at last be achieved towards the implementation of a United Nations plan for Namibia
which would ensure peace and security in that troubled
region.
105. It would seem to us that such a peace plan is
not to the liking of the Pretoria regime; perhaps it does _
not accord with its ideas for a solution of the problem
of southern Africa. In the circumstances, we cannot
help but conclude that these acts of provocation and
destruction- against a neighbouring State have only
one purpose-to undermine and perhaps derail the
moves to achieve a just and peaceful solution of this
problem by the United Nations.
106. We have no alternative but resolutely to oppose
any act that offends our sense of decency, threatens
the ‘peace of the region and makes a solution much
harder, if not impossible to achieve.
107. Tlie Council must use every means at its disposal to resolve the present situation .:peacefully; it
must demand a cease-fire, the inmediate withdrawal
of the invading troops and full restitution to the AngoIan people.

101. Finally, I wish to reaffirm the full support of
the Government of Bangladesh for the just struggle
of the oppressed peoples of Namibia and southern
Africa for their national liberation, and I reaffirm our
firm solidarity with and support for all the front-line
States in their just struggle in safeguarding their national honour, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
I wish to express our deeply felt condolences to the
Government and the people of Angola and to the
wounded and the families of the victims of this dastardly act of aggression.

108. The PRESIDENT: I should .like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the. representatives of Algeria, Botswana and
Brazil, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
‘provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

102. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): We have read the
reports and heard the statement of the representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola concerning the
armed incursions by the racist South African troops
into the territory of Angola which have occurred since
7 June, and which are continuing up to the present
time. By now those forces, fully armed and equipped
with sophisticated weaponry, amount to a brigade.
About 400 Angolans have been killed and hundreds
more wounded, most of them civilians. Damage to
property and livestock is extensive.

At the invitutiun
of the President,
Mr. Semichi
(Algeria), Mr. Modisi (Botswnu) and Mr. Corr2u du
Costa (Brutil) took the places reserved for them ut
the side of the Council chamber.

109. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

103. Without doubt, these attacks and armed incursions are a flagrant violation of international law and
particularly of the Charter, and cannot but be strongly
condemned and censured by the international community. What further aggravates the situation is the
deptorable fact that they were perpetrated by a racist
regime that has been universally condemned for its
persistent aggression against neighbouring States, in
which it often uses Namibia as a springboard from
which to launch such attacks.

110. Mr. CORREA da COSTA (Brazil): Mr. President, I should like to thank you and the other members
of the Security Council for allowing my delegation
to participate in this most important debate. The situation we are considering is, indeed, very serious and
once again brings into the open the persistent refusal
of the South African authorities to comply with the
basic and fundamental principles of the Charter. We
had hoped that the negotiating process launched after
the adoption of Council resolution 435 (1978) on the
United Nations plan for Namibia would, in the final

104. That is ironic and deplorable, because Namibia
is supposed to be under United Nations administration
11

ple the inhuman..,and .-anachronistic segregationist
analysis, restrain South Africa’s expansionist and
-aggressive, policies, for the sake of bringing about .policies they: are now. subjected to. ,. I’ ;cii
.,
)(1!yi f,, 3
,I
stability and prosperity -in the csouthern part of:the
African continent. Unfortunately, instead ,of .lending 1114.,.-a,The;.Bra&&,Govkmme~t
.!and people .-pledge
its co-operation to the efforts now under way intended
their uncompromising solidarity with the.people and
to <enable tha,@nibian,, people, under the leadership
Government of Angola,.and we-fully share their pres~of SWAPO, to,~exercisetheir inalienable right to selfent. grief. This solidarity has been recently strengthdetermination and,,independence,, the ,authorities .:in : ened by the visitbpaid, to Angola by. Brazil’s Minister
, Pretot$by dubious and unclear responses filled with
of State for,Extemal Relations ,only. a few .days ago.
qualifications, have’ been protracting the, implemenWe have already strongly condemned the inadmissible
tation of the settlement proposal while pursuing an acts of aggression of the South African regime against
..i.ntemal~,solution~aimed
at establishing a puppet regime Ythe sovereignty and territorial: integrity of the People’s Republic .of Angola .and repudiated the massain, Windhpek. Both. the Brazilian and ..the Angolan
,,Government :have .alr.eady:expressed their joint .con- cres conducted. against the. -civilian population, as
‘ cem overthe manoeuvres of the South African regime
well as the deliberate destruction of economic centres,
,tend.ing to block United ,Nations resolutions, in partic- ,.aimed
that country.
: at< crippling and Iidestabilizing
:. : . :
ular&resolution.435 (1978), (and have reaffirmed their
joi,nt support for the just claims of the Namibian peoIIS, I am certain that ‘my &untry now more than
,-ple and,of,SWAPO~ ,+. : .’ :
<‘:. :,,
‘ever will be in a position to share the Angolan sorrow
.,
and to provide the Angolan people with assistance in
order ~_
to help them ‘in consolidating their indepen: 1!,I,: South-: Africa’s -defiance .of United “&ations
peace.efforts .goes even further.. It includes brutal and . dence ,and promoting their economic and social devel,..
- ,
.wanton acts. of, aggression .against neighbouring and
opment.
9 ,.,
*Y.”
2
front$ne States. -This time, .once again, the victims :
,.
.*were tthe brave ,and .courageous .people of Angola. ?!I16! .hIr. .WECKMANN (Mexico) (interpretation
-Only an .entity totally uncommitted to the authority
from Spnnish):,.My
delegation wishes to express its
of this Council would dare to engage in the atrocities
grave concem.over the new and serious acts of aggres.desqribed by the representative of Angola, in spite of
sion on the part of the Republic,of South Africa against
‘1~he~undisguisedwarnings already given by the Council.
the People’s Republic of Angola, one of the most
&id y&we are’ f acing a repetition of unjustifiable acts recent and valiant States Members of the Organizawhidh have caused the deaths of ‘almost 400 people
tion. We wish to express to the,people and Govern‘in ‘Angola: whose. territory at this moment bears the
ment ,of Angola>. through their t representative here,
,spurious and. illegal presence of one South African
our firmest solidarity in the face of the tragedy that
’ ,mdtorized ‘infantry brigade, ‘two battalions of parathat -sister country is suffering and our most hearttroopers’and one &companyof armoured cars. There
felt: sympathy to the families of so many innocent
”
,cari be‘& ‘denying that., together with the now already
victims.
_
:
‘.
vdluminous 1:collection of Pretoria’s crimes, these
latest mcidents constitute another serious violation
117, i We viewsthis moment’ as one .of the bloodiest
of international peace and security and, as such,
episodes in the process of. decolonization and the
should be dealt with by the competent United Nations
elimination of racism in Africa. The spirit of freedom
body.
:
and independence has been .opening a way in the
African continent, thanks to the sacrifice of its citizens
112. Speaking of crimes, one may wonder what
and to the growing sympathy of, all countries which
wish to live under the symbol of equality. Faced with
^ crime was committed by our Angolan brothers for
this movement for liberation-most recently exemthem to suffer such a harsh and heavy punishment.
They are’guilty bnly of pursuing the consolidation of
plified in Zimbabwe, which we soon expect to weltheir ‘own freedom ‘and development. The good faith
come at the United Nations-a movement that is not
‘and peaceful intentions of the Angolan Government
only impossible to contain but is about to culminate
in a formal political phase, the remnants of colonialism
need no further proof. Indeed, we owe to the late
President Agostinho Neto the concept of a demiliand racism in that continent, which unfortunately
tarized zone along the northern borders of Namibia
have accomplices, are entrenching themselves behind
as a means of assisting the implementation of the
their bulwarks and launching counter-attacks in order
settlement proposal.
futilely to prolong the supremacy that they have
enjoyed for too long, based as it is on oppression,
113. It is indeed naive to expect that a State whose
inequality and racism. Those attacks have been sysfoundations rest on the abhorrent policies of aparttematically directed against all neighbouring States,
heid, might ,relinquish expansionist and aggressive
using, in cases such as the one at hand, Namibia as
policies. The crux of the whole matter is that uparra forward base, a place where South Africa has main1*,
hrid must be terminated. Until then, southern Africa
tained an illegal presence for decades.
will know no peace and no prospect of prosperity.
The South African Government would do better if it
118. My delegation does not hesitate to point out
came to its senses and ceased imposing upon its peoto the Council that many of our resolutions con1;

i

i

:‘:,

.,~“i!;‘r.,

.’

‘

!>“$

;

. .._

_>

demning. the continued. acts of aggression by South
Africa remain for the -most,*part a dead letter; It is
making an appeal that those resolutions establishing
an embargo on 1arms and ririlitary equipment ’ atid
strategic aid to Pretoria riiay be implemented in -the
most reffective way and is ready to offer to make ‘its
contribution to a new resolution ‘that would categorically’bring about once and for ail the cessation of that
policy that .flagrantly violates the principles -of’ international coexistence and of the Charter. .’ .’ ‘:
’’
:
)_
: ,‘I ;
-’
-. i;;: ‘m ::
119. *The PRESIDENT:. The :next ‘speaker. is -the
representative *of Nicaragua. I i invite him :to take :a
place at the Council table- and to make a statement.?
, \
_.j
‘,.
120. Mr. TINOCO (Nicaragua) (inrerpretarion fim
Spnnish): Mr. President, permit me first of all to thank
you and the other’members of the Council for offering
me this opportunity to take part
.,. in ,.this debate.’
: -‘J 3i.:..:
121. IThe delegation of free Nicaragua is participating
in the. work’ of the, Council for ,the first time becau’se
it is deeply concerned over the massive act of aggression committed by the racist regime of Pretoria against
the brother country and people of ‘Angola, an act that
has so far left nearly 400 persons dead and involves
the introduction of a motorized infantrybrigade, -two
battalions of paratroopers and acompany, of armoured
: ‘.
cars into Angolan territory.
2, _:i
_’
122. Nicaragua wishes to protest as itrongly as pos.sible that inexcusable act of aggression
the con.’ and
>I
sequent loss of human life.
1, ‘.:. ~ ’
,I_
123. Those countries that belong $0 the non-aligned
movement, Nicaragua among them, fully understand
what is behind these acts of aggression and the manner
in which the international communlty’should face up
to them. Thus in the Final Declaration of the Sixth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non,Aligned Countries it is emphasized that
_zi
,
:’
:. “the problems of southern Africa could not be
:‘: dealt with piecemeal, because they are inextricably
interlinked politically, economically and militarily
and therefore have’to be tackled together”,*.
and that
>*i:
“Freedom, peace, security and progress cannot
‘.,I be achieved in southern Africa unless,the apartheid
.system of institutionalized racial discrimination,
exploitation and oppression is crushed”.’

the representative of Angola on .28 May [s/13965].
They left more than 200 dead and many wounded, in
addition to incalculable material damage and de” struction.
r,: ,*.I_
‘i25.‘:: We would further recall resolutions 454 (1979),
466 (1980) ,and 473 (1980), in which the Council cohdemned South Africa for its flagrant violation of the
sovereignty. and territorial integrity’ of neighbouring
:Afi-jcan’States. ’
1
‘.;
. . :.
.:.,i.IL’ ,
:.,,tt.:
i
126.~7My ‘tiountry wonders how many &ore’ deaths
there bwill bei1how many more resolutions. How long
will South Africa continue to .disregard the decisions
of the. United’ Nations and engage ‘in -its policy i of
,aggression,,and .terrorism with. impunity? ‘Responsibility “restsnot only with the nilhig circles of Pretoria.
Given the information concerning the supply of weapons and military equipment to South Africa;-‘and in
view of the ambivalence of certain countries in their
reaction to. the acts of aggression and the absence of
any effective pressure being exerted on Prietoria by
those same countries to imake ‘it apply the relevant
resolutions of the Council so that Namibia may attain
independence, those countries share responsibility
’
: for what is occurring today.. ,- . ‘h _ ! : ,“.,
‘::,
_”
:
,_/I
127.- Nicaragua calls upon-’ the Council to ‘demand
once -again that the racist regime refrain from’undertaking any .further military actions ‘and acts ‘of sub*version against African States; it should also demand
the immediate withdrawal’of the racist troops’from
Angola;- and, considering the innumerable appeals
unheeded by the racist regime and the’extreme seriousness of what now appears to be a full-fledged invasion,
the Council should -decide upon. the. application of .
other more appropriate measures that have a real: and
,.
decisive effect. I’ 128. The PRESIDENT: The’ next ‘speaker is the
representative of India. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
129. Mr. MISHRA (India): Mr. President, may I first
of all congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Given your
wisdom and diplomatic skill, we have no doubt that
you will successfully guide the deliberations of the
Council at a time when it is seized of some of the vital
issues facing the international community. _
130. I should also like to pay tribute to the representative of the Niger for his accomplishments during
.
his presidency last month.

124. We recall that this act of aggression is part of
the entire systematic policy ofthe racist-regime against
the territories of front-line States. Suffice it to point
out the 15 acts of aggression committed in the course
of this year that were mentioned by the representative
of Zambia when he addressed’ the Security Council
on 10 April last [2209rh meeting] and the two cases of
aggression brought to the attention of the Council by

131. Mr. President, I am grateful to you and to the
other members of the Council for this opportunity to
make a statement on the serious situation arising out
of the most recent acts of aggression committed by the
South African racist regime against the People’s Republic of Angola.
13

‘_

132. The Council has met Loday at short notice to
consider South Africa’s armed invasion of the People’s Republic of Angola. This has come within two
months of the unanimous adoption by the Counci!,of
resolution 466 (1980) .strongly condemning South
Africa for its. continued intensified and unprovoked
acts against another of its neighbours, the Republic
of Zambia.
,
.
133. In its.characteristic manner South Africa has
ignored the dictates of this Council’and, indeed, of the
entire .peace-loving world and has unleashed aggression against a young African nation. The fact that the
Council has decided to convene urgently to consider
the grave threat to international peace and security
caused by South Africa’s action against Angola rekindles the hope of humanity that the Council will take
a grave view of the South African aggression against
Angola. We ‘hope that the Council will take ‘such
adequate measures as’will force the racist South’African regime tovacate its wanton aggression and restore
peace in the area.

in the strengthening of its illegal occupation and
exploitation of the people and resources of Namibia.
:, 1
,..
138. The fact that the non-white population of South
Africa itself has over the past decades been seething
under the tyranny and exploitation of the.white upnrthd minority should have given the Pretoria regime
sufficient cause for attention ,and effort: Far from
securing a just and equitable solution of its own problems, the racist regime in Pretoriahas sought to’divert
attention from its own lamentable plight by launching
acts of aggression and intimidation against the frontline States. The world community, no doubt, has long
since seen through these transparent schemes.

134. The representative of the People’s Republic of
Angola’ has given us a graphic account of the growing
escalation of gets of aggression and intimidation that
have culminated in ‘the present situation. The bru- ’
talities committed by the .South African regime are
clearly contrary to all norms of civilized international
behaviour and are unbecoming to a Member ‘of the
United Nations. ’
135. We should commend Angola for its heroic resistance to South Africa’s sustained effort to intimidate
the young re ublic and for bringing the facts of the
case to the atBention of the Security Council.
136. The reasons for South Africa’s anger against
Angola and the other frontline States are not far to
seek: The People’s Republic of Angola has been the
champion of human dignity and liberty, and it has
consistently supported the oppressed people of Namibia, who have been denied their inalienable right to
national independence. The struggle for independence
in Namibia led by the sole and authentic representative of the people of Namibia, SWAPO, has reached
its final stages, and the South African racist regime is
desperately trying to prevent its inevitable ouster from
Namibia by intensifying its acts of oppression and
terror. Faced with the overwhelming challenge of the
liberation movement, South Africa has committed
aggression against Angola in a bid to force that country
to give up its stand of principle in support of the Namibian people.

139.. In this context, the increased activities by South
Africa in the direction of acquiring nuclear weapons
have assumed grave and ominous proportions. South
Africa’s military prowess, together with its nuclear
capability, is posing a threat not only to the people of
Africa but also to the entire world. The aggressive
policies of South Africa and its own building up of a
dangerous arsenal of weapons have been facilitated
by the support it has received from Western interests
in certain parts of the ‘world. It is regrettable that
certain countries continue to give encouragement to
the inhuman policies of South Africa for narrow and
selfish economic benefits.
140. The Council should condemn South Africa in
the strongest terms for its aggression against Angola
and demand immediate and complete withdrawal of its
troops, auxiliaries and surrogates from the territory
of Angola. The Council should also take note of this
latest action as a part of South Africa’s plan to perpetuate its illegal occupation of Namibia and to sabotage the activities of the United Nations to secure an
internationally acceptable solution to the question of
Namibia. South Africa’s policy of apartheid and racial
discrimination is at the root of its belligerence and
should be condemned again. The entire international
community should not fail to express its solidarity
with the people of Angola in their heroic resistance
against South Africa. Economic difficulties and a
threat to its integrity are the price that Angola is
being called upon to pay for its support of the cause
of the Namibian people.
141. My delegation expresses the hope that ,the
Council will be able to summon the necessary political
will to take enforcement action under Chapter VII of
the Charter if South Africa persists in its behaviour
and does not reverse an aggressive policy which
already stands universally condemned.

137. My delegation has in the past, while dealing
with South Africa’s acts of intimidation against the
front-line States, had occasion to refer to them as not
isolated and individual acts of State terrorism but a
systematic effort at intimidation and destabilization of
the neighbouring independent front-line States in an
effort to secure their acquiescence, if not co-operation,

142. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Romania. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
143. Mr. MARINESCU (Romania) (interprekztion
from French): Mr. President, the Romanian delegation would like to thank you and the other members
14

of the Council for giving it the opportunity to take
part in these deliberations dealing with an extremely
serious question for international peace and security.
:
.:
144. For the second time in two weeks, the Council
has to consider the matter of the evil deeds of the
South African authorities. A few days ago, in taking
part in the Council debate on the situation in South
Africa, the Romanian delegation [2229rh mering]
highlighted the deeply reactionary and aggressive nature of the racist regime of Pretoria and the extremely
dangerous risks posed by the very nature of that retrograde regime to peace on the African continent and
throughout the world.

149.~ That is why, in the opinion of our delegation,
the complaint by Angola and the present debate are
a serious alarm signal for the Security Council which,
under the Charter, has the special responsibility to
ensure a climate of peace and security conducive to
co-operation and the free development Iof all nations.
150. The Romanian delegation, like other delegations, has called more than once-in our statement
made on 12June [ihid.], for example-for the adoption
of strong measures to put an end to the policy of apartheid, ,the most degrading expression of inequality
and oppression,’ breeding violence on the domestic
front and acts,of aggression against independent Afri:‘. .,
_I
can States. -<

145. The present debate on the recent acts of aggression perpetrated by the racist regime of Pretoria
against the young independent State of Angola once
again show the baleful implications of the policy of
apartheid
and the very serious situation created in
that part of the African continent. They reflect at the
same time the indignation of the international community at the aggressive actions of South Africa
against Angola and its legitimate concern over the
ever-growing dangers which the racist and apartheid
regime’ represents for the security of African States
and for world peace.

151.’ The abolition of-the ‘policy of &rtheid
and .
the elimination of the causes of tension in that region
are, in the opinion of the Romanian delegation, an
imperative need of extreme relevance and ,urgency..
They have attracted the attention of progressive and
democratic forces everywhere that support the just
struggle of the peoples of southern Africa. To achieve
them requires the adoption of resolute ,measures to
compel the Pretoria regime to respect the relevant
resolutions of the Security .Council. The present
debate on the acts of aggression .against Angola,
which is taking place scarcely two weeks after the
Council’s adoption of resolution 473 (19gO), which
demands that “the South African racist regime should
refrain from committing further military acts and
subversion against independent African States”, once
more highlights the defiant refusal of the Pretoria :
leaders to heed the appeals to reason addressed to
them by the Council.

146. The recent South African incursions into
Angola, a State which has been devoting its efforts to
the peaceful reconstruction of the country, and the
very presence of armed forces of South Africa on
Angolan territory are ‘a flagrant violation of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
a Member State of the United Nations, an insolent
violation of the norms of international law and an open
defiance of world public opinion and the resolutions
of the Organization concerning South Africa. These
brutal actions are part of an uninterrupted chain of
‘acts of violence and aggression committed by the
South African racist regime against neighbouring
States, acts which have caused a number of victims
and severe material damage and which can in no way
be justified.

152. The Romanian delegation would like to take
this opportunity strongly to reaffirm the unswerving
solidarity of Romania with the Government and the
people of Angola in their heroic struggle to defend
and strengthen the national independence of their
country. We consider that it is absolutely essential
that, following this debate, the Security Council adopt
measures conducive to putting an end to the provocative and aggressive actions which represent a brutal
violation of the independence and sovereignty of
Angola as well as peace and security throughout the
African continent and the whole world. We unreservedly support, as measures to be taken immediately, the
resolute condemnation\of those acts of aggression
and the demand for withdrawal forthwith of South
African troops from Angolan territory.

147. The real aims behind these systematic and premeditated acts committed by the racist authorities,
which have been unmasked repeatedly in the past
during the Council debates, are without doubt to
stifle the struggle for liberation and the national emancipation of the peoples of southern Africa, to maintain
a regime of colonial domination in Namibia, to destabilize the economy of Angola and of other neighbouring African countries and to carry out South
Africa’s designs for domination in that part of the
continent.

153. Romania has condemned and continues strongly
to condemn the policy of apartheid
and racial discrimination which represents defiance of mankind,
a flagrant violation of the rights of the majority population of South Africa and of the Charter and of resolutions of the United Nations, and which engenders
serious dangers for international peace and security.

148. The harmful effects of such a policy and the
explosive state of the situation in South Africa itself
and in the whole region of southern Africa are a real
threat to peace in the area, with unforeseeable repercussions for peace and world security.

154. As is well known, Romania actively supports
the people of southern Africa, their national liberation
15

movements; the young independent States; as well as. units and arnuoured ,cars. ‘That brutal act .of. plunder
actions taken by the United Nations to’ abolish .otice and :-genocide ‘has, Shocked’ peace;loving’*people all
and for ‘all the policy of crparrh~id and racial discrimiover kthe world and evoked their strong’ip(lignation.
nation and to bring about the realization of the’aspid That’.blatant act .of aggression. is just ,,anothei manirations of the South African people to freedom, human
festation of the despicable $tuie of the’racist regime
dignity and social progress. That consistent position ‘. of South Africa, whi&has time and ‘again ‘shown
of ‘,Romania, *which has been’ expressed on’ Several utter ,disregard for’ universally respe’cted“;liorms of
occasions by ‘its President, ‘stems from’ its ‘steadfast
international .and civilized, ‘behaviour. The’invasion
policy of resolute support for the ‘national liberation;
ofAngola; which is one of a series ofcriniinal~assaults
struggle of peoples against imperialism, colonialidm~~’ committed by ‘South’,Africa’against-the territories of
ne’o-colonialism: and drill : forms “of ’ do’mi’nation : and
its neighbours, is a flagrant violation of the principles
foreign oppression; ‘and for respect ’ for the *sacred ’ enshrined in the’charter as well’as a.threat
...I :;.to the peace
right of each people to be master of its’ own destiny.’ : andI,.,,‘security
of
the
region.
;’
8
...
. r ‘., < .: -8:.
..i
.A’ ( I ._
:.
155. The Romanian delegation would like on this
1611” The Islamic countries,’ which share the expeoccasion to reaffirm ‘the position of ~Roiania of mili- : rience’with other countries of ‘Asia, Africa and Latin
tani solidarity and constant support for the ,str@$gle America of a common %trirggle~‘against ‘colonialism
of the Namtbian people to enjoy its inalienable- rights
and .imperialism, .fu!ly, understand the vicious nature
to, self-determination .and independence.
>v.;‘ a‘c1 of those ‘evil force,s and are conscious O;f the anguish
. .I I, ,..,.;; , ‘,f-:‘L:
,‘_
A’ <. .:,:.I.*
and tragedy ofthose who’suffer%ndei colonialist, and
I%‘.“;- We. are ‘profoundly convinced -that, in the . imperialist subjugation. The Islamic eountrieb’~‘have
present~%ircumstances~:of:a ,worsening international s. therefore fully sided with the’ heroic struggle of our
situation,’ the%ettlement of the problem of Namibia
African brothers to eradicate the last vestiges of
in accordance :with the aspirations of the Namibian ” colonialism and imperialism from that continent. The
people’ and the implementation of its legitimate ‘right
Islamic -countries have ,:also ~resolutely condemned
to’indepehdence have become.one of the most pressing ‘- the abhorrent and criminal policies of racial discrimiproblems affecting peace and co-operation among ” nation and’tipartheid practised by South Africa.;
.‘.
. ,._ . , I
.‘.‘. : ..
,
peoples.
,
.,. ~ :,.,,... ,‘_.“_.‘..
.
162. ‘-This common position of the Islamic countries
157. In conclusion, the Romanian delegation
is based,,on the eternal message of the brotherhood
expresses its donviction that the Security Council will
and .equality of Imankind proclaimed by Islam, ‘our
take the necessary steps resolutely to ‘condemn. the
respect for fundamental human rights and selfdeteraggressive actions -by the racist Government ‘of South
mination and bur abiding,commitment to human dig
Africa against Angola, to atErm the solidarity of the
nity and. peace. Motivated by this: spirit, the States
international community with the just struggle of the-. members ‘of the Islamic Conference have repeatedly
Namibian people for its national independence, and
expressed their complete solidarity with the African
to bring about the immediate withdrawal of the South . people in their just struggle forthe right to self-determiAfrican forces from Angolan territory, as well as nation-and national-independence and have undertaken
taking any other steps to satisfy the legitimate requests to extend to- them all possible help and assistance,
made by the Government of the People’s Republic
moral and material, in their resistance to colonialism
of Angola. .’ ’ ‘.; ‘.
and racism. In 1974, the <Fifth Islamic Foreign Miti‘,
ister’s Conference formally called for co-operation
158.: The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the : and consultations with OAU, with a view to promating
representative of Pakistan, who wishes to make a
solidarity between the two organizations and thus
statement in his capacity as ‘Chairman of the Islamic
frustrating the machinations of world imperialism.
Conference; I invite him to take a place at the Council
table. and to make his statement.
163. The Islamic Conference. has consistently
. .
opposed and condemned the practices of hatred ,and
159. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Mr. President, I wish to
discrimination in the economic, cultural and social
express our gratitude to you; Sir, and to the other
fields, as well as the continued unjustified imprisonmembers of the Security Council for having afforded
ment and torture of innocent citizens, and has called
my delegation the opportunity to speak on behalf of
for the release of political prisoners and the immediate
the States members of the Islamic Conference on the. recognition of basic human rights for the oppressed
grave situation resulting from the recent invasion by
majority and the restoration of such rights.
”
South Africa of the territory -of ‘Angola, a prominent
member of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries.
164. ‘The acts of aggression by South Africa against
its neighbours have been committed in the face of clear
160. We have learned with a deep sense of grief from
warnings issued by the Council, particularly in its
the representative of Angola that several hundred
resolution 428 (1978), in which the Council solemnly
innocent men, women and children lost their lives as warned that in the event of further acts of violation
a result of the wanton’ attack of South Africa, which
of the territorial integrity of Angola, the Council would
involved several battalions of armed troops, artillery
consider the adoption of more effective measures;‘,in
16

accordance -.$th the .appro.pri.ate,.,
provisions of the : 170. :.Hundreds of dead and wounded, among. them ,,
Charter, .including ,Chapter,; ,ylI. ,thereof. .,The ,-same*. defenceless women, children and old peoplermostly.
warning :&as,,repeated by the .,C,ouncil in. resolution,,. civilians+his js the ,result of what has been done once
454 (1979): -However, S.outh,A$+ continues td,carry :,i: again,,;by;.racist barbarity in that .brother country.
out its wantbri’acts of aggression; which have resulted ;: Since “23 June, a brigade of the, South African. armed. ,
in large-scale ‘damage .io life, and~:property. This sus- 1.. forces-has been tramping through -the fatherlandiof,l.
tained pattkiii of,’ aggression (betrays an’ : insidious
Agostmho.Neto,, deploying.PM&-90~ tanks, ,battaltons:;
design bythe %cist regime- of S9uth Africa to impede.:.: of. mqtprized, infantry s ayttllery , and armoured, .cars T
and obstruct.,the process .iof national reconstruction,. at :Eval, ~Mongua,. Cuamato, Ongo, Ankuaka, .,N’giva. ,
of its neighbours.and to,~eaken~ancl,destabilize’them~.,. and- Neone.. Its ~Mirage;planes,,and its .AtQ,uettehe$
165. ,.Un$Y.e~,,(;, & ;eh;;;L&
~can~;~n;tib;n.‘~ copters,,,a sinister. reminder of .the flagrant support+ .:
certain IWestern;Powers to Fasctst .Herr Botha;,,vtolate, 1’
of the United Nations, South Africa has siot,onIy per; : the airspace .@,a depth of.@. ktlometres v$hnn_ Ango: :.,
sisted in its despicable policies bf hpaithe-id and racial
la’s borders.
discrimination but has been emboldened by the, sup-,,
port ‘it continues to receive from .certain .quarters ,to .. 71.,:*-This:is .‘,
not../.the.first,time m.the per&d:,of,a few :
intensify its aggression against its.neighbours. Howmonths ,that this body .has been urgently convene.d to..,+
ever, that support.cannot, halt,the,advance of .history., cons,ider the acts of armed aggression by,&Preto.ria ..
The brave people @Namibia and South Africa, ~who. regime: iambia,:Angola.cr,~d.Mozambique:.ha~e;indis-.,,
are fighting for human dignity,; civilized, . values, and,, criminately and repeatedly suffered and been mauled
recognized norms ‘oftinternational lay:, and ‘above .all, ,, by .it without the international community:having been
for their -right to self-determination, ,will,~inevitably :, able to adopt any .,measure against: the: aggressor..
triumph.
1 .( ,I*
I
.,
:.;,. Neither. has this Council been able .to,~pply:the.meas::.’
._
.:A:..’
,;
I’ :. ., ures provided for in ..the ‘Charter to. safeguard the .
,’
166. The Security ‘,,Council. .ha$’ a primary respon-, i independence ,and territorial, ,integrity of .thosecoun-.,;
sibility to bring this deplorable situation ,to an *end, tries or to mete. out the punishment .dese:rved to any .,!
cquntry that daily, tramples on+ ..:_:it 1 ‘, :.:;,. ; : s’T,; ‘,
The Council must vigorously condemn .the latest
:.
South African aggression against the People’s Re172. This new crime committed by the South’.&&
public of Angola.: South Africa must be asked to
can racist regime cannot remain unpunished. It,+ not, 1
withdraw forthwith-its military troops from the terripossible to tolerate Mr. Botha’s Fascists continuing, .%
tory of Angola and. to respect .the territorial integrity,
in,, disregard of. all ,Ithe protests’ of, the .,progressive..1
severe.ignty and national independence of its. neighinternational community;. to massacre, .:persecute.,
hours.. The Council .must also give aclear warning
torture and imprison the black patriots of got.@ Africi; e
that it can no longer tolerate wanton acts of aggresand the members of its national,,liberation ,,movec ,
sion. by the racist regime of South Africa and that,
ment, the African National Congress,: and. to ,brfng
if such :acts are repeated, the Council Will not hesitate
death, destruction and horrors to I the, :neighbouring
to impose the sanctions provided for under Chapter VII
independent States..
.r ,-,,
of the Charter. Finally,,the Councilshould also declare
‘a C’.
its complete solidarity with the Government and the
173. It is totally inadmissible’ for ‘South,Africa“to’:.
people of Angola and other front-line -countries and
call. :upon Member .States to extend all .necessary make use of the Territory of Namibia, .yhich it occupies: i
illegally in complete defiance of the United Nations
assistance to those :oountries to strengthen their
and showing scorn for its Members,. as:a,trampoline
defence against the predatory attacks of the racist
for its attacks on Angola. It is shameful for this to be ,
regime of South Africa.
happening despite the repeated decisions; that have
been
adopted by the United Nations Council .-for :
167. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Namibia,
the ,legal Administering Authority for the
representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at Territory, and
despite the demand by the overwhelming
the Council table and to make his statement.
majority of the General Assembly that an end be put
:,.*.,,.
once and for all to the criminal policy’ of the South
168.-..Mr. ROA KOURf (Cuba) (interpretation from
‘-.;
African racists.
S@@h): Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the
other’ members of the Council for the opportunity’
174. If the abominable and monstrous .crprrrtheid -- being’offered to me to participate in this debate.
regime has justly been considered to be a crime against
humanity, the international behaviour of those who
169. :.The non-aligned countries, whose group at the
represent it and embody it deserves the repudiation
United Nations I have the honour of presiding over,
of all and the rigorous sanction of the Council.
have learned with deep indignation the news of a new,
brutal and unprovoked act of aggression by the racist
175. The non-aligned countries and other progresminority regime of South Africa against the People’s
sive forces have demanded that sanctions be imposed
Republic of Angola, a member of our movement and
against South Africa. At the sixth Conference of Heads
of its*.Co-ordinating Bureau.
of State or Government, our countries urged the Coun.

,’

‘:’

I

,I’

I_,‘,

;

‘!I,:,

I

‘:_

‘.*

,.,;

_,,.

“.‘.

1

I

,:

;

_ .”

17
.‘..

.

,

:
,,,..

:’

cil to impose general mandatory sanctions against the
Pretoria regime, in accordance with Chapter VII 6f
the Charter. Almost one year has elapsed since then,
and despite the fact that every passing day brings fresh
proof of the criminal and aggressive behaviour of
South Africa, which thus becomes the main threat to
international peace and security in southern Africa,
the Council remains immobilized by the inaction of
some of its permanent members, not to mention’the
shameful’veto against the just demands of the qualified
majority of the States Members. It is truly ‘inconceivable’ihat the juicy profits extracted from South
Africa by the multinational corporations of those same
countries should paralyse the action of the supreme
body of theUnited Nations, whose main responsibility
is’to defend the principles of the Charter and to oversee the maintenance of international peace and security.

i76. The Council must condemn this new act’,of
aggression by’the so-called Republic of South Africa
.- against the People’s Republic of Angola. The Council
must unequivocally condemn the utilization by ‘South
Africa of the Territory of Namibia-which, I repeat,
‘. it .illegally occupies against’ the will of the intemational commtinity~for launching its aggression against
independent countries in ‘southern Africa. The Council must demand the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of ‘the <racist armed forces from the ‘territory of ‘Angola and it must demand reparations for
‘the damage done to the population, to property, to
the means of communication and to the agriculture
of Angola. The Council must demand the immediate
and unconditional cessation .of violations of Angolan
airspace by the’south African Air Force. The Council
must, in brief, apply the sanctions provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter against the racist, oppiessor, expansionist and aggressor regime of South Africa.
177. States Members, for their part, should refrain
from selling weapons, military technology and oil ,to
the Pretoria’ Government and should require the
immediate cessation of such sales by States which
continue to engage in such trade and which contribute
i’,, in this way to the strengthening of the military poten‘.tial and the aggressive capacity of South Africa. Above
all, Member States should lend urgent, generous
assistance of many kinds to the People’s Republic of
Angola and to the front-line countries, in order to
strengthen their defence capability in the face of the
continuing acts of aggression by South Africa.

‘the independent States of Africa. Those who Support
them today for reasons which cannot be confessed
will tomorrow face the inevitable consequences as
well.
180. The struggle continues; the victory is certain.
181. The PRESIDENT: The next ‘speaker ‘is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him, to take a place
-at the Council table and to make his’statement.“,
I,
‘,182. Mr. SEMICHI (Algeria) (interprc-t&n
from
‘French): On behalfof the Algerian delegation, I ‘Should
like : first to thank the members of the Council for
having given my delegation the opportunity to’partic‘ipate in this important debate.
,..,’
183. The Algerian delegation has already had the
opportunity to extend its congratulations to you,
Mr.’ President, on your assumption of the presidency
,of the Security Council for the month of June. ,These’ I
congratulations, which we have the pleasure’ b;f ‘te‘newing today, were contained in a statement made’by
the representative of Algeria [2228rh meeting] during
‘the debate on the stepping up of repression’by the
racist forces of Pretoria against the people of South”
Africa on the eve of the anniversary of the people’s
uprising at Soweto. In that statement, we had the
bpp~ortunity to speak about the danger posed to’international peace and security by the oppressive land’
bellicose behaviour of the u~urtlzeid regime, a regime”
,which practises institutionalized racism, tramples
under foot all democratic freedoms within its borders
and exercises intimidation and aggression ‘on the’
:Intemational level against all neighbouring countries,
which it tries unceasingly to destabilize.
:
184. The question before ‘the Council today is
obviously well known to its members, for it is another
link in a very long chain of systematic aggression
against the People’s Republic of Angola, since ,its
accession to independence in 1975. We have to ‘say
that the racist regime of Pretoria has never been able
to accept the victory of the national revolution and
its mm garde, the MPLA, in this former Portuguese
colony, and has constantly attempted such acts ‘as
direct intervention by its troops in Angola at”the
moment of the historic victory of the Angolan liberation movement. Beyond this, South Africa has
always tried to divert the revolutionary current which
is, and has been since 1975,following its path in Angola.

178. Angola is not alone in its heroic resistance to
the invader. By its side are the people of Africa, the
non-aligned countries and the progressive forces of
the socialist camp. Whosoever attempts to conquer
fraternal Angola will, as a patriot of Cuban independence put it, gather the dust of its land or will perish
in the attempt.

185. The special nature of the debate which has
begun today in the Council stems from the well-known
plans and ulterior motives of South Africa, at the very
time when the international community-in whose
forefront are the members of the Council-is urging
that country to join a consensus within the United
Nations to bring about a peaceful negotiated settlement of the Namibian issue on the basis of Council
resolution 435 (1978). We believe that these ulterior
motives and designs have to do with the determina-

179. No people will stand idle in the face of the
aggressive policy of the South African racists against
18

tion of.the Pretoria regime to give another dimension
to the issue of Namibia and to extend the zone of
tensipn, to Angola, to Zambia and to the whole southem portion of Africa, thus diverting the attention of
the international community from the obvious issues.

the entire Angolan people, which has brought a complaint here as a result of the South African aggression
of which it is the victim, and respond in an appropriate
way to the aggressive behaviour of the Pretoria regime.
192. Zn taking any decision, the Council must bear
in mind the contents of the letter of the SecretaryGeneral of the’united Nations addressed to the Pretoria
authorities on 28 June [ihid.]. ,More than ever before
the prestige of the Organization and of the Council as
the guarantors of international peace and security is
at stake. That is the responsibility of the members of
the Council, and we earnestly hope for an adequate
solution to the crisis prevailing in southern Africa.

186. Permit me to sum up the .situation prevailing
in that part of Africa. That situation is crystal clear.
First, South Africa is illegally occupying Namibia.
Secondly, the international community as a whole
has prepared a plan for a peaceful solution in order
to try to resolve that situation. Thirdly, only South
Africa is opposed to the implementation of that settlement plan. Fourthly, in order to put an end to the
delaying manoeuvres of Pretoria, the United Nations,
through the Secretary-General, asked South Africa
recently to take a clear stand explaining its own intentions with regard to implementing- that plan.

193. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
194. Mr. MODISI (Botswana): Mr. President,
I should like to thank you for having allowed my delegation to participate in this debate. My delegation is
confident that you will guide our deliberations to a
successful and satisfactory conclusion.

187. In the opinion of the Algerian delegation, the
South African reply to the Secretary-General’s letter
[S/14021] is to be seen in this bloody act of aggression
against the brother people of Angola, against its historic revolution and against its leaders, who up to now
have made only a positive contribution to the efforts
of the United Nations to put an end to the illegal
occupation of Namibia and to resolve that problem.

195. We have just heard a complaint by the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola concerning the South African invasion and occupation
of part of the territory of Angola since the beginning
of this month. The South African Government itself
has confirmed that its soldiers-some of whom were
killed-invaded the territory of Angola beginning on
13 June. The South African Government further
admits that it has used aircraft, helicopters, armoured
vehicles and several battalions to carry out the attack
against the People’s Republic of Angola. The South
African Government has declined to give any specific
reason for the attack against Angola.

188. Hence South Africa’s reply is, to our mind,
the expression of the utter scorn that South Africa has
for the United Nations; it is the expression of the utter
arrogance that that country has never ceased to demonstrate on the basis of what it claims is its military
superiority over the other countries’ of southern Africa
and a kind of invulnerability which, it would seem, it
owes to the political, economic and military support
it finds in certain Western countries.
189. In this precise context and in this difficult phase
today confronting the People’s Republic of Angola,
whose people has just added 370 more martyrs to the
victims of South African aggression, the Algerian
delegation wishes to express its complete and entire
support for that friendly country. The trials now confronting Angola affect us all, just as they affect all
African countries, the long-suffering African continent and all the oppressed peoples of the world. We
should like to reiterate here Algeria’s total commitment r&&is Angola to any initiative or decision to
be taken by that country to strengthen its internal
security and to safeguard its national independence.

196. We have met several times in past years to
consider and take decisions on similar South African
aggression against neighbouring independent African
countries. The decisions taken by this Council have
invariably demanded that South Africa stop all these
diabolical attacks against its neighbours and withdraw
its forces from their territories. These decisions are a
matter of public record and the South African Govemment is fully aware of them. Yet South Africa continues, in a blind rage against the neighbouring independent African countries, to attack their territories,
killing, as they did in this case, innocent men, defenceless women and children, destroying, as always,
property and livestock, crippling strategic installations
and cutting off communications by destroying bridges
and telecommunication lines.

190. Furthermore, with regard to the other international implications of this South African aggression
against Angola, in particular the Namibian dimension
of this aggression, my country wishes to recall here
its total support for SWAPS, the sole authentic representative of the Namiban people, which is successfully waging its armed struggle to recover its national
rights.

197. As recently as April, Zambia brought a similar
complaint to this body. The catalogue of the crimes
the South Africans have committed on Zambian soil
were identical to the crimes they have committed and
continue to commit within the territory of Angola. In
that debate, South Africa was strongly condemned for
aggression against Zambia.

191. in conclusion, we consider that the Security
Council must now respond to the hopes placed in it by
19

:

1

.:

:

:-.

_‘.

-.

198. My delegation would like to observe that South
African aggression against Angola and Zambia follows
a pattern directly related to the search for solutions
to the problems in the area. Representatives around
this table will recall that in May 1978, during the socalled proximity talks on the future of Namibia, South
Africa unleashed a wanton attack on Assinga, in
Angola. The attack brought home the true nature of
the South African intentions in those talks, in which
it was a principal party. At that time, South Africa
has announced its widely reported acceptance of the
Western plan that formed the basis for those negotiations. Early this year, the Secretary-General sent a
team to southern Africa to consult Governments in
the area on the modalities of the implementation of
the demilitarized-zone component of the Western
plan. On their way to the area, the United Nations
representatives were met with a series of South African bombings, as South Africa was then engaged in
an invasion of the territory of Zambia. Today, almost
before the ink could dry on the Secretary-General’s
reply [ibid.] to the South African letter seeking clarifications on the demilitarized zone [S/13935], the
South African armed forces are boasting about their
invasion of Angola, in which they have killed more
than 370 men, women and children, destroyed property and crippled strategic installations.
i99. It is evident, therefore, that, whenever South
Africa is faced with a reasonable proposal based on
international law and supported by the entire international community, its response has invariably been
to resort to armed invasions of its independent African
neighbours. The inevitable conclusion to be drawn
from the pattern of events my delegation has just
outlined is that the South African Government finds
it very difficult to reason with the international community and that, whenever it fails to wrestle with the
tasks before it, it takes out its frustrations on its neighbours. That is the cruel punishment that Angola and
Zambia in particular have had to endure. It would be
remiss of my delegation if it did not add that they are,
indeed they must be, taking this punishment on behalf
of the international community. What is the international community prepared to do in retribution? Does
South Africa, a renegade regime condemned for its
evils against humanity, have no one to account to?
200. Western countries continue to sell destructive
arms to South Africa, which the latter in turn uses in
its invasion of neighbouring independent African
countries. Western Powers do so even as they admit
to us that it is illegal to sell arms to South Africa.
Security Council resolution 418 (1977) outlawed sales
of arms to South Africa, and those countries among
us which engaged in such trade with South Africa
undertook to stop it.
201. The Council must take measures to see to it that
resolution 418 (1977) is respected and that South
Africa is denied the military hardware that it now
misuses at the expense of independent African coun-

tries. Western countries, in particular, must exert fresh
efforts to stop the flow of arms and military technology
to South Africa. Only effective action by the Western
Powers will give meaning to our work here in the
United Nations and lend credibility to the pious declarations of concern that we in southern Africa and the
oppressed peoples in South Africa and in Namibia, in
particular, have heard so much about.
202. The Government and people of Angola, for
their part, have demonstrated their adherence to
international principles and law. They have demonstrated their courage and determination to gain their
independence from colonial rule and to retain that
independence in the face of tremendous challenges.
They have striven to normalize their relations with
the neighbouring countries, and in a mere five-year
period have succeeded in gaining the confidence of
the international community.
203. In the search for a solution of the problem: of
the illegal South African occupation. of Namibia,
Angola has taken courageous initiatives and has proposed the establishment of a demilitarized zone between its territory and that of Namibia. The demilitarized zone concept was proposed by Angola in direct
response to South African concerns. All parties
concerned have recognized that concept as an eminently pertinent, reasonable and responsible approach
to the problems raised. The co-operative and innovative attitude of the Government of the People’s
Republic of Angola must be reinforced and encouraged by all of us who believe in the rule of law and
reason. The international community, acting through
the Council, should be seen not to be failing in its duty
to safeguard the principles- and tenets that mankind
throughout the ages has valued.
204. In conclusion, the people of Angola have the
right to demand retribution for the evil that South
Africa has frequently and without reasonable cause
visited upon their country. They have the right to
defend their territory against wanton and unprovoked
invasions. This right is enshrined in international law
and in the Charter, of which the Council is the guardian.
205. My delegation strongly condemns the Govemment of South Africa for its acts of aggression against
the sister front-line State of Angola and demands that
it withdraw forthwith and unconditionally all its
forces now in Angola.
206. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
26 June from the representatives of Niger, Tunisia
and Zambia [S/14025], which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that during its
consideration of the item entitled “Complaint by
Angola against South Africa” the Security Council
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional

.

cations, despite these armed attacks, they-with the
support of the rest of Africa, with the support of the
non-aligned movement and of ail progressive mankind-will persevere in the struggle. We are convinced
that the struggle will be intensified, and that final
victory in southern Africa is certain.

rules of procedure, to Mr, Theo-Ben Gurirab, Permanent Observer. for the South West Africa People’s Organization to the United Nations*‘.
Unless I hear an objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to this request.

213. We are heartened bv the sufferings and sacrifices that the people of Angola and Zambia endure on
our behalf in order to help us to resist the illegal coioniai occupation of our country. We express once again
on this occasion our heartfelt grief and condolences
to the MPLA-Workers’ Party, to the Government
and to the fraternal people of Angola in their sad hour
of national emergency and tragedy. They are shedding
their blood and undergoing daily hardships as a result
of provocations and attacks. SWAP0 will never forget
what they are doing for us. The future generations of
Namibia, of free and independent Namibia, will not
forget their suffering and sacrifices.

207. The PRESIDENT: I invite Mr. Gurirab to take
a place at the Council table to make his statement.
208. Mr. GURIRAB: Mr. President, I am most grateful to you and to the other members of the Council
for giving me this opportunity to address you during
this debate. It is a personal privilege for me and an
honour for SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people and, indeed, an honour
for the Namibian people.
209. The Security Council, charged by the Charter
with the critical questions of war and peace and the
maintenance of security in the world, has met once
again to debate racist South Africa’s violations of
international law and the Charter, of which apartheid
South Africa is a co-author, one of its representatives
having - ironically-served
as one of the original
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly.

1;

:

214. We are dealing with a small group of die-hard
racists who are desperate and losing their senses.
They have chosen to be on a collision course with
history. They shoot and kill small schoolchildren in the
townships and cities of South-Africa. They are using
brutal military occupation as an instrument of persuasion, and they are daily killing and torturing Namibian
patriots throughout the country. To them, goodneighbourliness means repeated armed invasions and
acts of aggression against independent front-line African countries. Their co-operation with the United
Nations on, for example, the question of Namibia, is
characterized by persistent defiance, non-compliance
and rejection of the authority of the Organization
over Namibia.

210. For the umpteenth time, the Council has before
it a complaint by an African front-line State charging
armed invasion of its sovereign national territory and
the commission of massive acts of aggression, entailing
a tragic loss of human lives and wanton destruction
of property at the hands of the Fascist military forces
of the racist junta of Pretoria operating from Namibia,
which it continues to occupy illegally in open defiance
of the United Nations, which is the legal authority
over Namibia.

215. For more than three years, protracted efforts
have been made to promote Namibia’s independence
through the holding of free and fair elections under
the supervision and control of the United Nations.
Security Council resolution 435 (1978), however,
remains in limbo. Its continued viability as a basis for
settlement is becoming increasingly doubtful. South
Africa has been and remains the sole obstacle.

211. We listened attentively to the serious and compelling statement of the representative of Angola at
the beginning of this debate. We were moved by his
eloquence, but more than that we were traumatized
by the grim facts and figures of the explosive situation
created in his country by the latest massive unprovoked act of aggression against and armed invasion
into the People’s Republic of Angola.

216. Less than a week ago, on 20 June, the SecretaryGeneral sent yet another conciliatory letter to the
Pretoria racists so as to enable them to accept speedy
implementation of the United Nations plan on Namibia. The fact that the Council is meeting at the
instance and on a complaint of Angola is an indication
of South Africa’s real intentions in Namibia. It is an
indication that South Africa is not ready, is not willing,
is not prepared to implement the United Nations plan.

212. We are compelled by the gravity of the situation
thus created and by its serious implications to make
our voice heard in the Council. The southern African
region is at a critical stage. The members of the Council are fully aware of repeated pleas in this body by
representatives of the front-line countries recording
the repeated wanton acts of aggression, destruction
and loss of lives in Angola and in Zambia, in particular. We know that the people of South Africa, no less
than the peoples of Angola and Zambia, are suffering
at the hands of the racists who are supported and
abetted by powerful imperialist forces in the Western
world. We are convinced that, despite these provo-

:.
.
-_
-_

217. It is most significant to note that the latest
aggression is taking place at a time when OAU is in
session at Freetown, Sierra Leone-a continental
body of sovereign independent African States whose
co-operation with and support for United Nations
efforts to superintend Namibia and bring it to genuine
21

‘.

independence is crucial and essential. Why did Botha
and his hechmen choose this time to remind us of their
true intentions? What conclusions are the African
leaders supposed to draw from the current situation
created in Angola? Is it not the same racists who are
expected to co-operate with the front-line States in
resolving the colonial conflict in Namibia? How is
that possible? If the Boers believe that they can
threaten or attack SWAP0 and make it submit, they
are seriously mistaken. The struggle, which is our
patriotic duty and commitment in Namibia, will continue until final victory. We are convinced that Angola’s support for SWAP0 and the Namibian people
will remain unswerving. We are pleased and proud of
Africa’s determination and the support and material
assistance coming from the world’s progressive antiimperialist, anti-colonialist, anti-racist, anti-Zionist
and anti-capitalist forces.
218. The resolution to be adopted at the end of this
debate may, like the previous ones, be nothing more
than a mere show of solidarity, a post-mortem reaffirmation of the lofty .ideals of the United Nations.
Peace and security are seriously threatened in southern Africa. Chapter VII of the Charter enjoins this
Council to act, and it is ‘action that the gallant people
of the People’s Republic of Angola look for as they
listen to the deliberations of this Council. They expect
action. No reaffirmation, no gestures of solidarity
will suffice to fight against brigades, battalions,
armoured cars and the rest.
219. Therefore, in conclusion, may we once again
appeal to the Council to assist the front-line countries,
which are front-line countries not only in terms of
OAU; they are front-line countries also because
they are members of the non-aligned movement, and,
most importantly, because they are helping the United
Nations to realize its ideals, to assist the people of
Namibia and enable them to realize their right to selfdetermination and independence. Therefore the Council should do more than merely condemn, express
solidarity and rearm principles.

220. Mr. MUTUKWA (Zambia): I should like to
introduce the draft resolution in document- S/14024.
I am speaking on behalf of the seven sponsors of this
draft resolution: Bangladesh, Jamaica, Mexico, the
Niger, the Philippines, Tunisia and my own country,
Zambia.
221. After what has been said in this marathon debate there is very little one can add, except to indicate that this particular draft resolution is intended to
go at least some way in responding to the grave situation we face following the aggression by the racist
regime of South Africa against the People’s Republic
of Angola. One could have wished to have stronger
measures adopted.at thistime, but consultations have
indicated that there is need to present what we have
been able to achieve so far.’
222. The draft resolution now before the Council is
based on several previous positions and it relies on
some language used in previous resolutions, such
as resolution 418 (1977), which was adopted unanimously by the Council. It is our hope that no delegation will find any difficulty in going along with a
number of positions that have been accepted previously .
223, It is on the basis of a clear assessment and the
consultations undertaken that we commend the draft
resolution for adoption by the Council at a time to be
determined by the President.
The meeting

r&e at 9.35 p.m.

NOTES

I A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 92.
para. 78.

f Ibid.,

.’

Litho in United Nstions, New York

cKt400

83-61462-Octbkr

1987-2,OSO
