216

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

into the mainstream of society, and in preventing delinquency,
Mindful further of the social aspects of domestic violence and of the great importance of emphasizing and
developing appropriate methods of conflict resolution
between the parties involved,
Recognizing that abuse and battery in the family are
critical problems that have serious physical and psychological effects on individual family members, especially the
young, and jeopardize the health and survival of the family unit,
Recognizing further the adverse effects of exposure to
domestic violence, especially at an early stage of human
development, and the incalculable harm thereof,
Convinced that the problem of domestic violence is a
multifaceted one which should be examined from the perspective of crime prevention and criminal justice in the
context of socio-economic circumstances,
Convinced also of the necessity to improve the situation
of the victims of domestic violence,
Concerned that the abuse of alcohol, narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances may be an exacerbating factor in
domestic violence and that the effects thereof should be
further examined,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of women as victims of
crime; 80
2. Invites Member States concerned to take specific
action urgently in order to prevent domestic violence and
to render the appropriate assistance to the victims thereof;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify research
on domestic violence from a criminological perspective to
formulate distinct action-oriented strategies that could
serve as a basis for policy formulation and to report
thereon to the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control to examine the problem of domestic violence;
5. Urges all relevant United Nations bodies, agencies
and institutes to collaborate with the Secretary-General in
ensuring a concerted and sustained effort to combat this
problem;
6. Invites the Eighth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders to
consider the problem of domestic violence under a separate agenda item dealing with domestic violence;
7. Invites Member States to adopt specific measures
with a view to making the criminal and civil justice system
more sensitive in its response to domestic violence, including the following:
(a) To introduce, if not already in existence, civil and
criminal legislation in order to deal with particular problems of domestic violence, and to enact and enforce such
laws in order to protect battered family members and punish the offender and to offer alternative ways of treatment
for offenders, according to the type of violence;
(b) To respect, in all instances of the criminal proceeding, starting with the police investigation, the special and
sometimes delicate position of the victim, in particular in
the manner in which the victim is treated;
(c) To initiate preventive measures, such as providing
support and counselling to families, in order to improve
their ability to create a non-violent environment, emphasizing principles of education, equality of rights and equal80 NC'ONF 121/lh

ity of responsibilities between women and men, their pannership and the peaceful resolution of conflicts;
(d) To inform the public, as necessary, through all
available channels, about serious acts of violence perpetrated against children, in order to create public awareness
of this problem;
(e) To deliver appropriate, specialized assistance to
victims of domestic violence, as an integral part of social
policy;
(I) To provide, as a temporary solution, shelters and
other facilities and services for the safety of victims of
domestic violence:
(g) To provide specialized training and units for those
who deal in some capacity with victims of domestic violence;
(h) To initiate or intensify research and collect data on
the background, extent and types of domestic violence;
(1) To make legal remedies to domestic violence more
accessible and, in view of the criminogenic effects of the
phenomenon, in particular on young victims, to give due
consideration to the interests of society by maintaining a
balance between intervention and the protection of pnvacy;
(J) To ensure that social welfare and health administration systems are engaged more intensely in providing
assistance to victims of familial violence and abuses, and
to make all efforts to co-ordinate social welfare and criminal justice measures.
96th plenar)' meeting
29 November 1985

40/37. Expression of appreciation to the Government and people of Italy on the occasion of
the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Milan,
Italy, from 26 August to 6 September 1985.q
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government and
people of Italy for acting as host to the Seventh United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/38.

International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/56 of 3 December 1982, 381
104 of 16 December 1983 and 39/122 of 14 December
1984, as well as Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/45 of 31 May 1985,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Inter
national Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women on its activities, 81
Taking note with interest of the Institute's mode of operation, through the use of networks, in carrying out its functions at the international, regional and national levels,
81 A/401707, anon

VI.

Recognizing the importance of research, training and
information activities for the increased participation of
women in the development process at all levels,
Recognizing also the importance of research, training
and information activities for the implementation of the
Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement
ofWomen, 79
l. Requests the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women to strengthen its
activities in research and training for the formulation of
policy analysis, planning and programming relevant to the
increased participation of women in development,
especially its activities in statistics, indicators and data relevant to women, in particular in the developing countries,
at the national and regional levels;
2. Also requests the Institute to give particular emphasis in its programme of activities to innovative methodological approaches related to women and development in
research, training and information programmes;
3. Calls upon competent institutions and organizations
within and outside the United Nations system to continue
their collaboration with the Institute by strengthening the
network of co-operative arrangements related to programmes concerning women and development;
4. Invites States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women, in view of the
long-term projection for the work of the Institute;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session a report on
the activities of the Institute;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women".
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/39. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind,
including distinction as to sex,
Reaffirming that women and men should participate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
by which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of3 December
1982, 38/109 of 16 December 1983 and 39/130 of 14
December 1984,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention, 82
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the
work of its fourth session, 83
82 A/40/623.

83 Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Se.1.non. Supplement

No. 4J (A/40/45).

217

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

l. Notes with appreciation the increasing number of
Member States that have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;
2. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so as soon as possible, taking into
account the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 July 1985;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status of the Convention;
4. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the
work of its fourth session;
5.. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
Convention;
6. Urges States parties to make all possible efforts to
submit their initial implementation reports in accordance
with article 18 of the Convention and the guidelines of the
Committee, and requests the Committee, in organizing its
work, to ensure that the reports of States parties are adequately reviewed within the quadrennial cycle envisaged
in the Convention;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make all efforts to
ensure adequate servicing for the effective functioning of
the Committee as a treaty body of the United Nations;
8. Takes note once again of the discussion in the Committee, at its third session, 84 concerning the inclusion in
the agenda of a future session of an item on ways and
means of implementing article 21 of the Convention,
which provides that the Committee may make suggestions
and general recommendations based on the examination
of reports;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to the Commission on the Status of
Women, for information.
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/98.

Improvement of the role of the United
Nations in the field of social development

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and Development based on the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly proclaimed on l l December 1969, 85
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of 1 May 197 4, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 33/48 of 14 December
1978 on world social development and 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies
for the Advancement of Women, adopted by the World
Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Devel84 Ibid.. Jhmy-mnth Sesswn. 'iupp/emem No. 45 (A/39/45). vol. II. para

360.
8, Ser resolution 2542 (XXIV,
