United Nations

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4355th meeting
Thursday, 2 August 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernández de Soto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Cooney
Miss Durrant
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Strømmen
Mr. Gatilov
Ms. Lee
Mr. Chaouachi
Mr. Kuchinsky
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Small arms
Letter dated 25 July 2001 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2001/732).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-49128 (E)

*0149128*

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 4.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Thailand and Nigeria, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Singhara
Na Ayudhaya (Thailand) and Mr. Mbanefo
(Nigeria) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would also
like to ask representatives, as far as possible, given that
we have 25 speakers on the list, to ensure that speeches
are to the point.
The next speaker is the representative of Mexico.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico is very gratified to have the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia presiding
over this meeting of the Security Council. Allow me to
convey to you, Sir, my country’s great appreciation for
your Government’s firm support for the consideration
of the issue of small arms in international forums.
After the statements that we heard this morning,
my delegation does not wish to be repetitive or
overwhelm the Council with a lengthy and
cumbersome speech on small arms and light weapons,
but we would like to respond to the invitation extended
by the Government of Colombia to consider this issue
in the context of the activities and mandates of the
Security Council.
In a broader context, that of the whole
international community, the recently concluded United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects — which has
already been referred to many times — demonstrated a
broad interest in taking a multilateral approach to this
issue.

2

The problem became of particular concern in the
mid-1990s. The estimated figures for 1995 indicated
that approximately 500 million small arms were
circulating worldwide, as you noted in your statement,
Mr. President. Recent estimates speak of about
600 million small arms, which originate from
600 manufacturers in 95 countries. When the Council
discussed this issue two years ago, in September 1999,
concern was expressed about the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and the destabilizing effects of
their excessive accumulation and circulation, especially
in regions of conflict. Moreover, the Secretary-General
was requested to include in the studies of the problem
the humanitarian and socio-economic consequences of
the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of small
arms and light weapons, of transfers of these weapons
and of their illicit production and sale.
In the two years that have elapsed,
notwithstanding the arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council, the excessive availability of small
arms and light weapons has not been reduced in
countries in conflict.
We believe it necessary to once again appeal to
the exporting countries to exercise a greater level of
responsibility in their international transfers of such
weapons. This was eloquently underscored by the
representative of Mauritius during this morning’s
debate. We would like to note that we should continue
the practice established by the report of the Chairman
of the Security Council Committee on the situation in
Angola, which raised the question of the use of arms
traffickers and the provenance of arms obtained by
illicit means, and made recommendations on how to
tackle these problems. As the Security Council
investigates the activities of intermediaries in the small
arms trade, and the trail of financial transactions
involved in this field, it will have at its disposal more
information on which to formulate recommendations
and take decisions.
The question of small arms is multidimensional.
Mexico believes that the Member States of this
Organization should make a commitment to provide
weapons only to those Governments that are acting in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. As was stated this morning by the
Ambassador of Bangladesh, the Member States should
also undertake to establish a worldwide zone free of
child soldiers. The Security Council should have at its
disposal specific information on small arms in those

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

cases where there is a threat to international peace and
security. To this end, the coordination mechanisms
within the United Nations system could be improved,
and communications with subregional and regional
organizations could be strengthened, as well as with
non-governmental organizations.
The Security Council should study in depth the
lessons learned in the area of small arms. The Lessons
Learned Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in conjunction with the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, could present a report on the
excessive availability of small arms and light weapons
in conflict situations and the repercussions of such
weapons on peace-building.
Mexico believes that advisory missions to
consider the question of small arms in regions of
interest to the Security Council should have the consent
of the State or States involved. In a broader context,
such missions might help to define the specific
assistance needs of States suffering from excessive
accumulations of this kind of weaponry.
In conclusion, I reaffirm my country’s firm
commitment to the full implementation of the measures
proposed in the Programme of Action of the previously
mentioned United Nations Conference.
We are confident that the Security Council and
the General Assembly will continue to consider the
issue of small arms within their respective mandates.
The outcome of that consideration will be examined in
the review conference in 2006.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Mexico for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Argentina. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.
Before giving the floor to the representative of
Argentina, I wish to express to the Mission of
Argentina the sorrow of the presidency concerning the
death a few days ago of Ana María Moglia, who was a
member of the Argentine delegation in the Council and
an outstanding colleague of many of those present here.
May our condolences be conveyed to her family in
Buenos Aires.
I now invite the representative of Argentina to
make his statement.

Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
being present today at this important debate on small
arms. I commend you, Sir, on your initiative, and on
the excellent work that has been done by the Mission
of Colombia, headed by Ambassador Valdivieso, in
preparing for this meeting.
I would also like to thank you most especially,
Mr. President, for your condolences for the loss of an
excellent civil servant, an excellent friend and an
excellent servant of the United Nations, Counsellor
Ana Moglia, and I am sure members of the Council
who were here last year when Argentina was a member
will remember her qualities. I am particularly grateful
for your words of condolence and I will certainly
convey them to her family.
Today, the international community is aware of
the magnitude of the problem caused by the
proliferation and the excessive accumulation of small
arms and light weapons around the world. As has been
noted in this debate, the United Nations has made it
clear that the uncontrolled circulation and easy
availability of these weapons currently causes the death
of more than 500,000 individuals annually as a
consequence of civil war, conflicts and crime. It is
estimated that 40 per cent of the global arms market is
diverted to the black market, fuelling the majority of
regional conflicts that have arisen since 1990.
The Secretary-General has noted that small arms
and light weapons must be the next focus of urgent
global attention, since these arms exacerbate conflicts,
cause flows of refugees, undermine international
humanitarian law and engender a culture of violence
and impunity. These arms destroy the social fabric and
constitute a menace to peace, development, democracy
and human rights.
Reducing the steadily growing access to these
arms in the world is one of the most serious challenges
the international community faces today.
To combat this, more laws and regulations are
needed, and especially the political commitment to act
with resolve when looking for affective answers to
solve this problem. To do this, it is necessary to adapt
and optimize existing resources in order to prevent,
control and reduce this menace responsibly and
efficiently.

3

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Every region and country has its own
characteristics, and the solution must be developed
taking these particularities into account.
In contrast to the progress achieved in the field of
arms of massive destruction, a framework of global
standards and norms for eliminating the illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons was lacking.
Among the initiatives previous to the recent
Conference in New York, we can mention the United
Nations resolutions on the matter, and especially the
commitment shown by heads of State at the
Millennium Summit, where it was resolved to take
concrete action to end illicit arms-trafficking as part of
a broad common vision for a secure and peaceful
world.
Aside from the initiatives mentioned, we should
add the pioneering work of the Organization of
American States in creating the first binding regional
instrument on the issue: the Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related
Materials, which supplements the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects has marked a turning point in the stance of
States in combating illicit trafficking in these weapons.
The Programme of Action adopted at that Conference
establishes a series of measures to put an end to illicit
trafficking, to try to make transfers of weapons
transparent and to support regional disarmament
measures.
Argentina notes with satisfaction that this
included a commitment to establish penal measures
criminalizing the manufacture and the illicit trafficking
of these arms, as well as administrative regulations and
monitoring bodies for their production, circulation,
export and import. It is encouraging to see the
development of international criteria on the arms
brokering, the detection of the routes of illicit trade and
the location of its points of supply.
We underscore in this respect the appeal to
countries to cooperate with the United Nations system
for the effective implementation of arms embargoes
decreed by the Security Council in accordance with the
Charter.

4

An international programme of action could not
be implemented if the proper instruments were not
developed at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels. Within the framework of the
Southern Common Market and Bolivia and Chile,
initiatives have been taken to address this problem:
first, the creation of a common registry of vendors and
purchasers of firearms, their parts and ammunition; and
secondly, the creation of a firearms group, whose
mission will be to harmonize legislation, increase
cooperation and act as the focal point for coordination
in following up the Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference.
Argentina, like many countries, is not spared the
consequences of the illicit circulation of small arms.
The increase in the rate of urban violence, which in my
country has taken a tragic number of innocent victims,
is often the consequence of the illicit arms trade and
the ease with which any individual can acquire a gun
on the black market. These facts are a cause of great
concern and are among our Government’s priorities for
action.
We trust that the Security Council will play an
important role in adopting an integrated approach to
this problem. We believe that there are two important
aspects to be taken into account: the first is the
inclusion in the mandates of peacekeeping operations
effective measures for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants; the second is the
creation of mechanisms to monitor effective
compliance with sanctions. The mechanism created for
Angola and that established on 30 July by resolution
1363 (2001) for Afghanistan are positive concrete
examples.
The goal is to pool our efforts to tackle a
multifaceted problem that cannot be attacked on just
one front but must be attacked on various fronts
simultaneously and concertedly. Coordination and
international cooperation are fundamental for achieving
this. Only in this way can the problems of war and
violence be reduced to manageable levels, and
conditions for the security of the population be made
favourable. This is an indispensable factor for life,
liberty, peace, solidarity, economic progress and
harmony in international relations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Argentina for his kind words
addressed to me.

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

The next speaker inscribe on my list is the
representative of Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First,
Mr. Foreign Minister, let me welcome your presence in
this Chamber, which underlines the importance of the
topic that brings us here. Let me also congratulate
Colombia on the initiative of convening an open debate
on the question of small arms in the Security Council.
There is no doubt that this is a problem with
universal dimensions, which our Organization should
address not only in the Assembly but also in the
Security Council. In this regard, the presidential
statement of the Security Council on 24 September
1999, which incorporated this item on its agenda,
recognized that what we are facing is “multifaceted and
involves security, humanitarian and development
dimensions”. (S/PRST/1999/28, second paragraph)
Because we are really dealing with “small arms
of mass destruction”, it is vital to take every
opportunity to keep alive the commitment to combat
this scourge on all fronts.
The question of small arms is a complex issue
that represents a serious threat to human security. We
believe that we must undertake to eradicate this
scourge through measures that promote respect for
human rights, the rule of law and good governance, as
well as equitable socio-economic development and the
implementation of programmes to eradicate the culture
of violence and replace it with a culture of peace.
Here we must take note of the outcome of the
recent United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
In this context, we fully support the substance of the
presidential statement made by Ambassador Camilo
Reyes of Colombia, who so successfully guided the
proceedings of the Conference.
We agree that the Conference represented a very
significant step, in that it was the starting point of a
process to address in a comprehensive manner one of
the most urgent issues in the area of international peace
and security.
However, we, too, were disappointed at the fact
that it was not possible to reach agreement on
recognizing such significant aspects of this struggle as
the establishment of restrictions on the private
ownership of weapons and the need to eliminate their

transfer to non-State actors. We are convinced that
agreement on this last aspect would have markedly
facilitated the work of the Council. For this reason, we
deem it appropriate to note that the Secretary-General
highlighted the potential benefits that the international
community might expect from an understanding on
these issues.
On this particular point, we believe it important
to reiterate that at the Conference, Chile expressed its
conviction that it was essential to make progress on the
elaboration of an international instrument to strictly
limit the manufacture of, and illicit trade in, these
weapons. It stated also that, in a matter that is so
closely bound up with human suffering, we should
promote restrictions that will safeguard life, above and
beyond simple free-trade considerations.
We believe that the Security Council must play an
active and clear-cut role in this process and that it
should in its work consider the fresh responsibilities
that the international community has set out in the
Programme of Action of the Conference. For this
reason, we would to highlight a number of initiatives
that take on particular significance in the light of that
document.
It is clear that the question of the proliferation of
small arms is a source of immediate concern in postconflict peace-building situations. It is therefore
essential for the Security Council to consider including
in peace agreements and in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions specific measures to give effect
to programmes for disarmament and arms destruction
and for the demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, with particular emphasis on the situation
of child soldiers.
We believe also that we must incorporate in the
process of planning peacekeeping operations experts
who are skilled in the area of international
humanitarian law, human rights and the rights of
refugees, including provisions relating to children and
gender issues, so as to ensure the effective
implementation of these principles. As a reflection of
the importance of these programmes, it is also essential
to allocate the necessary resources for their
implementation.
It is clear that illicit flows of small arms
complicate the work of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. Not only should the
States involved strive to restrict these flows, but the

5

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Security Council should also make rigorous use of the
monitoring mechanisms available to it. In other words,
this body should not simply confine itself to calling for
the implementation of these measures; it should ensure
their full and effective implementation.
We believe that efforts to restrict the flow of
small arms will require a change in the way in which
sanctions are applied. On this particular point, the
Council will have to continue to explore new ways of
improving the effectiveness of arms embargoes by
reviewing the functioning of existing sanctions
committees.
It is extremely important to strengthen preventive
measures in order to restrict the use of these weapons
and avert the need to resort to the programmes
mentioned earlier. In order to do so, the Security
Council should have available to it, in its consideration
of each conflict, the relevant information about the
illicit use of small arms and military weapons. This
would make it possible to give priority to such illicit
use in the general framework of the efforts deployed by
the Security Council in the process of the restoration of
stability.
In this regard, the Security Council must play a
dynamic role in educating Member States about the
negative effects of sustained flows of weapons to
hotbeds of tension and to areas of conflict. These
efforts can be enhanced through the exchange of
information and the development of close international
cooperation with the various regional and subregional
bodies involved in the monitoring the destabilizing
proliferation of these weapons.
We would like to conclude by highlighting the
tremendous responsibility we have in alleviating the
plight of peoples that are hostage to crime and armed
conflict, which are fuelled by the excessive and
uncontrolled circulation of these weapons. We must
find solutions to promote social and economic
development as well as national, regional and
international stability. As Ambassador Reyes noted at
the conclusion of the Conference on the illicit trade in
such weapons, we should continue to address this
question in all its aspects until the conscience of
mankind is at long last satisfied that all that can be
done has in fact been done, in order to alleviate this
global tragedy.

6

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Chile for the kind words he addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Moura (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, the delegation of Brazil joins previous
speakers in welcoming your initiative and in expressing
our satisfaction at seeing the brotherly country of
Colombia presiding over the Council. Your presence
here reflects the importance of this moment for
Colombia. We are certain that during the month of
August, the Council will be in very good hands under
the leadership of Ambassador Valdivieso. I am also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his important
statement this morning.
No other United Nations body, in its daily
activities, experiences the effects and consequences of
the uncontrolled circulation and use of small arms as
does the Council. When this matter was dealt with in
the Council for the first time two years ago, Brazil had
the honour of occupying one of the non-permanent
seats. Our then Foreign Minister had the opportunity to
participate in a productive debate on an issue that was
new and not very visible at the time. There can be no
doubt that the ministerial meeting of the Council and
the presidential statement issued at that time helped to
give this issue visibility on the world scene.
Much has changed since then. The situation is
more complex and fraught with challenges.
Mechanisms for addressing the question of small arms
are much more developed. Thanks to extensive
discussions, the issue is much better understood, and
the many dimensions of its manifestations in various
regions of the world have been recognized. The notion
of the primary responsibility of States has been
consolidated.
Two months ago the General Assembly adopted
the Protocol against the Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. In
our region, the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms
came into force. More important than any of this, we
managed to agree on a Programme of Action in the
context of the recently concluded United Nations

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Conference on the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Therefore the
Security Council today is debating this issue in a
context in which the international community has
already laid common bases for addressing these
problems.
It is important to conserve the achievements of
the Conference. The success was due to a large extent
to the skills of Ambassador Camilo Reyes, and it is
essential that we give the worldwide follow-up process
that has already been agreed upon the opportunity to
yield fruit. We are pleased to note that the Colombian
initiative to further pursue this issue recognizes the
limits of the jurisdiction of the Security Council in this
field and the need to avoid creating a process parallel
to that of the Conference. Small arms are being
addressed by the Security Council as elements in some
of its items and not from any conceptual perspective,
which could encompass the whole set of problems in
all their aspects.
For Brazil, the dimension of the phenomenon of
small arms and light weapons that is of particular
concern to the Security Council is the conflict
dimension. The role of the Council with respect to
small arms relates to conflict prevention, the
implementation of arms embargoes, the collection of
surplus arms in the post-conflict phase and the work of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants.
We know that this important role is not exclusive
to the Council, but it should be combined with the
efforts of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, in particular, and with regional and
subregional initiatives. Similarly, an integrated and
balanced approach to the phenomenon that takes into
account, for example, the fact that small arms are also
something that fuel organized crime, drug trafficking
and terrorism would go beyond the mandate of the
Security Council.
In the area in which this body has jurisdiction, it
seems essential to us to highlight the importance of
securing strict monitoring of the implementation of
arms embargoes decided upon by Council resolutions.
We would like here to place on record our recognition
for the efforts of the sanctions committees to ensure
monitoring of measures to combat illicit trade in
firearms in regions or entities that are subject to

sanctions and to make public the actions of persons and
countries that are involved in sanctions violations.
The reduction of the military capacity of UNITA
in Angola is proof that the Security Council, in
conformity with the mandate of relevant resolutions,
may play a key role in worldwide efforts to combat
illegal arms flows.
We are also convinced that two of the major
objectives of the Council in the area of small arms —
preventing conflicts and strictly implementing arms
embargoes — have been strengthened in the
Conference in the sense that it was able to adopt a
political undertaking to provide small arms and light
weapons only to governments or entities properly
authorized to receive them.
The basic document that the delegation of
Colombia has circulated for this debate contains a
series of important proposals. In order to make an input
in this thinking process, I would like to highlight some
points which, it seems to us, could strengthen the role
of the Council, without getting into the sectors that
relate to other bodies of the United Nations.
First of all, the Council should be ready to enter
into dialogue with regional and subregional agencies
that are also involved in Council agenda issues and
which have experience or initiatives in the area of
small arms. We encourage the Council to continue the
policy of strict implementation of arms embargoes in
all sanctions regimes and to continue to provide
incentives to all States to cooperate with the
investigations of the sanctions committees.
It is also important to take into account measures
to ensure that surplus weapons in a conflict that has
just ended are not diverted to neighbouring countries or
other regions where there is potential conflict. As to
the Conference on illicit trade, the Council could send
a positive signal by welcoming the adoption of the
Programme of Action and reaffirming the commitment
to contribute to the implementation of its provisions.
Lastly, at the first biennial meeting for the
implementation of the Programme of Action, the
Council might call on the Secretariat to provide
information on the progress achieved in securing the
objectives set in those paragraphs directed to the
Council.
Solving the problem of small arms requires the
commitment of all States, the assistance of civil society

7

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

and input from international, regional and subregional
organizations. The Council alone cannot successfully
tackle this challenge. But it is positive that this matter
is being discussed and the views of States Members
with respect to what they expect from the Council’s
activities are being listened to. We hope that this open
debate will result in a substantive decision that will
once again reaffirm the determination of the Council to
work together with all concerned and contribute to
collective efforts to eradicate the evils caused by small
weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Brazil for the kind words that he has
addressed to Colombia.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belgium. I invite to take a seat at the
Council table and make his statement.
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — the associated
countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey; and Iceland
and Liechtenstein, European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) countries belonging to the European Economic
Area, align themselves with this statement.
I would first like to congratulate Colombia for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and to
thank China and Ambassador Wang for his excellent
service in the month of July. I would also like, in
particular, to thank you, Mr. President, for having come
from Bogota in order to preside over this open debate
of the Security Council and thus give us the
opportunity to express ourselves on a subject that is of
particular concern to us and on which Colombian
diplomacy and particularly Ambassador Reyes have
devoted so much energy — namely, the illicit trade in
small arms in all its aspects.
We can never repeat enough that there are more
than 500 million light weapons and small arms
currently in circulation around the world, and that in
armed conflicts 8 out of 10 victims are civilians, many
of them women and children. How can we ignore this
scourge that fuels conflicts and seriously destabilises
civil society? Public opinion expects us to take action.
None of our countries can resolve this problem alone.
That is why we need to act together.

8

At the start of the Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in July, the Belgian
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister declared,
on behalf of the European Union, that it was essential
to be able to achieve concrete results in a number of
what we consider to be priority areas: the
implementation of export controls and export
principles; the development of an international
instrument on marking and tracing, as well as on
brokering; specific actions concerning stockpile
management and the destruction of surpluses; and a
particular emphasis on disarmament, demobilisation
and the reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants.
The European Union was not able to obtain at the
Conference everything that it considered essential for
effectively controlling illicit trafficking in small arms,
in particular in areas having to do with export
principles applied in the framework of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as well
as of the European Code of Conduct for Arms Exports
and the European Union Joint Action on Small Arms
and light weapons. The final text nevertheless contains
important elements relating to marking, tracing, export
controls, stockpile management, DDR and assistance
for the world's most affected areas, mainly Africa.
Furthermore, we are very gratified by the
decisions to organize in 2006, at the latest, a review
conference to examine the implementation of the
Programme of Action and to hold biennial meetings to
evaluate the progress made at the regional, national and
global levels that will ensure a follow-up to the
Conference. In this context, I wish to thank SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan for his remarks this morning,
which clearly point the way for us. This follow-up is
vital for ensuring that joint action against this illicit
trafficking is effective in the long term.
Lastly, the follow-up opens the way for the
preparation of negotiations concerning marking,
tracing and brokering. This kind of initiative is of
particular importance to the European Union, which
has already begun important work along those lines.
The Programme of Action asserts that the illicit
trade in light weapons prolongs conflicts and involves
elements that touch on conflict prevention and
settlement, as well as on development. The
participating States have therefore decided to prevent,
control and suppress all aspects of the illicit trade in
light weapons, laying particular emphasis on regions of

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

the world where conflicts are ending and where there is
an urgent need to resolve serious problems posed by
the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of light
weapons.
The Programme of Action also provides for the
application of DDR programmes comprising measures
for the collection and destruction of light weapons, in
particular in post-conflict situations, and for the
inclusion, whenever appropriate, of specific provisions
for such programmes in peace agreements. At the
regional level, there are also a number of measures
aimed at strengthening moratoriums on the transfer and
manufacture of light weapons and at support for DDR
programmes, especially in post-conflict situations.
Lastly, at the global level, the participating States have
undertaken to encourage, particularly in post-conflict
situations, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life.
In this regard, we have undertaken to encourage
the Council to study, on a case-by-case basis, the
possibility of including, if need be, relevant provisions
concerning
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets for
peacekeeping operations. The incorporation of these
measures into a comprehensive strategy is, in our view,
an effective and coherent way of supporting
peacekeeping efforts and, above all, of guaranteeing
their durability.
The European Union considers it essential that all
the efforts made to convene the Conference be
followed by concrete effects. The States that have to
contend with post-conflict situations must be helped
and supported by international decisions and measures
taken in compliance with the Programme of Action.
As we have already said, none of our countries
can resolve the problem of the illicit trade in light
weapons and small arms alone. The European Union
will therefore welcome with enthusiasm any initiative
that will make it possible to enhance the follow-up to
the Conference, as well as the implementation of the
measures already taken and of those that will enable all
the actors concerned to strengthen their capacity to
combat this trade in an effective and lasting way.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Belgium for his kind words addressed
to me.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Philippines. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also congratulate China on its presidency last month.
At the same time, I wish to congratulate you and your
country on the leadership and initiative you have
shown throughout the process leading to and during the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and for
having convened this important meeting today.
Like your country, the Philippines has not
escaped the problems that have been caused by the
proliferation and uncontrolled spread of small arms and
light weapons. In this regard, I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement earlier this
morning, in which he once again captured the true
depth of this problem.
The international community took a step in the
right direction in addressing this problem when, less
than two weeks ago, we concluded our small arms
Conference with the adoption of a Programme of
Action. We must continue to move in the right
direction and build on what we have achieved. The
proliferation and the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons are and
should be of direct concern to the Council. While the
other organs, particularly the General Assembly, and
agencies of the United Nations all have particular roles
to play in addressing this problem, the Security
Council has a unique and singular role, not only
because the top producers of small arms and light
weapons are members of the Council, but also because
all have, in various forums, supported efforts to address
this problem. Moreover, the Security Council's role is
important primarily in two areas: arms embargoes and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of ex-combatants.
Illicit small arms transfers have become
commonplace. New and old weapons move with
unbelievable ease, but when United Nations arms
embargoes are defied, that is when we see how truly
insidious the activities of illicit arms brokers are. Thus,
we find it most significant that the Programme of
Action recalls the obligations of States to comply fully
with Security Council arms embargoes. The

9

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Programme of Action also contains the commitment of
States to take appropriate measures at the national level
against any activity that violates a Security Council
arms embargo.
We strongly urge the Security Council to continue
looking into ways and means of enhancing the
effectiveness of arms embargoes, including reviewing
the functioning of existing sanctions Committees and
encouraging States to provide all relevant information
on embargo violations.
While we understand the particular constraints
involved, the Philippines strongly supports the call
made by the Secretary-General and others two years
ago, during the ministerial-level consideration of this
issue in the Security Council, that measures for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants be included in peace agreements and the
mandates of all United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
We are particularly glad that the Programme of
Action on small arms did not limit DDR to postconflict situations. It is true that, as far as United
Nations practice is concerned, the mindset is to apply
DDR only to post-conflict situations, but there are far
too many conflicts in which the United Nations is not
involved and applying this rule to all conflicts is and
would have been a grave error. If we are to wait until
conflicts end, there may be no one left to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate.
We believe that even before conflicts cease, even
before a conclusive military or political solution is
reached, combatants should have a viable and practical
opportunity to take themselves out of the conflict and
for their small arms to be collected. The fact is that
some combatants, given a choice, might prefer to do
this, but that, in the absence of DDR, they may turn to
crime, piracy, acts of terrorism or other similar
activities. The Philippines therefore thanks those who
supported our view and helped bring this progressive
element into the Programme of Action.
We believe that our overall efforts to address the
problem of small arms and the momentum that we have
been building would receive a welcome boost if the
Security Council were once again to place itself fully
and squarely behind these efforts through a presidential
statement or a resolution. This would give added
political impetus to the follow-up action to the
Conference and the Programme of Action.

10

Finally, the Philippines looks forward to working
with the various organs and agencies of the United
Nations, the relevant international and regional
organizations, other States and members of civil
society in implementing the Programme of Action,
including preparing, as appropriate, for the various
follow-up meetings to review its implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I welcome you to
New York, Mr. President; it is good to see you here.
You know, Sir, we in the Non-Aligned Movement used
to be very envious of Colombia for its wonderful city
of Cartagena, but now we are truly, truly envious of
your having won the Copa América; we congratulate
you and the people of Colombia.
South Africa is pleased that the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects successfully adopted a
realistic and implementable Programme of Action. In
that regard, I wish to recall the statement made by the
head of the South African delegation during the general
debate at the Conference, when he said that
“the Conference provides the international
community with a unique opportunity to
collectively express itself on the dangers posed
by these weapons and to adopt a realistic and
implementable programme of action. Such a
collective effort would initiate a long-term
process to prevent, combat and eradicate this
threat to peace, stability and sustainable
development”.
In that regard, South Africa is satisfied that the
Conference achieved its goals. While it must be
recognized that the Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference strikes a delicate balance of differing
views, the Programme provides for the first time an
internationally agreed framework for preventing,
combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects on the
national, subregional, regional and global levels in a
realistic, sustained and comprehensive manner.
The successful conclusion of the Conference, Mr.
President, was possible thanks to the important role
played by your Government, and in particular by

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Ambassador Camilo Reyes in his capacity as President
of the Conference. His leadership and contribution, as
well as that of Ambassador Carlos dos Santos of
Mozambique, the Chairman of the Preparatory
Committee, inspired the Conference to seek
compromises and to adopt a realistic and achievable
Programme of Action. Their dedication to the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is symbolic of the plight of
the peoples of States most affected by the scourge of
those weapons.
South Africa is particularly pleased that the
Programme of Action is based on the approach adopted
by States most affected by the threat of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons. Africa collectively
responded to that threat through the adoption of the
Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position
on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, thereby providing a
framework for an African solution to a problem that
transcends national and regional boundaries. In terms
of that framework, the small arms problem is addressed
from an inclusive perspective of arms control and
disarmament, post-conflict peace-building, conflict
prevention and socio-economic development. In
addition, the Declaration concerning Firearms,
Ammunition and Other Related Materials in the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the adoption of a SADC draft protocol in August
this year will facilitate subregional cooperation to
combat illicit small arms proliferation; this is of
particular relevance to the Programme of Action.
South Africa also welcomes the agreement that
the General Assembly should convene a follow-up
conference by no later than 2006 to review progress
made in the implementation of the Programme of
Action. That conference and its preparatory phase,
including meetings of States on a biennial basis, would
consider national, regional and global implementation
of the Programme of Action. It would also ensure that
the process started by the United Nations Conference is
sustainable and that it remains relevant. It would
further ensure that the United Nations continues to play
a central role in addressing the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects. In that regard,
South Africa welcomes the various references in the
Programme of Action to the role of the United Nations,
other international organizations, non-governmental

organizations and civil society in assisting States to
promote and implement the Programme of Action.
Although the important role of the Security
Council in implementing the Programme of Action is
recognized and welcomed, the nature and origin of the
Programme of Action as an initiative of the General
Assembly should be respected when the Council
considers initiatives related to small arms. Given the
nature of the problems associated with the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and the fact that the
Programme of Action was developed and adopted
through a process initiated by the General Assembly,
this issue should continue to be dealt with in the ambit
of the General Assembly. The Security Council’s
involvement in this issue should be confined to specific
areas related to the Council’s agenda.
In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
commitment made by States in the Programme of
Action to encourage, particularly in post-conflict
situations, the disarmament and demobilization of excombatants and their subsequent reintegration into
civilian life, and to provide support for the effective
disposition of collected small arms and light weapons.
Of related importance is that one of the measures is to
encourage the Council to consider, on a case-by-case
basis, the inclusion of relevant provisions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in the
mandates and budgets of peacekeeping operations.
South Africa furthermore welcomes the undertaking by
States to take appropriate measures, including all legal
or administrative means, against any activity that
violates a Security Council arms embargo in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and to
cooperate with the United Nations system to ensure the
effective implementation of Security Council
embargoes.
South
Africa
recognizes
the
important
interrelationship between the role of the Council in the
implementation of Programme of Action and its
responsibilities with regard to international peace and
security issues. It is, however, regrettable that the
Programme of Action, owing to the concerns of one
State, does not include a commitment by all States not
to provide arms to so-called non-State actors or rebel
groups. The continued supply of arms, in particular
small arms and light weapons, to rebel groups and
other non-State actors clearly runs counter to efforts by
the Council to promote peace and stability in specific
areas of conflict. A commitment by all States to

11

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

provide arms only to Governments would, in our view,
have strengthened the Council’s efforts to prevent the
supply of arms to rebel groups that continue to
destabilize peace and security in many countries in
Africa. In that regard, we remain concerned that rebel
groups and other non-State actors continue to receive
arms despite various initiatives by the Security
Council. As that issue drives to the core of the problem
associated with the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in Africa, South Africa trusts that both the
General Assembly and the Security Council will
remain seized of this matter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of South Africa for his statement, and in
particular for the congratulations he conveyed to
Colombia about the Copa América success. I know that
he celebrated Colombia’s victory as though he was
Colombian. Of course, other ambassadors were not
quite as happy with the success of Colombia, but it was
still generally celebrated. Once again, many thanks.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of New Zealand. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and make his statement.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): At the outset, let
me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your initiative
in the Council’s role in relation to the issue of small
arms and light weapons, particularly following the
important achievement of the Programme of Action at
the small arms Conference last month here in New
York.
The Programme of Action underscored the
multifaceted nature of the small arms issue and the real
and immediate threat that these weapons pose to the
security of nations and individuals. While the final
outcome was not all that we might have hoped for, it is
the first time the international community has agreed
on measures to tackle the illicit trade in these weapons.
At this stage, may I acknowledge the pivotal role that
was played by Colombia, and in particular by
Ambassador Reyes, in ensuring that the Conference
had a successful outcome.
The Security Council’s powers under Chapter VII
of the Charter to take measures considered necessary to
deal with threats to or breaches of the peace include, in
appropriate circumstances, the imposition of arms
embargoes to prevent the proliferation of small arms in
a particular environment. We consider that, with
careful thought, such measures can be helpful in

12

achieving the core objective of restoring peace and
security.
We recognize that it may be argued in some
circumstances that imposing embargoes where the size
of opposing arsenals is already skewed may do little
more than freeze the existing balance of power. But, on
the other hand, the Council’s overriding concern should
be to defuse the conflict situation as much as possible.
The importation of more arms only adds fuel to the
fire. It also might place additional lives at risk,
including lives of personnel of operations mandated by
the Council.
While the Council should continue to use these
powers where necessary, it must also be sure that the
effect of such measures will both halt the proliferation
of small arms and make the prospect of an end to
conflict more likely. The cooperation of all States is
needed to ensure that domestic systems are in place to
comply with such measures.
In our view, consideration should also be given to
strengthening the capacity of the Secretariat so that it is
able to provide further support for monitoring by the
Council, to ensure that any embargo is not
circumvented by illicit trade.
Recent conflicts in Sierra Leone and Angola have
shown, however, that embargoes on weapons alone
might often prove insufficient. In situations where
conflicts are fuelled by the uncontrolled exploitation
and smuggling of natural resources, measures should
also be taken by the Security Council to address these
factors. Further work must be undertaken on refining
United Nations sanctions, including arms embargoes,
so as to ensure that they are effectively targeted
towards achieving sustainable peace with a greater
certainty of success.
The Council also has an important role to play in
ensuring that the widespread and uncontrolled presence
of small arms and light weapons in areas of recent
conflict does not disrupt nations’ peace-building
efforts. This requires the more frequent inclusion of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
elements in post-conflict United Nations peacebuilding operations, as recommended in last year’s
Brahimi report on United Nations peace operations. I
note that a number of those who have spoken before
me have also placed considerable emphasis on this
aspect.

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Recent experience in Sierra Leone and Kosovo
has certainly shown that such measures are by no
means easy, but they are absolutely essential. If
stability is to be achieved, the law of the gun must not
be allowed to reign freely. It is the role of the Security
Council to recognize when such elements are required
in missions and to include appropriate provisions in
mission mandates.
We have seen this ourselves in our own region,
the South Pacific, where small arms have exacerbated
recent unrest and conflict. We have also seen it further
afield in our peacekeeping and peace-building work
with the United Nations. Countries of our region find
external support to be vital as they try to resolve
conflict. While the supporters come mainly from
regional partners, the international community also has
an important part to play, as the United Nations
continues to do, for example, in Bougainville, Papua
New Guinea.
Mr. President, we fully endorse your objective in
seeking to formulate a set of practical and workable
recommendations as an outcome of this meeting, and
we look forward to the final product.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of New Zealand for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Republic of Korea, whom I invite to take a seat
at the Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my warmest welcome
and appreciation to you, Mr. Minister, for chairing this
Security Council open debate on the issue of small
arms. I would also like to pay tribute, through you, to
Ambassador Camilo Reyes, who guided us to the
successful conclusion of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
My delegation believes that the Programme of
Action adopted by the Conference, spelling out
concrete measures to be implemented at national,
regional and global levels, provides a solid framework
to monitor and review its implementation. At the same
time, I would like to stress that the adoption of the
Programme of Action is just the beginning of a long
process to address this issue. Indeed, what lies ahead is
a concerted effort to translate specific provisions

contained in the Programme of Action into concrete
action.
My delegation finds today’s forum very timely
and useful, not only because it will provide added
momentum for our global efforts, but also because it
will deepen the Security Council’s understanding of its
role in this field.
In recent years, there has been growing concern
over the impact of the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, as they claim innocent lives, exacerbate
conflicts and impede post-conflict peace-building and
rehabilitation. As the United Nations body bearing
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should remain committed to finding a remedy to the
problem of small arms and light weapons.
It has been nearly two years since the question of
small arms was explicitly addressed in the Security
Council. Recently Member States have highlighted the
need to tackle the small-arms problem in the context of
other Council open debates, most notably during this
past June’s debate on the prevention of armed conflict
and April’s debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. We believe that the small arms
question requires the continued attention and active
engagement of the Security Council, and that the
Council should be brought more fully into the fold of
international efforts to address the issue.
I would like to take a moment to comment on a
few of the points in the Programme of Action that I
find particularly relevant to this debate.
I believe that the Security Council is well
equipped to foster the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in conflict and postconflict situations. Recalling that the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons contributes not only to
the outbreak of conflicts, but also to their recurrence,
we cannot stress enough that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes are a
core element of conflict prevention and post-conflict
peace-building efforts. At the United Nations
Conference last month an overwhelming majority of
States called for more substantive assistance from the
international
community
for
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. This call
was based on the recognition that, if the deep-rooted
reasons for the demand for small arms were not

13

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

addressed, it would be impossible to do away with the
culture of violence.
As was made evident by recent events in Sierra
Leone and Liberia, a lack of resources and political
will for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
efforts often leads to renewed violence in conflictprone areas. It should be noted that the Programme of
Action encourages the Security Council to consider, on
a case-by-case basis, the inclusion of relevant
provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations. This issue has particular
relevance for the Security Council, as its peacekeeping
missions have increasingly engaged in post-conflict
reconstruction and even nation-building activities,
where the collection and destruction of small arms and
the rehabilitation of ex-combatants are critical not only
for the success of the mission, but also for the
sustainable peace and development of States
concerned.
In addition, we recognize that the Security
Council’s arms embargoes can be powerful tools for
curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We welcome the fact that the Programme of
Action calls upon each and every State to take
appropriate measures, including legal or administrative
ones, against any activity that violates a Security
Council embargo. However, we find it deeply
disturbing that small arms and light weapons continue
to be smuggled into areas where Security Council arms
embargoes have been imposed. We recommend that the
Security Council further study ways and means to
improve the effectiveness of its arms embargoes.
We would also like to stress the particular
importance of preventing the excessive and
destabilizing accumulation of and illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in areas of actual and potential
conflict. Certainly, a comprehensive approach to
tackling the problems associated with these weapons
will help minimize the incidence and intensity of
violent conflicts and alleviate the suffering of innocent
civilians. With this end in mind, the Security Council
should strengthen its role in combating both the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and preventing
their excessive and destabilizing accumulation.
Finally, we would like to encourage the Security
Council to become involved in the follow-up to the
Programme of Action. To this end we believe, as noted

14

in the document prepared by Colombia for this open
debate, that a follow-up report of the Secretary-General
identifying, inter alia, areas in which the Security
Council can play a more active role, would be of great
value.
The Security Council has a valuable role to play
in preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. As a strong
advocate of curbing this illicit trade, my Government
stands ready to support the Security Council’s
initiatives to facilitate the implementation of the
Programme of Action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Venezuela. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Alcalay (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by hailing the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Mr.
Guillermo Fernández de Soto, who is presiding over
this important meeting. At the same time, I wish every
success to our colleague Alfonso Valdivieso, as, during
this month of August, in which Colombia holds the
presidency of the Council, he continues the marvellous
job begun this morning by his Foreign Minister. We are
certain, Sir, that the work of the Permanent
Representative of Colombia as President of the
Security Council this month will be a reflection of his
estimable record as a diplomat at the United Nations
and of Colombian diplomacy in general.
I would also like to salute the presence of the
Secretary-General in our discussion this morning. This
underscores the importance that the Secretariat
attributes to the debate that is taking place in the
Council today.
Although it is true that small arms and light
weapons are not the causes of conflicts, ready access to
them, combined with their widespread circulation and
uncontrolled proliferation, has contributed to
disturbances that affect communities around the world.
The tremendous ease with which it is now possible to
acquire these weapons on the international market,
their indiscriminate spread in civilian populations and
their use in violent activities and in crime — in
addition to their use in terrorism, organized crime and
drug trafficking, as has been noted here on various
occasions — make the problem even more disquieting.
In order to illustrate the seriousness of this situation,

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

suffice it to mention that in the last decade 46 of the 49
conflicts that took place in various parts of the world
were carried out chiefly by means of the use of small
arms and light weapons. Millions of men and women
around the world today mourn the loss of members of
their families, and countries have lost outstanding
professional people to help their development because
of the harmful effects of these small arms and light
weapons.
But at this stage, the debate, which is the second
of its kind in this Council, is of particular importance
because it was preceded by an important and successful
meeting, the Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons, under the brilliant leadership
of Ambassador Camilo Reyes, to whom all previous
speakers have paid tribute for his remarkable
contribution to the negotiations on the Programme of
Action. Thus, the Security Council faces a task that has
already been developed in the General Assembly, and it
must take further steps and become a compass for
action, working to incorporate all the contributions that
have already been made in order to make an effective
and efficient contribution to what has already been
done in the General Assembly, as a number of speakers
have stressed.
The delegation of Venezuela takes the view that
consideration of this issue by the Security Council is a
significant challenge in this debate that the
Organization has been holding on an issue of tangible
current importance on the multilateral disarmament
agenda, concerning which we need to pool our efforts
to adopt a comprehensive approach that takes into
account aspects such as arms control and disarmament,
post-conflict peace-building, conflict prevention and
social and economic development. This endeavour
requires coordinated action involving a range of
different bodies that are concerned with this issue so as
to ensure this comprehensive approach.
The Security Council’s role should certainly be
oriented towards considering the implications of this
problem within the purview of this principal organ,
which is international peace and security. From this
standpoint, it is our view that the Council has a specific
interest in this issue, given its responsibility in peacebuilding, which in turn involves support for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants, pursuant to the agreements voluntarily
entered into by the parties. At the same time, the
measures adopted by the Council in dealing with

conflicts in various regions of the world have a genuine
impact on efforts to reduce the spread and excessive
accumulation
of
small
arms
through
the
implementation of arms embargoes, whose provisions,
by the way, are binding on all States, and Venezuela
complies with them in full.
The United Nations has given significant impetus
to the development of a global awareness, which has
enabled the first steps to be taken towards the creation
and implementation of measures that, as they are
phased in, could be an effective advance in controlling
the illicit trafficking, excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. In this endeavour, we should highlight the
work of the various panels of governmental experts,
which have been created to identify better within this
Organization the means of tackling the problem in its
true dimension. The recent Conference on Small Arms
and Light Weapons made it possible for us to secure a
global political commitment by means of the adoption
of the Programme of Action, whose aim is to prevent,
combat and eliminate small arms and light weapons in
search of a peaceful balance inside our countries, and
which highlights the chief responsibility borne by
States, the chief architects in carrying out these
measures.
Venezuela considers that efforts to find solutions
to the problem of the illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons should follow a comprehensive,
balanced and non-discriminatory approach that takes
into account the specific characteristics and
experiences of the regions, subregions and countries
involved, with a view to tackling this criminal activity
in all its aspects. At the same time, my country
considers that with the support and participation of
civil society, the primary responsibility for tackling
these problems should fall to Governments. From this
standpoint, there must be safeguards for the right of a
State to acquire weapons to meet its legitimate needs of
defence, in conformity with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, in order to prevent manipulation and
biased interpretations.
In various regions of the world, States have taken
specific measures to counteract the illicit proliferation
of small arms. This is true in our hemisphere, where
the Organization of American States broke new ground
by adopting in November 1997 the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and

15

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Other Related Materials, and with the preparation of
model regulations on firearms, parts and components
by the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control
Commission.
The commitment of Venezuela to international
endeavours to combat illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is attested to by the adoption by the
National Assembly, the legislative organ of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, of the InterAmerican Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition,
Explosives and Other Related Materials, as published
in the official bulletin of the Republic, issue number
37.217 of 12 June of this year.
Venezuela is convinced that the international
community must base its efforts on cooperation in
order to tackle the problem of small arms and their
effects on peace and stability, in view of the links
between them and other illicit activities that might also
jeopardize the security of States.
Allow me to conclude by noting the result of the
Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons. This
outcome is the beginning of a process that will make it
possible to achieve measures of greater depth and scale
as we proceed further, in order to tackle the problem
effectively and comprehensively. In this regard, we
believe that the elimination of the excessive
proliferation and accumulation of small arms, together
with other measures proposed here, will undoubtedly
contribute to the solution of the conflicts to which we
have referred.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Venezuela for his kind words
addressed to the delegation of Colombia.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, which
the Sudan has the honour of chairing this month, allow
me to welcome you, Mr. Minister, as you preside over
the Security Council during this month of August. Let
me take this opportunity to congratulate your friendly
country on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. We are confident that this
will represent yet another achievement in the list of
Colombia’s diplomatic successes.

16

Allow us also to thank you, Sir, for your initiative
to convene this important meeting and for having
invited non-members of the Council to participate in
this debate. I should like also to take this opportunity
to thank the Permanent Representative of the People’s
Republic of China for the outstanding and wise manner
in which he discharged his duties as President of the
Security Council last month.
Today’s meeting is being held in the wake of the
recently concluded United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. Your country, Mr. President, had the
honour of presiding over the Conference, in the person
of Ambassador Camilo Reyes. Ambassador Reyes
played a central role in the process and deployed major
concrete efforts, throughout difficult negotiations, to
reach a consensus on the text of the Programme of
Action to prohibit the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects.
The Programme of Action, through various
measures – national, regional and international – and
review mechanisms, has given the international
community a firm foundation for undertaking serious
efforts to combat the threat posed by the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.
The implementation of the Programme of Action
will require intensive efforts by Member States, the
United Nations and relevant and international regional
organizations in order to undertake constructive
initiatives in implementation of the Programme’s
objectives.
The Group of Arab States contributed to the
success of the Conference through many positive
proposals that promoted the possibility of, and
enhanced efforts to reach, a consensus. The Arab
Group, in this context, wishes again to express its
regret at the fact that the Programme of Action does
not contain a clear commitment by Member States to
export weapons only to Governments. That call was
made by all African States, in the light of the fact that
Africa is the continent most affected by the threat of
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
hands of rebel groups, thereby threatening peace and
security in the continent. The importance of this
commitment can be clearly seen in the many conflicts
that the Security Council deals with on an almost daily
basis, in which these criminal groups work to
undermine security in the African continent.

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

Many of the statements made during the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects stressed that this
illicit trade was not a defining element of the nature of
the many emerging conflicts in many parts of the
world. However, such traffic does fuel existing wars.
Conflicts have their roots in the remnants of
colonialism; in economic, social and human conditions;
in ethnic strife; in the proliferation of poverty, debt,
illiteracy and infectious diseases in developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries; in
the glaring inequities in international, trade, and
economic relations between developed and developing
countries; and in situations of occupation, which lead
to political strife followed by military action.
The Arab Group believes, therefore, that all
efforts must be focused on dealing with these root
causes in order to put an end to the human suffering
caused by the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.
The Arab Group believes that issues relating to
disarmament fall within the mandate of the First
Committee of the General Assembly. That Committee
has adopted many resolutions on these questions. Our
Group believes that the role of the Security Council
must be a supporting one in respect of the efforts
undertaken by the General Assembly. We also hope
that the Security Council will fulfil its role in
coordinating with relevant bodies to mobilize resources
and expertise in order to implement the Programme of
Action on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, as well as provide assistance to States in
implementing the Programme.
Nevertheless, our Group understands the
Council’s interest in the threat posed by small arms and
light weapons, in the light of its role and responsibility,
as enshrined in the Charter, for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and considering also
the interlinkage between the proliferation of these
small arms and light weapons in the conflict zones that
the Council deals with.
All of these challenges are underlined in the
Programme of Action, which also encourages the
Security Council to consider the inclusion, on a caseby-case basis, of appropriate measures relating to
disarmament,
demobilization,
resettlement
and
reintegration in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations.

The Arab Group hopes that any measures taken
by the Security Council in future on the subject of
small arms and light weapons will be in line with the
provisions of the Programme of Action. We hope that
the Security Council will give due consideration to the
fundamental right of States to self-defence, in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter, which
implicitly gives States the right to acquire weapons to
defend themselves and to establish their own defence
systems.
The Security Council is also called upon to
respect the right to self-determination of peoples under
colonialism or other forms of foreign domination or
occupation. We express the hope that the Council will
strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including the sovereign
equality of all States, their territorial integrity, the need
to resolve disputes by peaceful means and nonintervention in the affairs of other States.
The Programme of Action stresses that efforts
pertaining to small arms and light weapons must not
encroach on priorities related to nuclear disarmament
and to those pertaining to weapons of mass destruction
and conventional weapons.
In this regard, the Arab Group hopes that the
Security Council will give due consideration to nuclear
disarmament and to weapons of mass destruction,
which are a genuine threat to humankind and are
closely linked to international and regional peace and
security. These priorities are set forth in the final
declaration of the 1978 General Assembly special
session devoted to disarmament, which stressed that
utmost priority be given to nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, and then to conventional
weapons.
The threat of such weapons is clearly seen in the
grave situation in the Middle East, where Israel
possesses weapons of mass destruction. The world
witnesses daily the excessive use of military force by
the Israeli occupation forces against an unarmed
Palestinian people struggling for its right to selfdetermination.
In conclusion, the Group of Arab States pledges
to continue its efforts and contributions to combat the
threat of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, in the United Nations and in all other
relevant international and regional organizations, and
to support the review conference in 2006 and other

17

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

meetings devoted to reviewing the progress made
nationally,
regionally
and
internationally
in
implementing the Programme of Action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Bebars (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me say that it is a great honour, on behalf of
the Arab Republic of Egypt, to extend to your country
and to you personally, Sir, our sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like also to take this
opportunity to convey to the Permanent Representative
of the People’s Republic of China our profound thanks
for the efforts made during China’s presidency of the
Security Council last month. We would like also to
emphasize the importance that we attach to the
inclusion of the issue of small arms and light weapons
on the agenda of the Security Council following the
recent United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
We wish also to extend our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, for the statement he made at
the beginning of this meeting. We would like also to
point out the objectives that we hope to achieve in
today’s meeting, which are contained in your letter, Mr.
President, addressed to the previous President of the
Security Council.
Egypt would like to associate itself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan on behalf of the Arab Group. Egypt considers
illicit trafficking in small arms to be one of the most
important problems affecting specific regions of the
world. Because of the illicit and speedy proliferation of
small weapons and its links with many ethnic, cultural,
political and economic problems, this matter requires a
solution that takes into account the specific conditions
and circumstances in the affected areas. The
proliferation of small arms and light weapons should
be seen not as a cause of conflict, but rather as a tool
for fomenting and fuelling ongoing conflicts, which
find their root causes in a number of economic, social
and ethnic factors that have accumulated and become
complex.
To effectively put an end to this problem, we have
to work through two parallel approaches. The first
approach gives us a conception of the social and

18

economic factors involved in this problem as the real
root causes of the conflicts that lead to the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
long and medium terms. The second approach
emphasizes confronting the problem of illicit trade and
circulation of small arms and light weapons in the short
term.
At the national level, Egypt has witnessed a
period of stability in respect of small arms and light
weapons. This stability is due to our strict legislation
and regulations in this area, which go back to the
1950s. Our legislation controls all forms of trade,
manufacture and possession of such weapons,
criminalizes illegal activities and establishes national
mechanisms to make laws and to implement them. At
the regional level, Egypt is working in cooperation
with its African neighbours through the exchange of
experts and technical information in order to find
definitive solutions to limit the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons on the African continent,
which is the continent suffering most from armed
conflicts.
The Bamako Declaration issued by the African
ministerial meeting on small arms and light weapons,
which was held in Mali in November 2000, is a
pioneering regional initiative that reflects a joint
African decision to work together against the illicit
proliferation, circulation and trade of small arms and
light weapons. During that meeting, in a spirit of
cooperation, Egypt and its African brothers searched
for a solution that takes into account the specific nature
of this problem for some countries of the African
continent.
At the international level, Egypt has actively and
positively participated in the work of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons, which produced an ambitious
political Programme of Action aimed at combating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and
criminalizing other related illicit activities. It also
aimed at safeguarding the control of national
authorities over legal activities in order to prevent the
use of such weapons in any illegal activities, at
enhancing regional and international mechanisms to
deal with the root causes of the problem of illicit
trafficking and at limiting its adverse impacts in terms
of poverty, the slow pace of social and economic
development and ethnic conflicts in the affected
countries.

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

In this connection, we would like to stress,
absolutely and clearly, that dealing with this issue is
linked to the non-infringement of a number of rights.
Prominent among them is the right of peoples to selfdetermination and self-defence, particularly those
peoples under the yoke of foreign occupation.
Moreover, the State has the right to carry out all
legal activities in this area, to control its own territorial
integrity, to monitor the small arms and light weapons
it manufactures and to stipulate legislation to combat
illicit trafficking in those weapons and to prevent their
use and circulation in such illicit activities as terrorism
and crime.
Addressing this issue in no way undermines the
priorities of the international community in the field of
disarmament, which are clearly defined in the Final
Document of the first special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament in 1978, in which
nuclear disarmament enjoyed the highest priority,
followed by other weapons of mass destruction and,
finally, by conventional weapons.
Because of the exacerbation of the problem of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
close relationship between the smuggling of these
weapons and international peace and security, the
Programme of Action adopted by the Conference
clearly identifies the international community’s sphere
of activity, especially that of the Security Council. The
Programme, in paragraph 38 of section II, encourages
the Security Council
“to consider, on a case-by-case basis, the
inclusion, where applicable, of relevant
provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations”.
The Programme of Action also emphasizes in
other areas the importance of the cooperation,
commitment and total compliance of States with
Security Council resolutions imposing arms embargoes
in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, it calls on all States to take all
appropriate measures, including all legal and
administrative means, against any activity violating a
Security Council arms embargo.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that the
Programme of Action is considered to be the sole
instrument for contending with problems related to the

illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. It
identifies in a comprehensive manner the priorities,
commitments and national, regional and international
standards in this area. If we adhere to the goals and
measures set out in the Programme, we will reap the
fruits of all the international community’s efforts to
combat the dangerous proliferation and trade in small
arms and light weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of India. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Pal (India): We thank Colombia for calling
this open meeting on small arms and we are honoured
that you, Sir, are presiding over it. As Ambassador
Valdivieso’s paper makes clear, the focus of this
meeting is wider than that of the Conference last month
on the illicit trade in small arms, but the larger
problems the Council will consider grow from the same
roots.
As the Council said in its presidential statement
in September 1999,
“the prevention of illicit trafficking is of
immediate concern in the global search for ways
and means to curb the wrongful use of small
arms, including their use by terrorists”.
(S/PRST/1999/28)
Perhaps 1 per cent of the global stock of small arms is
illicitly held, but that comes to 5 million weapons.
Conflict diamonds constitute a similar tiny fraction of
the global trade in roughs, but the international
community is trying to put in place a stringent,
verifiable system of controls to make illicit trade much
more difficult. The Council has given that process its
support; indeed, the international effort to identify and
ban conflict diamonds started here, and proscribing the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must have
at least as high a priority.
Like any other commodity, the trade in small
arms is licit only if both exports and imports go
through official, legal channels. Arms exports by a
Government that violate none of its laws are
nevertheless illicit if the weapons are sent to non-state
actors in another country, bypassing or subverting laws
there. Since terrorists and non-state actors exploit this
loophole, buying arms on the international market
when they are not covertly or illegally supplied by

19

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

States that promote terrorism, the international
community must agree — as it was unable to do at the
Conference last month — that the trade in arms must,
as the rest of international trade does, flow only
through channels authorized by both exporting and
importing Governments.
Members of this Council, given its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
obviously have a special responsibility, and none more
so than the permanent members, both because they are
the largest arms exporters in the world and because, if
they break the law, they can use the veto to protect
themselves.
Over the last decade, the Council has established
embargoes to cut off the supply of arms to such violent
non-state actors as UNITA, the Revolutionary United
Front and the Taliban. When the Council found that
these were easily bypassed, investigations it authorized
showed how international criminal networks were
being used to sell diamonds and supply arms in Angola
and Sierra Leone. In Afghanistan, the principal exports
of the Taliban are drugs and terrorism, and the arms
embargo is as riddled with holes as the latticework for
which one of its neighbours is famous. We hope that
the monitoring mechanism that the Council set up for
Afghanistan a few days ago will do its work well. If the
arms embargo is still flouted, we expect the Council, as
it has in West Africa, to tackle the problem at its roots
and to take measures against those responsible.
Elsewhere, as the United Nations tries to help
build peace after a conflict, disarmament is often the
first and knottiest challenge its peacekeepers face. Your
working paper, Mr. President, asks what happens to the
small arms collected in a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration campaign. They must be destroyed,
but that is often the problem easiest to resolve. Many
of those who fight in these internecine conflicts have
grown up with arms; in the world they know, a gun is
the only means, they think, of staying alive. It protects
them and they use it to force others to give them food
and shelter. Unless the United Nations offers them
security and they have other means of livelihood, most
do not give up their arms or give up only a few of
them. This means that the United Nations must send its
peacekeepers so well-armed and equipped that they can
truly offer security to all sections of the local
population and face down those who refuse to give up
their arms. It also means that the international
community must be generous with its support for the

20

economic programmes of rehabilitation. Without this,
combatants could be driven, by the fear of destitution if
nothing else, to keep their arms.
Over the past 50 years, small arms have become
enormously more lethal, the average assault rifle now
laying down the volume of fire of early machine guns.
They have also become lighter, which means that
children can use them much more easily. Much less
training is needed with weapons that simply spray
bullets over a wide range, and the cost of small arms
has plummeted from the 1980s, as some armies have
laid off stocks.
All this explains why small arms in the hands of
ever-younger combatants have been able to sustain
conflicts hugely expensive in terms of lives lost, and
why terrorists have been able to take such a heavy toll
of innocent lives.
Now, however, small arms are about to make
another jump in technology. Some armies are receiving
for field trials small arms that integrate integratedcircuit and other cutting-edge technologies into an
assault rifle, making them infinitely more destructive.
If the past is a guide, these weapons will turn up in the
hands of non-State actors well before most third-world
armies get them. These are the weapons that soldiers
from developing countries will have to face in the
hands of terrorists or insurgents at home or, when they
go out as Blue Helmets, abroad.
It is more than ever necessary, therefore, to have
the strictest controls put in place on the manufacture
and export of small arms. International instruments
need to be negotiated quickly, and a system or
mechanism needs to be put in place to trace and mark
small arms and to ensure that they are not diverted
from legal channels into the illicit trade. The Council
should give its encouragement to that process.
Both the Conference on the illicit trade in small
arms and the paper prepared by Colombia (S/2001/732,
annex) recognize the usefulness of regional
cooperation. However, as with narcotic drugs, with
which illicit small arms and terrorism have a nexus,
countries or regions into which these are smuggled can
only do so much to stop the influx. In the case of
narcotic drugs, the onus is placed on producing regions
to control the problem at the source. The cooperation
of the countries and regions that are the principal
manufacturers and exporters of arms is just as essential
to the control of this other illicit trade. Some of them

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

have taken steps regionally to stop the illicit trade in
weapons; we welcome that.
We trust that the Security Council will take
effective practical steps carrying forward, or in support
of, the Programme of Action adopted at the Conference
last month that will curb the availability and use of
small arms to foment and sustain conflict and
terrorism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of India for the kind words he addressed
to my country.
The next speaker is the representative of
Australia. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.
Ms. Moules (Australia): Australia welcomes
Colombia’s initiative in convening this open debate.
We consider it timely for the Security Council to have
further discussion of the question of small arms two
years after the item was first placed on the Council’s
agenda and in the wake of the successful outcome of
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in all Its Aspects.
The Programme of Action adopted by the United
Nations Conference provides a solid framework for
enhanced international cooperation in combating the
illicit small arms trade. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the President of the
Conference, Colombia’s Ambassador Camilo Reyes, on
his outstanding leadership and on his pivotal role in
forging the consensus that was achieved. Australia’s
expectation is that the Programme of Action will serve
as a practical and dynamic point of reference for
further work at the national, regional and international
levels, including in relation to the Security Council’s
role in this area.
We see continuing validity in the presidential
statement (S/PRST/1999/28) issued following the
Security Council’s open debate on small arms in
September 1999, in particular in relation to: the
importance of regional cooperation in tackling the
issue of illicit trafficking in small arms; the call for
greater attention to be given to effective
implementation of arms embargoes; the call for
measures to discourage arms flows to countries or
regions engaged in or emerging from armed conflict;
the provision to peace negotiators of best-practice
guidance on the disarmament, demobilization and

reintegration of ex-combatants; the need for effective
national regulations and controls on small arms
transfers; and the importance of ecologically safe
destruction methods, in respect of which we welcome
the Secretary-General’s report of November 2000
(S/2000/1092).
Beyond the enduring importance of the 1999
presidential statement, several aspects of the recently
adopted Programme of Action on small arms have
particular relevance for the Security Council, namely:
the need to place particular emphasis on regions of the
world where conflicts come to an end and where
serious problems with the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons have to
be dealt with urgently, and the importance of
mobilizing the political will throughout the
international community to prevent and combat illicit
transfer and manufacturing of small arms and light
weapons.
In addition, some of the more specific measures
recommended in the Programme of Action complement
the 1999 presidential statement. These include the call
for cooperation with the United Nations system to
ensure effective implementation of arms embargoes
decided by the Security Council, and the call for
consideration by the Security Council, on a case-bycase basis, of the inclusion, where applicable, of
provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations. In that context we would
emphasize also the importance of the safe and timely
disposal of surplus arms and of the secure management
of existing small arms stockpiles.
Since the start of international efforts to address
small arms problems, Australia has been a strong
advocate of developing practical, implementable
measures tailored to meet the specific needs and
capacities of each situation and region in which the
problems occur. For example, Australia has strongly
supported the development of model legislation on
weapons control for Pacific island countries and is
examining ways of improving procedures for effective
weapons safekeeping and accountancy in that region.
Ongoing efforts at the regional level provide a guide to
practical activities that can help to reduce the threat to
civilians and their livelihoods that can be posed by the
availability and circulation of small arms.

21

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

We see an important role for the Security Council
in ensuring that small arms issues are addressed as an
integral element of the Council’s approach to conflict
prevention and resolution. Depending on the particular
circumstances of each situation, the Council is well
placed to develop practical recommendations for
addressing small arms issues, drawing on lessons
learned to date and on the Programme of Action where
applicable.
We welcome the fact that small arms issues have
been increasingly referred to in many of the Council’s
thematic debates over the past two years. We welcome
also the Security Council’s endorsement of the
Secretary-General’s reporting on various missions,
including those which cover small arms issues, for
example in relation to weapons disposal in
Bougainville. This provides further ballast for
international efforts to combat small arms problems.
We urge the Security Council to continue its
active efforts to address small arms issues, with
particular reference to the spirit and objectives of the
Programme of Action.
For its part, Australia will continue to work
assiduously for effective implementation of the
Programme of Action, in particular in our own region,
as part of our global cooperative efforts to combat the
illicit trade in small arms and to alleviate the threat it
poses to international peace, security and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Australia for the kind words she
addressed to my delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Mr. President, I would
like to begin by congratulating you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August. Your presence here underscores the
important role that Colombia has been playing in
leading the international effort to meet the challenge of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Your
initiative in arranging today’s debate is timely, as this
meeting takes place against the backdrop of the
recently concluded United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. I must mention here that we had an
opportunity to work very closely with your delegation

22

before and during the Conference, and I can assure you
that we will work very closely with your delegation
even as we pursue its follow-up.
The Conference adopted a Programme of Action
which clearly identifies the responsibilities of States at
the national, regional and global levels. The contents of
the Programme of Action are now being analysed and
examined by Member States for the requisite follow-up
measures on their part.
We welcome this opportunity which you have
provided us, Mr. President, by convening today’s
meeting to examine how the Security Council can play
its role in addressing the problem of small arms.
First of all, I must compliment you,
Mr. President, for encapsulating nearly 40 statements
in today’s meeting. We appreciate your patience. In
contrast, nearly 150 statements were made during the
three or four days of general debate in the Conference.
All these statements should give us enough food for
thought and soul searching, certainly not ammunition
to create smoke screens to cover the realities.
Undoubtedly, the easy availability of small arms
and light weapons has exacerbated the situation in
many trouble spots around the world. The abundance
of small arms in conflict situations has also made
United Nations peacekeeping efforts more difficult and
hazardous. Indeed, disarmament of warring factions is
increasingly becoming a linchpin of peacekeeping
operations. Pakistan, as a major participant in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, is playing its part in
implementing such programmes in conflict areas,
particularly, if I may mention, in Sierra Leone.
While disarmament programmes and restrictions
on the flow of illicit arms help to address the problem,
they are not the real and definitive solution. Conflicts
attract arms, whether legal or illegal. For every
demand, there is a commensurate supply — and this is
applicable to every commodity, including arms. Arms
will continue to find their way to wherever conflicts
exist. The flow of arms, illicit or otherwise, cannot be
completely stemmed. What can be controlled, however,
or resolved or even prevented, is not the flow of arms,
but the conflicts themselves. That is where the role of
the Security Council lies, and where the primary
responsibility of the Council lies. Let there be no
detraction from the Charter obligations which this body
has towards the pacific settlement of disputes and the

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

prevention of armed conflicts. As the old adage goes,
an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
Mr. President, you have raised some valid points
in your letter of 25 July which was circulated as a
document of the Security Council. We agree that the
accumulation and circulation of and the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons pose a global threat to
peace and security. Addressing this issue, however, is
the responsibility of Member States in accordance with
the provisions of the Programme of Action adopted by
the recent Conference. The Security Council, for its
part, must play its role as a facilitator of that process
by focusing on its own Charter obligations. The
Council’s concern should not be so much with the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons as with
conflict prevention and dispute resolution. The Council
must not allow a situation to arise in the first place that
entails the use of arms, small or big, or their
proliferation.
In fact, somebody once asked Einstein, if I may
recall, what weapons would be used in a third world
war. He said that he did not know what would be used
in a third world war, but he knew that only rocks and
stones would be used in the fourth world war. So,
whatever it may be, even rocks can become a means to
kill each other. Therefore, the best thing is to prevent
the situations that necessitate men killing each other.
That is the imperative.
It is not the ready availability of small arms alone
which contributes to the intensification of armed
conflicts and to increased levels of violence. A culture
of peace cannot be created simply by eradicating small
arms and light weapons. The problem is not so much
the weapons; it is the conflicts themselves. As long as
armed conflicts continue to afflict our planet, the
means of violence will always be available. Trying to
deal with the means of violence is merely to put on a
bandage rather than going into the malaise and treating
the disease.
In many cases, violence is generated by denial of
justice, and conflicts intensify because of the denial of
the inalienable right of self-determination and the
continuation of foreign occupation. It is this and not
the easy access to small arms which is an impediment
to negotiations and the realization of lasting peace.
Nobody can deny legitimacy to freedom struggles
wherever they are waged and with whatever means
they are waged. People do and will fight back when

their homeland is occupied and when their intrinsic
rights are trampled. The examples of Kashmir and
Palestine are clear for all to see. The Council’s
obligations in such cases are clear: to implement its
own resolutions and to take the necessary steps to
resolve disputes and restore peace, particularly by
implementing its own resolutions and decisions. There
can be no deviation from this basic requirement.
We fully share your view, Mr. President, that the
initiatives taken to address the problem of small arms
lie outside the competence of the Security Council. You
have clearly defined the parameters of today’s meeting
by acknowledging that this public debate is not meant
to establish new definitions or understandings on the
question of small arms, nor is it to introduce new
norms and codes of conduct. This is a subject on which
efforts at the global, regional, subregional and national
levels are already in progress.
In our view, the first objective stipulated in your
document, which is follow-up action by the Council on
the question of small arms, can begin to be addressed
through decisive actions by the Council on conflict
prevention. The Council can also address the second
objective by its fulfilling its obligation to resolve
disputes in all conflicts, without exception or
selectivity. Chapter VI of the Charter provides the
framework.
The Security Council is obliged not only to keep
peace, but also to make peace, to build peace. The third
objective, regarding the active participation of States,
has already been addressed at length in the recent
Conference. Member States are fully cognizant of their
responsibilities, and any further debate on this issue
will not add anything of value. In this regard, the
elements identified in your document as issues for
consideration therefore also become somewhat
redundant. What remains here, however, is the need to
underscore the Security Council’s Charter obligations.
We believe that the best contribution the Council
could make would be to fulfil its Charter obligations on
preventing armed conflicts and resolving disputes. The
only answer to all the questions raised in your
document is for this world body to eliminate the root
causes of conflicts, resolve disputes, make and build
peace. In addition, necessary concerted action has to be
taken to promote sustainable development and
economic well-being in all parts of the world. Peace
and development are inextricably linked.

23

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council’s mandate is clearly
defined. While there may be an urge in the Council to
expand its role in all directions, it must not lose sight
of its basic functions and obligations. Trying to take on
tasks beyond the Council’s mandate may be an
ambitious exercise; it is also self-defeating. There is a
wise ancient saying that he who tries to do everything
ends up doing nothing.
That is why the Council must not lose sight of,
nor indeed its focus on, its Charter obligations and
must try to fulfil them completely and without
selectivity. If the Council wants to make a genuine
contribution to the question of small arms, then it must
focus on the areas that are directly within its
competence and jurisdiction. These are, I repeat at the
risk of repetition, the peaceful resolution of disputes
and the prevention of armed conflicts. We need a
resolute but non-discriminatory approach rather than
mere rhetoric through public debates.
Pakistan is fully cognizant of its obligations
under the Programme of Action adopted by the recent
Small Arms Conference. All Member States are
conscious of their responsibilities. The question is
whether the Security Council is willing and able to
play its role in accordance with its obligations, as
enshrined in the Charter. This is where the
effectiveness and the credibility of the Council, and
that of the United Nations, will be tested. The only way
for the Council to tackle the issue of the supply of
small arms is to end the demand for them by preventing
conflicts and resolving disputes. The Council will,
therefore, do justice to itself and indeed to the
international community by focusing on its Charter
obligations and fulfilling them completely and without
selectivity or discrimination.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Canada. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
welcome you, Sir, and we congratulate Ambassador
Reyes of Colombia, who was able to organize this
meeting with competence and patience.
Canada is pleased with the results of the
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The Conference
concluded with the adoption of a Programme of Action
that
showed
the
international
community’s
determination to tackle the problem of small arms

24

trafficking. This success is based on solid foundations,
in particular on the specific, future-oriented action of
the African States, the member States of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the countries of Latin American and the
Caribbean.
(spoke in English)
We now have a consensus document that
acknowledges that the small arms trade as a whole, and
not just the illicit aspects of that trade, poses real and
urgent problems. We have all agreed that Governments
are responsible for acting on such issues as
manufacturing, marking and tracing, record-keeping,
export controls, brokering, stockpile management and
the collection and destruction of small arms.
The Programme of Action that we have agreed to
also recognizes the human dimension of the problems
linked to small arms, including their impacts on women
and children — aspects of the issue in which my
country has invested particular time and effort. Another
positive aspect for Canada is the Programme’s attention
to the issues of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, issues that others before me have
highlighted today.
The results of the Conference are thus very
welcome, but they are only a first step. In achieving a
consensus result some important elements had to be
left aside for the moment. The Programme of Action is
a good start, but it is neither perfect nor complete. It
includes no elements, for example, on such key factors
as regulation of civilian possession of arms, or
transfers to non-State actors. Action on these elements,
too, was supported by many delegations, but
unacceptable to only one.
The Programme of Action also includes little in
the way of detail on such key issues as criteria to help
Governments clarify the conditions for export
authorization or standards for determining what
constitutes an excessive and destabilizing accumulation
or surplus. These are important elements for Canada,
but problematic for some other countries. All these
unfulfilled elements are key to any comprehensive
international approach to the small arms issue and must
still be re-addressed. The issues that could not be
agreed on in the Conference can and must be actively
pursued and re-addressed in the biannual meetings and
the review process.

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

More broadly, the Programme will be stillborn
even in its current form if it is not rigorously and
rapidly implemented. Some of these issues can be
handled through the follow-up procedures of the
Programme itself. The issues on which there was
agreement, both those explicitly mentioned in the
follow-up section of the Programme and those
mentioned elsewhere in the document, should be
pursued vigorously in the meantime, starting now.
For our part, in Canada, we have already begun
planning and consultations with other States on
regional implementation seminars. We will be pushing
for implementation not just at the national level but
also through all pertinent regional and international
organizations of which we are members — and that is
most of them. This includes the Security Council,
which can play a key role, for example, by
incorporating appropriate disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration provisions in the mandate of
peacekeeping operations and in securing the necessary
financing for those provisions.
The Conference was undoubtedly a success, but
still only a qualified success. It would be a mistake to
underestimate what we did achieve. Equally, it would
be wrong not to recognize how far we still have to go.
We owe it to the men and women and girls and boys in
places much less comfortable than New York City.
Their well-being and security depends on our
controlling — indeed, on our curtailing — the
appalling trade in small arms. We do not believe there
is any country among us blind or indifferent to the
terrible consequences for these people if we fail. But it
has become apparent in negotiations that there are still
some philosophical differences of approach on the
issue of small arms. In Canada’s view, and in the view
of many of the countries most severely affected by the
instability and insecurity these weapons bring, the
access, the management, the sale, the transfer and the
use of these weapons must be closely tracked and
closely controlled, whether they are in the legal or
illegal cycle of transfer. We should know into whose
hands these weapons are being sold or given and by
whose hands they are being used at all times — in
peace, in conflict, but particularly in turbulent times.
No philosophy or ideology gives any of us a
dispensation from seeing the terrible harm that these
weapons do, and no philosophy or ideology gives
anyone an exemption from the responsibility to address
them. Just because the issues of transfer and possession

are not reflected in our document does not mean they
are not reflected in the daily lives of so many people —
lives that are themselves too often curtailed because of
these weapons.
The real assessment of the Conference’s success
will be made on the ground, not in New York, in terms
of guns destroyed and lives saved. This in turn will
mean some very hard work, nonetheless, for us here in
New York, in converting the paper promises of the
Programme of Action into reality. It will mean
devoting time, money and political will to this issue,
and it will mean continuing the battle over the coming
years to complete the Programme of Action to make it
more comprehensive in its scope and more ambitious in
its commitments. The Council may rest assured that
Canada will continue with these battles, working
closely with like-minded States from all regions of the
world until this scourge is alleviated. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General’s call for a legally
binding treaty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Nepal. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me begin by
congratulating our close friend, Colombia, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. We are honoured by your
presence here, Mr. Minister, at today’s open debate on
small arms, which signifies the importance we should
attach to the issue before us. I appreciate the
background paper prepared by the Colombian mission,
which is focused and useful.
The debate on small arms could not have been
more timely. Only last month, we agreed on a global
Programme of Action to combat illicit trade in small
arms in a concerted manner. This debate sustains the
impetus generated by the Conference.
Much has been said in recent years about the
horrors of small arms as the principal instruments of
violence. It is time we joined hands to bring about the
dawn of a new era where the glory of life prevails over
the glory of guns.
The menace of guns has shown its ugly face in
schools, on streets and in civil wars in different parts of
the world. Out of more than 500 million small arms in
circulation, a sizeable number are in the hands of non-

25

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

State actors. If our own recent experience is any guide,
once violence has broken out, the distinction between
legal and illegal civilian possession of small arms loses
much of its meaning. They simply remain the
horrendous tools of death.
The impact of small arms has been deep and
wide: rapes, broken families, traumatized lives,
violated human rights, overstretched health services,
undermined education, misused scarce resources,
impeded development, destabilized States, undermined
peace, maimed youths and colossal loss of lives. The
majority of victims have been innocent and defenceless
women and children. Most unconscionable is the
growing number of child soldiers, whom people of
unscrupulous ambition or greed harness to kill and be
killed.
Small arms are indeed as much a security
challenge as they are a development problem. Parochial
political interests, criminal motives and social
discontent fuel the proliferation of small weapons,
making them likely to be indiscriminately used.
Humanity ought to strive for durable peace and
security for everyone in the world. To achieve this, we
must pursue the peaceful resolution of conflicts as well
as disarmament and security at a lower level of
armament, stimulate development that is also
environmentally sustainable, and promote justice that
gives each of us equal opportunity to excel.
There has been considerable progress in
controlling, and in some cases outlawing, weapons of
mass destruction, and we need to further strengthen and
accelerate the process. The international community,
however, has just broken the ground of disarmament in
small arms and light weapons, and we have yet to
devise a coherent and effective global strategy to
prevent the flow of small arms into conflict-prone
zones, to reduce our reliance on them for our safety,
and to evolve a culture of peace. The United Nations,
as in the case of weapons of mass destruction, can play
a significant role in this endeavour, too.
Clearly, the global accord on small arms is just a
modest, but good, beginning. We still have to confront
the challenge of implementing the agreement, and,
more importantly, of moving beyond it to address the
remaining issues, in order to make the world safer for
all from the scourge of small arms.

26

The United Nations has a threefold obligation to
confront the problem of small arms. First, it must work
with other stakeholders to implement the recently
agreed Programme of Action on the illicit trade in
small arms. Secondly, in conflict situations, it must join
forces with Governments to impose and enforce arms
embargoes, to check illegal local production and to
prevent legitimately owned weapons from getting into
the wrong hands. Thirdly, it must encourage the
international community to remove the threat of small
arms from the face of the earth by taking additional
measures.
Nepal appreciates the fact that the United Nations
has already devised an effective approach to
demobilizing, disarming and reintegrating combatants
in post-conflict situations. This approach must be
further refined and incorporated, where appropriate, in
Security Council mandates to make peace sustainable.
The United Nations must help evolve a workable
global strategy to prevent the proliferation of small
arms through, inter alia, marking and tracking
measures.
Information, as we all recognize, is of critical
importance to shaping a prudent policy and executing it
effectively. No source of information could match the
keen observations of United Nations development and
humanitarian workers, who can keep an eye on
smouldering social discontent and its facets, or of Blue
Helmets manning United Nations observer and
peacekeeping missions. Of late, civil society has
emerged as a strong partner of this world body and a
rich and additional source of information for United
Nations agencies and processes.
High-level panels could be helpful if they focused
on reinforcing and furthering international consensus,
rather than sidetracking or eroding it. Occasional
United Nations fact-finding and advisory missions
could also be explored as additional sources of
information, based on need rather than as a matter of
course. These could also prove counterproductive if
overused, because of their inherent visibility, in cases
where a quieter track 2 approach is critical to striking a
deal to resolve an involved inter-State or intra-State
conflict.
There is tremendous potential yet to be tapped in
regional and subregional organizations, whose physical
and cultural proximity can help tremendously to
accurately identify and analyse the problem, to forge

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

workable solutions, and to devise effective follow-up
measures. The United Nations must take them on board
in a more meaningful fashion to optimize the benefits
they offer.
The Secretary-General’s report must be the
linchpin of institutional information, both generic and
specific, for the Security Council to act. The Council
should therefore request him to furnish as
comprehensive a report as possible, including
information on the existence of small arms, sources of
supply and their possible impact on United Nations
peacekeeping missions, so that the Council could
formulate its mandates in an informed and appropriate
manner. But we must not lose sight of the fact that he
often has to work under severe resource and time
constraints and that parties in conflict seldom share
sensitive information, thereby limiting his capacity to
produce the kind of report the Security Council would
like to see on its desk. If objectively considered, the
lessons learned from past experience could provide
additional and invaluable insight to the Council.
Having said this, I must confess that Nepal is not
in favour of reinventing the wheel. We must try to
make the best use of the available resources and
mechanisms in a more coordinated and effective
manner in order to achieve our goals.
To be sure, an immediate symptomatic treatment
of the malady associated with small arms is essential.
But a lasting peace will remain a pipe dream until we
tackle the root causes of social discontent: poverty,
lack of opportunity and injustice.
Often, poor, frustrated and unemployed youth
seeking jobs and a station in life succumb to the glory
of guns and fall prey to the self-serving designs of
thugs, criminals and myopic political leaders. We must
empower the young with education, skills and jobs so
that they can say no to guns.
This calls for reversing the vicious circle of
poverty and conflict, making democracy work for
people, defeating crime, accelerating sustainable
development, creating employment opportunities, and
opening schools and hospitals in poor countries.
We must give our youth hope and opportunity.
The international community must come forward to
make this happen by assisting the poor countries to
develop and by making technology and markets work
for the poor.

In essence, it will take social transformation to
wipe out the menace of small arms. The Security
Council,
cooperating
with
other
competent
stakeholders, must contribute to this transformation to
the best of its capacity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Nepal for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Costa Rica. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Mr. Minister,
and, through you, the sister Republic of Colombia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. Costa
Rica appreciates the leadership that your delegation has
shown under the skilful guidance of Ambassador
Valdivieso in this body, while at the same time
recognizing your great endeavours in promoting the
interests and positions of Latin American countries.
The presence of small arms is a catalyst in armed
conflict. It is quite evident from every standpoint that
such conflicts would be impossible without weapons.
For this reason, it is not only right for the Security
Council to consider this matter; it is indispensable for
this body to take strong measures to prevent the threat
posed by this kind of weaponry.
The spread of small arms stokes the fires of
violence, heightens hatred and struggle, exacerbates
crime and terrorism and favours political and social
instability. The presence of light weapons facilitates
and encourages violations of fundamental human
rights. Arsenals of small weapons prolong armed
conflicts and impede the peace processes. Their
availability fuels common crime and feeds organized
crime. Their indiscriminate sale enriches a few while
ignoring the interests and needs of the majority.
Military budgets voraciously consume meagre national
resources, while our peoples suffer from the most
abject poverty.
In the hands of national armies, small arms are a
threat to international peace and security. In the hands
of extremist groups or despotic regimes, light weapons
become a threat to internal peace and security. In the
hands of private individuals, such weapons lead to
social breakdown and erode the security of our
citizens. The Security Council cannot continue to

27

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

ignore the suffering caused by the 500 million existing
small arms. This body cannot turn a deaf ear to the
cries of millions of innocent victims.
Just two weeks ago, we saw in this city the
conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons. Quite
candidly, I must say, that as far as my delegation was
concerned, the result of the Conference was
discouraging.
We are dismayed that the Programme of Action
adopted there does not explicitly prohibit the transfer
of arms to rebel groups. We are indignant that the
document does not condemn the dispatch of arms to
governments that commit mass or systematic violations
of human rights. We are alarmed that no strong
measures have been adopted to regulate the possession
of light weapons among civilians. We deplore the fact
that there has been no agreement on the immediate
preparation of a legally binding code of conduct on the
transfer of arms. We are concerned that the Programme
of Action does not include any explicit reference to
human rights, which should constantly guide our
struggle to combat this kind of weaponry. Moreover,
we regret that these very grave shortcomings have been
the result of inflexibility on the part of just a few
delegations that around this table profess to defend
peace and security.
The Security Council, fully and faithfully
discharging its primary responsibility for international
peace and security, must today take the lead in
combating the spread of small arms.
First of all, with respect to all the disputes under
its jurisdiction, the Council should adopt or strengthen
embargoes designed to prevent, combat and eliminate
the inflow of weapons. Such measures need to go hand
in hand with effective verification machinery and with
the full cooperation both of neighbouring countries and
arms producers.
Secondly, the Council must condemn and prohibit
the transfer of military material and personnel or
financial and logistic support to those countries whose
military units or security forces take part in human
rights violations. We believe that that ban should also
be extended to those States that do not respect
democratic principles or that have not ratified the main
human rights instruments and instruments of
international humanitarian law. The same ban should

28

apply to the transfer of arms to non-State actors, rebel
groups and extremist movements.
Thirdly, the Security Council, with the assistance
of the Secretary-General, should investigate and find
illicit supply routes for small arms and light weapons
to various areas in conflict and impose appropriate
sanctions on the nations, entities or individuals
involved in such activities. We believe that setting up
panels of experts similar to those investigating the
diamond trade would be a use model to follow.
At the same time, when circumstances in the field
so warrant, it would be appropriate to include in the
mandate of peacekeeping operations the task of
monitoring implementation of arms embargoes and
investigating breaches thereof. As part of their
mandate, missions should, moreover, be capable of
collecting, confiscating and destroying surplus small
arms and of promoting the reconversion of the arms
industry.
In the medium and long term, the quest for
international peace and security requires a substantial
reduction in the number of small arms available.
Combating the use, misuse and spread of these
weapons demands demilitarization in our societies and
the creation of a genuine culture of peace and life
grounded in greater economic and social equity, the
rule of law, democracy, representative government and
human rights.
In this context, the Security Council should
support disarmament efforts while at the same
promoting reduction in military expenditure. Would it
perhaps not be better for the $191 billion that the
developing countries currently squander on their armed
forces to be devoted to health? Would it not be
preferable to devote to education the $22 billion spent
on arms transfers to the Third World? Would this
perhaps not be the best way of guaranteeing peace for
future generations?
For more than 50 years now, Costa Rica has had
no arms expenditure. We are a disarmed country
without an army, which devotes its public budget to
education, preventive health and infrastructure
investment. In our land, you will find schools, not
barracks. Our children have never seen a helicopter
gunship, an armoured car or a warship.
Our experience has taught us that peace is not
simply the absence of armed conflict. Genuine peace is

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

the fruit of harmony among the various sectors of
society, respectful relationships among peoples and
individuals and the rejection of violence and hatred.
Peace demands active brotherhood among all people.
For this reason, peace can only exist when we
recognize that as human beings we are members of the
same family. The elimination of small arms is just a
first step in that direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Costa Rica for his kind words
addressed to my country.
The next speaker is the representative of Belarus,
whom I invite to take a seat at the Council table and
make his statement.
Mr. Ling (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus, too, welcomes Colombia’s
initiative to convene an open debate on small arms and
light weapons in the Security Council.
The recently concluded United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was undoubtedly a
landmark event in the life of the entire of international
community. I should like to express our gratitude to the
representative of Colombia, Ambassador Camilo
Reyes, whose experience and diplomatic skills enabled
the successful convening of the Conference and the
adoption of the Programme of Action, which, it must
be said, was no easy task. We must also refer to the
highly professional and effective work of the President
of the Preparatory Committee, Ambassador Carlos dos
Santos.
In the view of the Republic of Belarus, the
holding of an international Conference under United
Nations auspices and the adoption there of a final
document, the Programme of Action, represented a
great achievement. For the first time, discussing the
problems surrounding the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons was no longer a matter of mere national
or regional interest, but assumed a global dimension
that drew the attention of the wider world community
to this very serious issue. The next stage must be
concrete steps on the part of Member States,
international and regional organizations, the United
Nations and the Security Council to implement the
Programme of Action in order to solve the current
difficult problems in this area.

The Republic of Belarus shares the concern
expressed by the majority of the members of the world
community, who regard the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons as one of the main factors in the
spread of international terrorism, the emergence and
perpetuation of local armed conflicts and the expansion
of violence.
Belarus also fully shares the fears that the illicit
spread and destabilizing accumulation of small arms
and light weapons pose a real threat to regional and
international peace and security. The adoption at the
Conference of an agreed Programme of Action and the
subsequent discussion of that topic today here in the
Security Council are very convincing manifestations of
the international community’s awareness of the fact
that the problem of small arms and light weapons
cannot be solved by individual countries, but require
agreed and coordinated efforts at the national, regional
and international levels.
My country is committed to the principles of
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition and is actively
contributing to the fight against that scourge. Relevant
information on national legislation and practical steps
adopted by the Government of Belarus to combat the
illicit trade in these weapons were contained in the
statement made by the head of the official delegation of
the Republic during the high-level segment of the
Conference and have been distributed to members.
We are convinced that the Security Council can
play an important role in solving the problem of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons by giving
closer scrutiny to the following aspects of the problem:
first, reacting in a timely fashion to facts attesting to
the illicit spread and destabilizing accumulation of
small arms and light weapons; secondly, monitoring the
strict compliance of Member States with international
obligations regarding Security Council sanctions;
thirdly, providing assistance to States in matters of the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants and
their subsequent rehabilitation and reintegration into
civilian society, including the dispatch of advisory
missions to States at their request; fourthly, reporting
on and summarizing, with a view to establishing best
practices, the experiences by States in undertaking
national and regional programmes and initiatives to
monitor the transfer of small arms and light weapons
and ammunition, including measures to combat the
illicit trade in such weapons.

29

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, I should like to point out that, in
the opinion of the Republic of Belarus, the Programme
of Action — adopted as a result of a compromise — is
a balanced document containing realistic proposals
that, if implemented by the international community in
the context of the United Nations, will help to resolve
the acute problems related to the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Sierra Leone. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Permit me to
express Sierra Leone’s delight at seeing you, Sir, chair
such an important meeting of the Council at the
inception of Colombia’s presidency for the month of
August. My delegation wishes to express its gratitude
and appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wang Yingfan, for a job well done during the month of
July. May I also take this opportunity to proffer
congratulatory sentiments through you to Ambassador
Camilo Reyes Rodriguez for the exemplary manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the recently
concluded United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.
Sierra Leone attaches great importance to the
outcome and future effective implementation of the
provisions of the Programme of Action emanating from
that timely Conference, which emphatically highlighted
the concerns of my Government, which is only now
coming to grips with the scope and magnitude of the
former rebel insurgency. It is apparently all too evident
that the proliferation and illegitimate utilization of
small arms, which caused major devastation and
carnage in Sierra Leone for over a decade, indeed lends
credence to their being termed the real weapons of
mass destruction. It has been noted that, within the
West African subregion, there are an estimated
7 million deadly weapons in circulation, and the
incessant raging conflicts continue to provide the
perfect milieu in which the illicit trade in small arms
continues to thrive.
The general debate and technical meetings of the
Conference have now subsided, but the issue of followup has only just begun. In the words of Ambassador
Reyes,

30

“while it is critical that Member States take
concerted action against the illicit trade in small
arms as soon as possible, they must understand
that the Conference and its outcome were only
first steps in a process”.
It has also been noted that, in the quest to
prevent, combat and eradicate this illicit trade,
Governments
have
committed
themselves
to
considering all aspects of the small arms problem,
particularly to brokering, tracing and providing
financial and technical assistance. While we
acknowledge the fact that considerable effort has been
made at various levels in all parts of the world to deal
with all aspects of the problem, we must now
strengthen and build on those foundations.
It is therefore in this vein that we call upon the
Security Council to harmonize the positions of Member
States in accordance with the provisions adopted in the
Programme of Action. The Council must critically
emphasize the need for Member States to pursue
radical programmes within their respective territories,
subregions, regional groupings and elsewhere, aimed at
building a greater consensus on the prevention, combat
and virtual eradication of the illicit trade in small arms.
The Council could maximize its objectives in this
sphere by utilizing its many and varied peacekeeping
forces in sensitive conflict areas to effectively address
the issue of collection, storage, control and destruction
of light weapons, also liaising with other actors within
the United Nations system, such as the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to name but a few, as well
as through non-governmental organizations and civil
society, to implement programmes designed to put the
message across.
We regard the Security Council as the forerunner
in the global pursuit of the maintenance of international
peace and security. The recommendations proposed in
the various reports of the Secretary-General should be
given much more attention and introspective
consideration by the Security Council if the Council is
to succeed in that pursuit, especially with regard to the
issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. It is simply not good enough to issue
presidential statements and resolutions that have very
little meaningful effect on their intended recipients. My
delegation would like to see much more potent action
emanating from those statements and resolutions,

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

which would have an appropriately direct bearing and
reverberating effect on those recipients. It is the view
of my delegation that the Security Council should
develop the capacity to have greater leverage over
those parties directly responsible for the propagation of
conflicts caused by the proliferation of small arms. In
short, we wish to see a Security Council that dishes out
sterner, more robust and more resolute measures in
order to attain its desired Charter objectives.
My delegation also wishes to note that by
dispatching advisory missions to conflict areas, the
Security Council has invariably grasped in greater
detail the full frontal effect, as it were, of the problems
involved in many situations. The Council’s interaction
with high-level delegations ensures complementary
cooperation. Regional actors have become more
attuned to the inner workings of the Council, to the
extent that they look to the Council for guidance and
approval with regard to their respective intended
measures and aspirations, which do not necessarily run
counter to the thinking of the wider international
community. With that in mind, my delegation is of the
view that the Council should markedly and
continuously flex its muscular authority over the form
and content of the provisions of the Programme of
Action, and more specifically over the question of
compliance with arms embargoes.
Sierra Leone calls on other delegations,
especially those that are embroiled in conflict
situations, to be constant advocates of stricter
compliance with the norms of international law as a
measure aimed at putting an end to the culture of
impunity. Otherwise, the highly lucrative illicit trade in
small arms will continue unabated. It is also the view
of my delegation that the Council should adopt farreaching measures to ensure that Member States and
their respective authorized entities involved in the
production and marketing of small arms are forced to
comply with relevant legally binding instruments. It
should also effectively cause the strengthening of
established moratoriums and similar initiatives and
programmes specifically aimed at combating and
preventing this trade, which would lead to the eventual
eradication of these weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is the representative of Ghana. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

Mr. Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President,
Ghana too joins other speakers in commending you for
your initiative to hold this Council debate so soon after
the conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. Given the prominent role played by your
country in the discussions leading to the Conference
and during the Conference itself, the decision to make
this a priority issue for consideration by the Council so
early in Colombia’s presidency is an eloquent
reflection of your country’s keen desire to bring about
the eradication of this menace, and of its commitment
to that goal. We are confident that this debate will
enhance consideration of the outcome of the
Conference later this year by the General Assembly,
which mandated it.
Allow me also to congratulate the SecretaryGeneral and the Department for Disarmament Affairs
on their supportive role in ensuring the successful
conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects and the adoption of a realistic Programme
of Action to prevent, combat and eradicate that
phenomenon. Despite its deficiencies, the Programme
of Action sets out in a comprehensive manner not only
measures to be implemented at the national, regional
and global levels to manage and control the illicit
proliferation of small arms, but also options for dealing
with problems associated with the trend. Since the
Security Council is charged primarily with the
maintenance of international peace and security, it
should play a role that focuses on the following aspects
of the Programme of Action.
The first of these is lessons learned. There is no
doubt that the early integration of former combatants
into mainstream civilian life is a critical element that
promotes reconciliation and prevents the recurrence of
conflict. My delegation feels that the Security Council
can contribute to that process through the inclusion,
where applicable, of relevant provisions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
in the mandates and budgets of peacekeeping
operations. Such mandates must be broad enough and
sufficiently well resourced to enable missions to
execute the critical DDR components of their
operations. The new logic should be one that calls for
emphasis on preventing a former combatant from
taking up his or her gun because of a failed
demobilization and reintegration effort. The Council

31

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

must be seen to be working to make that thinking a
reality.
Secondly, ensuring the effective implementation
of arms embargoes imposed by the Council is one sure
way of curbing the supply of small arms and light
weapons to conflict areas, particularly to non-State
actors. We know that such embargoes have in the past
been broken with impunity by arms brokers often
acting with the connivance of State actors. We would
like to see the Council demonstrate greater cohesion,
vigilance and decisiveness in monitoring, exposing and
censuring breaches of its embargoes once such conduct
is exposed.
The third aspect is the strengthening of regional
and
subregional
mechanisms.
The
Council’s
recognition of the complementary role of regional and
subregional mechanisms in the maintenance of global
peace and security has been evident in its many reports
reviewing the progress of various peacekeeping
missions. Yet the lack of resources and appropriate
technology to make it possible to consolidate initiatives
at those levels to encourage activities such as
intelligence
sharing,
transparency,
cross-border
weapons collection programmes and the coordination
of national armaments regulations has hindered the
further development and consolidation of existing
mechanisms, such as arms moratoriums.
The Council’s support and initiative in the
establishment of funds, such as the Small Arms Fund,
which could support regional initiatives, as envisaged
in the Programme of Action, would go a long way
towards helping strengthen those mechanisms at the
regional and subregional levels.
The fourth aspect relates to follow-up
mechanisms. The Programme of Action highlights the
promotion of conflict prevention mechanisms as one
measure for curbing the need or demand for small arms
and light weapons. The Council’s involvement, through
the use of its good offices to encourage affected States
to solicit assistance from other States and from
regional and international organizations in the pursuit
of negotiated solutions to conflicts, would be pivotal in
helping to avert conflict.
The delegations of Member States, particularly
those from Africa, demonstrated the necessary political
will and flexibility that ensured a successful outcome
of the Conference two weeks ago.

32

Following the Conference, the Council can
facilitate the process for the development of an
international instrument on small arms by also
exhibiting the necessary cooperative support in
promoting initiatives such as workshops in various
regions and subregions on the small arms issue that
would serve as a platform on which to launch the
process. The Council, acting in this way, can justify its
efforts to participate and contribute in this area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Ghana for his kind words addressed
to my delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of
Bulgaria. I invite him to take a seat at the table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, on Colombia’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. On behalf of the Bulgarian
delegation, I wish you every success in fulfilling your
demanding and challenging tasks in presiding over this
important body.
Let me join previous speakers in congratulating
Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso and his colleagues on
the excellent preparations for this open debate. We are
grateful for the opportunity to contribute to the
consideration of the issue of small arms —— an item
on the Security Council’s agenda since September 1999
that is of particular concern to the international
community.
The importance of this meeting is emphasized by
the fact that it is being convened only a few days after
the successful completion of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, chaired in a
professional and devoted way by Ambassador Camilo
Reyes of Colombia.
Bulgaria has associated itself with the statement
made by the representative of Belgium, on behalf of
the European Union, and we fully share the view that
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
should be assessed as a landmark in, and an impetus to,
the efforts of the United Nations to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in strategic arms and light
weapons. We are pleased to see that the positive

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

outcome of the Conference is already galvanizing the
political will to fight the problem at national, regional
and global levels.
Bulgaria is pursuing a responsible policy of
stringent control over arms exports in compliance with
existing regional and international standards. I would
like to share some of our national experience.
Bulgaria has aligned itself with the criteria and
principles contained in the European Union Code of
Conduct on Arms Exports and the European Union
Joint Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons of
December 1998.
On 2 February 2001, the Bulgarian Government
adopted a special normative act for the implementation
of the principles, standards and criteria contained in the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
document on small arms and light weapons.
Our country abides by the provisions of the
moratorium on small arms transfers established by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We welcome the recent decision in Lusaka
by the ECOWAS heads of State and Government to
renew the moratorium on the import, export and
manufacture of light weapons for a second three-year
period, with effect from 5 July 2001.
In the context of the foregoing, Bulgaria has
introduced and developed a robust system of export
controls for foreign trade activities in arms and dualuse goods and technologies, corresponding to the
highest existing international standards.
The Bulgarian Government has established the
regular practice of adopting special normative acts or
decrees stemming from a given international
commitment.
During the last two years, the Council of
Ministers of the Republic of Bulgaria adopted a series
of internal regulations related to the implementation of
Security Council sanctions. These acts translate the
provisions of Security Council resolutions into
Bulgaria’s domestic legislation and enforce them with
respect to Bulgarian nationals and legal entities.
Currently,
a
governmental
decree
for
the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1343
(2001), on the imposition of sanctions against Liberia,
is in the process of preparation for adoption by the
Bulgarian Government.

In
accordance
with
our
international
commitments and the restructuring programme of the
Bulgarian armed forces, the Ministry of Defence has
already started projects for the destruction of surplus
small arms and light weapons. We are in close
cooperation with a number of partners, such as the
United States of America, Canada, the United
Kingdom, Norway, the Netherlands and others, on a
whole range of issues regarding stockpile management
and destruction of small arms and light weapons.
Under the terms of an agreement for cooperation
between the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Defence
of the Republic of Bulgaria and the State Department
of the United States of America, signed on the last day
of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons, a surplus in small
arms, nearly 80,000 units, will be destroyed using
existing facilities in Bulgaria.
In addition to taking steps at the national level,
Bulgaria actively promotes regional cooperation in
South-Eastern Europe. I would like to refer to the
importance of the documents adopted at the Regional
Conference on Export Controls, held in Sofia in
December 1999. The measures agreed at that
Conference enhance national export control systems, in
line with the European standards, strengthen the
process of regional cooperation in preventing illicit
arms-trafficking and controlling exports of arms and
dual-use goods and technologies, and constitute a
sound contribution to regional stability in SouthEastern Europe.
We commend the valuable practical work of the
Security Council’s arms embargo monitoring
mechanisms. We are convinced that full and strict
implementation of Security Council sanctions can be
achieved only through goodwill and a synergy of
actions on the part of all relevant actors. Improved
international cooperation and the coordination of
national State policies are indispensable for the
attainment of this goal.
Bulgaria will continue its cooperation with the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies on
monitoring the sanctions, including arms embargoes,
and will render all necessary assistance for the
implementation of Security Council measures
undertaken under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Before concluding, let me assure the Council that
Bulgaria is fully committed to further contributing to

33

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

the efforts of the international community to eradicate
the illicit trade in small arms, which has a destabilizing
effect and poses a threat to international peace and
security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Bulgaria for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): My delegation is
delighted to see Colombia serving as the President of
the Security Council for the month of August. I am also
happy to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia chairing the meeting today.
It is gratifying to see the Council holding this
open debate on the question of small arms shortly after
the successful conclusion of the United Nations the
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New York
last month. We wish to commend Ambassador Reyes of
Colombia on his well-deserved election as President of
this United Nations Conference devoted to finding
solutions to the pressing problems of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.
This meeting could not have taken place at a
more opportune moment. The fact that it is on the
agenda of the Security Council, we believe, is an
affirmation of the desire of the international
community to deal with the problem of the growing
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
While it is acknowledged that these weapons, in
and of themselves, do not start or lead to conflicts,
their ready availability has, nonetheless, frequently
caused the escalation of these conflicts and aided the
perpetration of criminal activities in many countries.
Clearly their proliferation and the illicit trade in
them — which is estimated to amount to 40 to 50 per
cent of the global trade in small arms — pose real
threats to the economic and social development of
many developing countries, especially in Africa.
Without doubt Africa is the most affected region
if one considers the devastation that conflicts involving
small arms have wreaked on communities and States.
We would recall the gory details of the Rwanda
pogrom and the untold hardships visited upon the
innocent civilians in Sierra Leone, the Democratic

34

Republic of Congo and Liberia, just to mention a few.
The Secretary-General has highlighted the nexus
between illicit trade in arms, the illegal smuggling of
natural resources such as diamonds, timber and so
forth, and the perpetration of conflicts in Angola,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The impact of the devastation caused by small
arms and light weapons in Africa cannot be
underestimated. In many instances, economies have
been totally destroyed and reduced to shambles,
infrastructures laid waste and millions of people killed
and wounded while thousands have been internally
displaced and many more turned into refugees. In the
face of this development, responsible members of the
international community cannot stand by and allow it
to continue.
Even though African States lack the capacity to
manufacture small arms and light weapons, the
continent unfortunately is the recipient of large
quantities of these weapons. It is estimated that in
Africa alone there are some 7 million illicit arms and
light weapons in circulation. The incessant conflicts
and wars in the continent have provided an
environment in which trade in light arms is carried out
in exchange for the natural resources of the continent.
The lucrative barter of arms for natural resources such
as “blood diamonds” has provided an opportunity for
arms dealers to thrive in the continent. It has also
helped rebel leaders to sustain conflicts.
In recognition of the enormous suffering that
Africa has experienced as a result of conflicts induced
by small arms, leaders of the West African countries
have tried, for example, to tackle the problems of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons at the
subregional level. In October 1998 the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
adopted a moratorium on the importation and
exportation of light weapons in ECOWAS States.
African Ministers also adopted in Bamako on 30
November 2000 a declaration on a common African
position on small arms and light weapons.
At the national level, my country, Nigeria, has put
in place practical measures to tackle the problem
through the establishment of the National Committee
on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Also Nigeria
declared Thursday, 5 July 2001 “small arms destruction
day” in conformity with the decision reached at the
preparatory committee to declare the first day of the

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

United Nations Conference on Small Arms and Light
Weapons as such.
Nigeria and Africa have taken these initiatives to
underscore their awareness of the danger posed by
small arms and light weapons. It is our hope that
members of the international community and indeed
members of the Security Council will take decisions to
complement these efforts.
In view of the global nature of the problem and
the urgent need to deal with it, my delegation would
like to say to the members of the Council that the time
has now come for us to take far-reaching decisions to
complement the decisions already reached at the recent
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. To this end, Nigeria
would like to urge members of the international
community to render technical and financial assistance
where needed to regional and national efforts to
eradicate illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Nigeria also wishes to support the call for the creation
of a small arms fund to assist States. Furthermore, we
urge Member States to share information on a
voluntary basis on their national marking systems for
small arms and light weapons.
As a follow-up to the Conference on Small Arms
and Light Weapons we wish to call for a review
conference to take place not later than 2006 to review
the progress made in the implementation of the
Programme of Action. My delegation also supports the
recommendation in the outcome document that further
study be undertaken, within existing resources, for
examining the feasibility of developing an international
instrument to enable States identify and trace in a
timely and reliable manner illicit small arms and light
weapons.
In conclusion, we would like to commend the
Secretary-General for his report contained in document
S/2000/1092, in which he provided a reference manual
for safe methods of weapons destruction for use in
missions areas. We hope that members of the various
United Nations peacekeeping missions will find this
useful during the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
Surely a world free of arms would be a peaceful
world, but since this for now is a utopian vision, we
can only strive to limit the proliferation of illicit small
arms and to ensure that they do not find their way into
the wrong hands. Our concerted efforts to address the

issues of conflict prevention, peace-building and the
protection of civilians and children in armed conflicts
will depend on how effectively we are able to tackle
the issue of the proliferation of illicit small arms and
light weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Nigeria for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next and final speaker is the representative of
Thailand. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Singhara Na Ayudhaya (Thailand) (spoke in
Spanish): Though I am the last speaker, I nonetheless
wish to tell you how very pleased I am, Mr. President,
to participate, and I would also like to welcome you,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to New
York. By dedicating your very valuable time to deal
with this issue demonstrates that the Government of
Colombia attaches great importance to the question of
small arms.
(spoke in English)
I should like to commend you, Mr. President, for
taking the timely initiative of organizing this open
debate in the Security Council on the important issue
of small arms. It was only last month that the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was concluded
under the able chairmanship of Colombia, resulting in
the Programme of Action. This initiative drew the
attention of the international community to the
multifaceted problems associated with small arms and
light weapons and to the common threat that the illicit
trade in such weapons poses to mankind. I should also
like to thank Colombia for preparing the document
entitled “Issues for the open debate on the question of
small arms” (S/2001/732, annex), which serves as a
good basis for our discussion today.
The landmark United Nations Conference and the
resulting Programme of Action marked an important
first step in our common effort to combat the scourge
of the illicit trade in small arms. Although we have a
framework document that is realistic, achievable, and
comprehensive, there is a general view that the
Programme of Action has not fully met the
expectations
of
the
international
community,
particularly the expectations of the victims of the illicit
trade in small arms. Nevertheless, it is important to

35

S/PV.4355 (Resumption 1)

recognize that we are at the beginning, rather than at
the end, of a long-term process of mobilizing the
international community to tackle this problem. My
delegation therefore pledges its support for the followup work of the Conference and for ensuring effective
implementation of the Programme of Action.
As expressed in the statement by the President of
the Security Council of 24 September 1999, there is a
link between the destabilizing accumulation of small
arms on the one hand, and threats to international and
regional peace and stability on the other. The illicit
trade in small arms is also an important factor because
it enables such destabilizing accumulations to take
place more quickly. But what makes the problem of
small arms an even greater threat to international and
national peace and stability is its linkage with other
problems of national and international concern, such as
drug-trafficking, money-laundering and cross-border
terrorism, to name a few. It is when small arms are in
the hands of these groups of people that the threats to
international and regional peace and stability are
increased manifold. Thus, if one is to effectively
address the small arms issues, one will also have to
bear in mind these other associated problems and
undertake efforts to resolve them, including, when
necessary, by taking action within the Security Council.
The problem of small arms not only threatens
human security but also impedes sustainable economic
development, and with it the development of basic
social and public services for individuals. Easy access
to small arms and their use by non-State actors,
including drug-traffickers, make it very difficult for
individuals to lead a normal life, since the propensity
to armed violence is increased. The problem of small
arms thus has a strong negative impact on both
freedom from want and freedom from fear, pillars of
human security, and therefore needs to be addressed in
all relevant forums. Let us not forget that the root cause
of the problem of small arms is conflict itself, and the
demand for small arms arises from conflict. We
therefore urge the United Nations to continue its good
work towards conflict prevention and resolving
conflicts at their roots. In this connection, we are
pleased that the General Assembly has just adopted a
resolution to continue considering the report of the
Secretary-General on the prevention of conflict and the
recommendations contained therein. In addition, we
urge that differences and disputes be settled through
political dialogues, negotiations and other peaceful

36

means. This is an area where the Security Council has
an important role to play.
There is no doubt that the Security Council, with
its mandate of ensuring international peace and
security, has an important contribution to make in
addressing the problem of small arms, particularly in
countries or regions experiencing armed conflict. The
effective design and implementation of arms
embargoes, especially in conflict areas, is one area
where the Security Council can and does play a pivotal
role. But the Security Council should not replace other,
more relevant forums at the national and international
levels that have already undertaken many initiatives in
addressing various issues related to the problem of
small arms, issues such as the definition of small arms.
The development of norms and measures to tackle the
problem of small arms, including the illicit-trafficking
of small arms, are best addressed in forums where there
is greater universality of membership. This is to ensure
transparency and to give our States the opportunity to
contribute to the process. We look forward to
continued, close cooperation between the Security
Council and other relevant forums, including the
General Assembly and regional organizations, to
jointly address and find effective and practical
solutions to the problem of small arms, including the
implementation of the Programme of Action of the
recent Conference.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
On the basis of today’s open debate, the
presidency will prepare a draft presidential statement
reflecting the views expressed and will submit it for the
consideration of the members of the Council during the
course of the next week.
I would like to express my thanks to all of the
speakers who have participated in this debate, and I
particularly thank them for the interest shown in this
item, which I am sure we all share. I believe it has been
a very enriching debate that will enable the Security
Council to move forward in its work with a more
comprehensive vision of the subject. Again, let me
thank all participating delegations. They have shown
that the results of our Conference have been positive
and constitute the first step in the right direction.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.
