United Nations

S/PV.6539

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6539th meeting
Wednesday, 18 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sellal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 2 May 2011 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/282)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-34509 (E)

*1134509*

S/PV.6539

United Nations remains committed to fully supporting
these efforts.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Allow me to briefly address the four topics under
discussion today.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Letter dated 2 May 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/282)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional
rules
of
procedure,
I
invite
Mr. Tegegnework Gettu, Director of the Regional
Bureau for Africa of the United Nations Development
Programme, and Mr. Colin Bruce, Director of
Operations and Strategy for Africa of the World Bank,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/282, which contains a letter dated
2 May 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
France addressed to the Secretary-General containing a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative. I
welcome this opportunity to discuss the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The United Nations effort in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one of our largest and most
complex operations. With the help of many partners,
the Congolese people are rebuilding their country. The

2

First, with respect to security and the protection
of civilians, security has improved in most of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the east, there
has been progress in the dismantling of foreign and
Congolese armed groups. That is the result of a
combination of factors: military operations conducted
in accordance with the conditionality policy of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
effective programmes to disarm, demobilize and
repatriate foreign ex-combatants, efforts to extend
State authority and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s improved relations with neighbouring Great
Lakes countries.
All of these achievements must be sustained.
Foreign and Congolese armed groups continue to
pose significant threats. The humanitarian situation
remains serious, with 1.7 million people displaced.
And, of course, human rights violations, including
murder, sexual violence, and the looting and burning of
villages continue to have large-scale humanitarian
consequences.
(spoke in English)
The second topic I wish to address is that of
elections.
Properly conducted, transparent elections can
ease tensions and build transparent and accountable
institutions. But they also entail risks, especially in
societies divided by or recovering from conflict.
The presidential and National Assembly elections
scheduled for 28 November, to be followed by
provincial and local elections, can help to further
consolidate peace and stability. Those elections must
be timely, transparent, credible, peaceful and secure,
offering all Congolese a full opportunity to participate
freely without fear of harassment or violence. We must
do our utmost to ensure that violence does not break
out before, during or after the elections. We have
invested much, and there is much to lose. This is
critical to ensuring the country’s continued progress. I
urge all Congolese stakeholders to work together to
ensure that the elections meet these basic conditions.

11-34509

S/PV.6539

MONUSCO is expected to continue to provide
logistical and technical support, for which the Mission
will require additional resources. The Mission also
stands ready to support the work of national and
international election observers. In addition, it will be
critical to provide the necessary equipment to the
Congolese police units that are being trained on
electoral security by MONUSCO, France and the
Government.
Third are the rule of law, governance and
institution-building. Long-term peace, stability and
development will require strong national institutions,
accessible to all, that can provide basic services and,
most fundamentally, security and rule of law. I
welcome the increased leadership of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government in addressing
sexual violence, including the fight against impunity.
This has included strengthening the military justice
system and prosecuting some of those accused of
sexual and gender-based violence and other crimes.
Other advances include steps to establish special
chambers to investigate and prosecute serious human
rights violations.
However, I remain deeply troubled by ongoing
reports of widespread sexual violence across the
country. I once again urge the Congolese authorities to
do more to put an end to such crimes. The
consequences of sexual violence are profound and farreaching. In addition to its untold harm to victims, such
violence deepens conflicts and worsens already dire
conditions. This is especially true when perpetrators go
unpunished. I urge international partners to provide
necessary support for the Congolese national police,
army and justice system, and to make identifying and
prosecuting the perpetrators a priority.
At the same time, we must ensure that the victims
of sexual violence receive proper attention and care.
Pursuant to resolution 1888 (2009), we have deployed
a team of experts that is working with national
authorities to strengthen the rule of law. The
professionalization of the national security services and
the strengthening of the judiciary are essential to
human rights, humanitarian access and the protection
of civilians. The cycle of impunity must end.
(spoke in French)
Fourth and finally is economic development.
There cannot be lasting stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo without economic recovery,

11-34509

reconstruction and development. I am encouraged by
emerging efforts to combat the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, for example through such regional
initiatives as the Lusaka summit convened by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Such steps can help the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to prevent acts that drive conflict and deprive
the country of vital revenues.
The Congolese people should be proud of the
gains of the past decade, but the situation remains
fragile. The challenges loom large. The successful
conduct of credible elections will be a milestone on the
road to stability. I encourage the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, national
stakeholders and the international community to jointly
identify the priorities of the next phase and the nature
of the United Nations support. The United Nations
remains committed to working closely with all partners
to provide all possible support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for International and
Regional Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Tshibanda (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): I should like at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to thank you
for your timely convening of this important meeting on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this important year of my country’s history. Through
you, I should also like to thank France, with which the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has close and longstanding ties of mutual respect and esteem.
I wish to echo the unanimous praise of last
month’s Colombian presidency of the Council, and to
express my personal gratitude for the zeal and
expertise with which the Colombian presidency
accomplished its tasks.
I further wish to pay tribute to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, whose introductory statement reflected
his tireless will to strive to build peace in my country.
We shall never be able to thank him enough for his
personal involvement in seeking a lasting solution to
the disruption of peace and international security that,
at a certain point in time, prevailed in the Democratic

3

S/PV.6539

Republic of the Congo, and for having spared no effort
to enable the universal Organization to help the young
Congolese democracy to blossom and the Congolese
people to attain their political and socio-economic
aspirations.
The United Nations engagement with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo dates back to July
1960 and is currently represented by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which replaced the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) almost a year ago. My presence here today
demonstrates the obvious importance that the
Congolese Government attaches to the support that my
country has received from the United Nations and the
international community.
Indeed, we believe that we are jointly responsible
for regular evaluations of the United Nations activities
in support of our Republic’s Government in order to
ensure that they remain relevant to our objectives and
to the changing nature of the challenges we face, and
that our partnership becomes increasingly effective,
thereby enhancing the Organization’s credibility. My
deepest wish is that the exchanges that we shall hold at
this meeting will allow us to forge a threefold
consensus between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Security Council on the progress that
has been made towards normalizing the situation in my
country, on the obstacles that continue to impede that
normalization and that urgently require our joint
attention, and — on the basis of that dual
evaluation — on the United Nations future activities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
with respect to MONUSCO’s mandate.

first objective concerns military operations and the
reduction of the threat posed by armed groups. First,
military operations as such have ended. Ongoing
efforts are aimed at neutralizing the last pockets of
resistance of roving, residual armed elements in order
to eliminate all threats to peace.
Secondly, operations led by the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC), with
the support of MONUSCO, have drastically reduced
the operational capacities of armed groups. Those
groups now consist of six to 12 elements, the extent of
whose criminal activities nevertheless continues to
pose a threat to the security of the population in some
remote areas of the country.
Thirdly, an ever-decreasing number of areas
where security is still disturbed by the presence of
those roving, residual armed elements are viewed and
treated by both parties as sensitive and unstable.
Nevertheless, they are entirely under the control of
Government forces.
Fourthly, in their missions, the Government
forces often benefit from the logistical support
provided by MONUSCO.
The second objective concerns the means
available to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to effectively protect the
population and gradually take over the security
functions of MONUSCO. In that regard, initiatives
have been taken to equip the country with increasingly
effective security forces. Within the FARDC, those
initiatives have involved the identification and
management of troops, the reorganization of troops
into regiments, the resumption of training for units and
the recycling of existing troops.

In our view, there is no better point of departure
for this exercise than the results achieved to date by the
joint assessment established pursuant to paragraph 7 of
resolution 1925 (2010). From that perspective, we
recall that resolution 1925 (2010) identified three main
objectives for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, with specific
results to be obtained for each objective. As the
Council will understand, there is no need for me to
remind those who adopted this resolution of its
objectives and the results expected for each of them.

Regarding the Congolese national police, it is
worth recalling a number of points. First, training will
be provided for border police, who are to be deployed
from Kalemie to Ituri to assist border post services and
mitigate border porosity. Secondly, 400 elements from
the armed groups will be deployed once they have
received appropriate training in Kapalata, in Orientale
province. Thirdly, police officers will be recycled by
MONUSCO. Fourthly, a vote will be held on the
reform of the Congolese national police, the legislation
for which is soon to be enacted.

In that context, the conclusions of the joint
assessment can be summarized today as follows. The

The third objective is to strengthen State
authority throughout the national territory by

4

11-34509

S/PV.6539

implementing civilian administration, which is the
guarantor of the rule of law. Here, we would recall
several points. First, the legitimate authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo control almost all
of the territory that had previously been controlled by
armed groups. However, some vestiges of the former
parallel administration of the Congrès national pour la
défense du people remain in the territory of Masisi, as
do some of the Simba group in Maiko National Park.
Secondly, the Congolese national police are
present throughout the liberated territories, with the
exception of northern Dungu. However, their
effectiveness is constrained by the shortage of officers,
lack of logistical support and insufficient training of
staff.
Thirdly, the judicial system is playing an
increased role and its functioning continues to
improve. New prosecutors have been recruited, trained
and deployed in sensitive areas. Furthermore, in
provinces where abuses have occurred, military and
civilian circuit courts have been set up, with support
from MONUSCO, to resolve the problems created by
the distance of courts and tribunals from the areas
where crimes are committed.
Fourthly, unfortunately prison management in the
field is insufficient and, where it is present, there are
many deficiencies. For instance, infrastructure is
outdated and staff, resources and training are lacking.
This stark and objective evaluation is the
outcome of the joint actions undertaken by experts on
both sides — MONUSCO and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Given the security
situation that prevailed in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo only two years ago, this assessment
provides ample grounds for satisfaction. Substantial
progress has indeed been made in reducing threats to
the security of our people and in improving the
conditions for the Government’s takeover of security
responsibilities. In addition, with the normalization of
our relations with neighbouring States, we can
legitimately consider ourselves to have emerged from
the peacemaking and peacekeeping stages.
Nevertheless, significant challenges remain and
we do not seek to downplay them. They are, however,
more closely linked to the requirements for
peacebuilding, democracy, good governance and
building State capacities. In that way, the State will be

11-34509

able to more efficiently and effectively carry out its
national functions.
From that standpoint, the Government has set
itself a number of priorities for which we expect we the
support of the international community. First, the
organization of elections at the end of the current
Government’s mandate will ensure that the Congolese
people can take charge of their own destiny.
Secondly, security sector reform involving the
army, the police, the judicial system and penal services
will be undertaken so as to guarantee the rights and
security of citizens, stabilize the country and the
region, and put an end to the impunity of those who are
found guilty of unspeakable crimes, such as the rape of
women and other massive human rights violations. The
Government’s commitment to fighting those crimes
was recently highlighted by the lengthy prison
sentences handed down for crimes of rape committed
by numerous officials, including high-ranking army
and police officers.
Thirdly, efforts will be made to combat the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which has
exacerbated the conflict in the eastern part of our
country and throughout the region, in particular by
implementing the instruments that were adopted to that
end at the Extraordinary Summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Lusaka
last December.
Fourthly, capacity-building efforts will be made
for the public and territorial administrations with a
view to successfully implementing the country’s
stabilization
programmes.
Those
include
the
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan in ConflictAffected Areas of Eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo (STAREC), and the decentralization and
national
reconstruction
programmes
commonly
referred to as the “five pillars of the Republic”.
Fifthly, we will strengthen good-neighbourly
relations with all neighbouring States through dialogue
and the enhancement of regional cooperation, which is
the gauge of peace and stability both within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and throughout the
region.
Turning to the elections, the Government is
determined to meet the challenge of holding them
peacefully, in keeping with the timetable established in
the Constitution and by guaranteeing the free and

5

S/PV.6539

democratic nature of the elections. To that end, we
have established the Independent National Electoral
Commission, which is the institution responsible under
the Constitution for organizing the elections. It consists
almost equally of representatives of the majority and of
the opposition.
Some other important developments have
improved the prospects for holding these elections.
Voter registration and review of the electoral rolls has
already begun. These operations are proceeding
normally in several provinces at once. After wideranging consultations with political participants from
across the spectrum, the Electoral Commission has
published an overall electoral timetable, according to
which elections for the President of the Republic and
national deputies will be held on 28 November, and the
President-elect sworn in and inaugurated on 20
December. It is an eloquent indication of the
Commission’s bipartisan nature that the timetable was
presented and explained on behalf of the Commission
by its Vice-Chairman, who represents the opposition,
not the majority.
Secondly, in evidence of the approval of the
timetable by almost the entire political class, important
opposition leaders confirmed their participation in the
forthcoming elections by registering after its
publication. In that regard, I note that the law
establishing the Supreme Council for Audiovisual and
Other Communications, which is mandated by the
Constitution with ensuring freedom of the press and
respect for ethics in the dissemination of information,
as well as equitable access for all political parties,
associations and citizens to official channels of
information and communication — a significant role
where elections are concerned — has been enacted, and
the Council itself will be established shortly.
Furthermore, despite its limited resources for
addressing the challenges of reconstruction in a postconflict country, the Government has committed to
covering 60 per cent of the total cost of the
elections — proof of its willingness to take ownership
of the process and its commitment to consolidating
democracy. It is clear that there is still a balance of 40
per cent needed to fully fund the election budget. I
reiterate the Government’s appeal to the international
community to come to our aid in financing the gap. In
this regard, we have already submitted a request to the
United Nations for logistical support from
MONUSCO, since the size of our national territory,

6

coupled with the current sorry state of our
transportation infrastructure, is one of the main
potential obstacles to the smooth conduct of our
electoral operations. MONUC’s assistance in this area
was crucial in 2006, as that of MONUSCO will also
undoubtedly be in the next elections. We would like to
express our gratitude for that assistance in advance.
That said, thanks to the technical assistance
coordinated by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) that we have already received
from the international community, and drawing on the
practical experience of election organization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo bequeathed to us
through the human resources of the Independent
Electoral Commission, the National Independent
Electoral Commission is equipped to conduct the entire
electoral operation, with the help of the Government
and the country’s other institutions according to their
areas of competence.
Furthermore, unlike the situation in 2006, when
the nation was in the throes of armed conflict and the
authority of the State was almost non-existent in a
significant portion of the country, the security situation
is now stabilized virtually throughout the national
territory, and we have reached the end of a legislative
term characterized by institutions that function
smoothly, lively democratic debate and freedom of
expression. Beyond the intensity of the build-up to the
elections, we believe there is therefore nothing major
that can impede or derail the electoral process to the
point of requiring any contribution from MONUSCO
beyond its logistical support, or any further special
dispensation that would undermine the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In this regard, as in everything else, we would
ask that, however essential it may be, all future
assistance from the United Nations, and MONUSCO in
particular, be conceived and organized in a way that
makes full use of the investments made by the
international community. In this way, we can end the
crisis of legitimacy, relaunch the economy and rebuild
a State in the Democratic Republic of the Congo — in
other words, capitalize and build on the remarkable if
still precarious results that we have achieved in this
area by working together in the past few years.
In that regard, and considering the evolution of
the security situation on the ground, we believe that the
time has come for us to launch together a transition

11-34509

S/PV.6539

phase that will include a restructuring and
reconfiguration of MONUSCO and its mandate with a
view to an orderly and progressive yet steady
withdrawal of its military component, while taking into
account the recommendations of our respective experts
on the joint assessment team. As a responsible partner,
the Government assures the Council that it has no
intention of jeopardizing the consolidation of the
security situation under way. It believes rather that the
irreplaceable assistance of the United Nations should
be adapted to the new realities on the ground. To that
end, we will limit ourselves to the following
comments.
Regarding security sector reform, which is a top
priority for our Government, we have opted to focus
mainly on bilateral cooperation in the area of reform of
the armed forces. In this context, agreements have
already been negotiated with a number of friendly
countries and are in the process of being implemented.
We nonetheless count on MONUSCO for reform of the
national police force, with the immediate goal of
training national units needed to police the elections.
As regards judicial reform, the Government is
hoping for the support of the international community
for its efforts in the area of zero-tolerance policies that
seek to end impunity throughout the country. More
specifically, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
seeks significant support for establishing the joint
tribunals that were proposed in the mapping exercise
report so as to identify crimes committed during the
period covered by the report.
On the economic front, with the consolidation of
peace and improved employment and income
opportunities, especially among young people and
women, the fundamentals are generally good but still
fragile. In order to consolidate them and create the
conditions for strong, sustainable growth with shared
social benefits, the Government intends to pursue a
prudent fiscal policy, conservative management of the
public purse, development of basic social and
economic structures, and the structural reforms begun a
number of years ago with the assistance of the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and
UNDP. We also intend to improve the business climate,
particularly through legal and judicial security,
diversifying resources for growth and seeking greater
added value locally, especially by giving a greater role
to small and medium-sized businesses. As we pursue
this commitment, we call for assistance on the

11-34509

development agencies referred to previously and other
agencies of the United Nations system that could help
us meet the Millennium Development Goals.
In this respect, the elements related to economic
recovery, social rehabilitation and insertion that are
part of the stabilization and reconstruction programmes
are particularly significant. These elements include
STAREC and the programme developed by the United
Nations country team aimed at ensuring consolidation
and development in the western and central regions,
which, while spared from conflict, still face the
consequences of the instability that is rife in the north
and east of the country. We therefore count on the
active involvement of the United Nations and the
international community in their financing and
implementation.
It is commonly acknowledged today that the
assistance provided to countries in post-conflict
situations, such as mine, must meet those countries’
priorities and real needs so that the population can
truly benefit from the peace dividends. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo acknowledges that it needs
lasting peace in order to efficiently and effectively
tackle the challenges of building an efficient State, a
State that is strong and prosperous, that respects the
rights of its citizens and that is able to meet their
needs. It therefore still expects a great deal from the
United Nations, which undeniably has the capacity to
help strengthen Congolese public institutions. We only
ask that we be able to shoulder, as responsible adults,
the prerogatives of our restored sovereignty.
The operative words, in the reflections that we
invite the Council to undertake on the future of our
cooperation, are “dialogue” and “partnership”, based
on the principle of ownership for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of subsidiarity when it
comes to the international community. To be effective,
we acknowledge that ownership requires strengthening
our national capacities. We are convinced that there is,
in this respect, a great deal of room for fruitful
cooperation.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Towards the end of 2011, important elections —
elections that will be decisive for the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — will take place.
This debate is all the more important as it affords us
the opportunity to examine issues of major importance
for the future of that country, in particular the State

7

S/PV.6539

regaining full control of its sovereign functions, the
future role of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the support it must provide
to this electoral process, the measures to strengthen
security, and the issue of combating the illicit
exploitation of natural resources.
My delegation would like to congratulate France
and to thank it for having convened this debate. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
contribution to this debate and to voice to him our
support for the United Nations contribution in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I welcome the
presence of Mr. Raymond Tshibanda Mulongo,
Minister for International and Regional Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We thank him
for the information he has shared with us, and we
associate ourselves with his appeal for action based on
dialogue and partnership in the Democratic Republic.
Finally, I welcome Mr. Tegegnework Gettu of the
United Nations Development Programme, Mr. Colin
Bruce, and Mr. Pedro Serrano for their participation in
this debate.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is the
scene of the biggest United Nations peacekeeping
operation — the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) — hence our interest in a
return to security, peace and stability in that country.
The mandate of MONUSCO, which was established in
2010 in cooperation with the Congolese authorities,
will come to an end on 30 June. The objective is to
gradually transfer to the Congolese authorities the
entirety of their sovereign responsibilities. That
transfer will of course be supported with all the
assistance necessary to enable the country to continue
to pursue stabilization, peacebuilding, reconstruction
and the resumption of its economic activity.
The question then arises of the role of the United
Nations and, in general, that of the international
community in that transfer of responsibility, which will
of course not take place without difficulties.
Challenges related to the security and political
situation and the economic reconstruction of the
country will lie at the very heart of this process.
With respect to security, we congratulate the
Government for the efforts made in this field.
However, the situation remains difficult, and the
priority should be strengthening security, especially

8

with the approach of elections. Eventually, however,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will require
enhanced assistance.
The extent of the eastern border makes it very
difficult to control the armed groups that operate on
either side of it. Strengthening security along the
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
involves, first, capacity-building for the Congolese
security and defence forces. In this respect, Gabon
would like the United Nations, as well as other
multilateral and bilateral partners, to continue to
support the Government in its efforts to reform this
sector. We encourage and welcome the steps already
taken by the Government to that end.
Secondly, improving the security situation will
require ongoing involvement of the countries of the
Great Lakes region in the search for a joint solution to
the crisis. In this regard, strengthening cooperation
among the countries of the subregion and the
assistance of the international community are
important preconditions for improving dialogue
between the Congolese authorities and the various
groups within the framework of political dialogue
resulting from the Goma agreements of March 2009.
Thirdly, improvements to the security situation
will not be effective without a genuine plan for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
would like to welcome the efforts in this area by the
Congolese authorities, who to date have reintegrated
around 32,000 ex-combatants in the armed forces and
the national police force.
With regard to justice, we would also like to
welcome the commitment of the Congolese authorities
to the fight against impunity, as demonstrated by the
legal proceedings taken against high-level officers of
the armed forces and rebel leaders accused of rape.
Beyond that, however, we should continue to support
reform and the strengthening of the justice sector.
The Congolese situation is also political. It is
crucial that the authority and sovereignty of the State
be fully restored throughout all of the country’s
territory. The success of the upcoming general
elections will contribute to consolidating the authority
and legitimacy of the State. Furthermore, the
Congolese political class overall wishes to see these
elections take place.

11-34509

S/PV.6539

To this end, the international community and the
United Nations must provide the technical and
logistical support necessary for the electoral process.
At the conclusion of that process, the setting up of
national reconciliation mechanisms and a strengthening
of the democratic institutions of the rule of law, health
and education, especially for young people, can only
contribute to creating a more tranquil political climate.

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, scheduling this important debate on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo today. I
welcome the positive comments made this morning by
the Secretary-General and Minister Raymond
Tshibanda. I also appreciate the participation in this
debate of the World Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union.

The stabilization of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the conduct of the elections will create
an environment conducive to restoring economic and
social activity. The macroeconomic initiatives and
measures already undertaken by the authorities should
be encouraged. That is why my delegation would like
to endorse the Congolese Stabilization and
Reconstruction Plan for Areas Emerging from Armed
Conflict, whose interface with the international plan is
the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy.

This debate is an important opportunity to discuss
the ways in which we can all assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its progress towards
sustainable peace and security. I shall touch first on the
short-term priority of the elections and then say
something about the broader long-term challenges.

With respect to the issue of mines, Gabon
welcomes the convening of the Lusaka Summit at the
conclusion of which the countries of the Great Lakes
endorsed the guidelines of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development on tracing
mineral resources, which is a very important
achievement given the link between the financing of
armed groups and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources. In that regard, we would like to welcome the
recent decision by the United States of America to
provide $11 million to support actions to combat the
illicit trade in mineral resources in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, at a time when we are thinking
about the future of MONUSCO, the objective should
be to enable the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to regain its authority
throughout the country. The future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a matter for the Congolese
people. The quest for peace should be the constant
concern for the people, the Government and the
international community. The international community
must support the country in finding a lasting solution
to the crisis and achieving lasting peacebuilding. Of
course, the priorities are those that Minister Tshibanda
has just shared with us, namely elections, security
sector
reform,
justice,
mineral
resources,
administration and economic reconstruction.

11-34509

The forthcoming presidential and legislative
elections mark a milestone in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and provide an opportunity to build on
progress made during the past decade. It is important
that these elections be based on the principle that every
eligible adult has the right to vote, that they include the
participation of civil society, human rights defenders
and journalists, that they respect the freedom of
expression and opinion and that they allow equitable
access to media for the political parties. These
elements are essential to a credible election process.
We urge all political parties to commit to peaceful
elections and we call on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the
international community to continue to work with the
Congolese Government and the National Independent
Electoral Commission to ensure that the election
process is successful.
Although elections are important, they cannot on
their own provide the long-term stability that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo needs. Therefore,
we must look beyond the elections to the key
challenges that affect the long-term security, stability
and prosperity of the country. As Minister Tshibanda
said, there have been important strategic successes, but
the challenges remain daunting. In particular, it is vital
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo build confidence in the institutions of
Government and provide the foundations for enhanced
economic activity, including enabling the safe return of
internally displaced persons to lead normal productive
lives.

9

S/PV.6539

We urge the Congolese Government to share and
implement its road map for defence reform and to work
with MONUSCO and other international partners to
drive forward the reform of the army and police. This
approach must include strengthening military police
and military justice institutions. I would highlight three
key areas.
First, further efforts must be made to form a
modern, effective national police force. We welcome
the progress already made with support from
MONUSCO towards establishing and training 10
police units in advance of the elections, and encourage
international donors to support the equipping and
training of additional police units. Their deployment
will play a significant role in reassuring communities,
and particularly the most vulnerable in those
communities, such as women, and provide the
foundation for re-establishing the rule of law and State
authority in all territories.
Secondly, security will only be achieved if justice
is seen to be done and lingering issues of impunity
addressed. Some important steps have been taken, but
we call on the Congolese Government to utilize the
experience provided in the United Nations justice
support programme to develop the criminal justice
chain, the judiciary and the prisons and to adopt
legislation to bring about the recommended reforms.
Thirdly, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration are essential to bringing
the conflict to an end and would help improve security
conditions in fragile territories. The United Kingdom is
a major financial contributor to the programme, and we
call for greater support from the international
community for this valuable activity.
Additionally, there are cross-border challenges to
stability that will need to be addressed. MONUSCO
has increased its efforts to protect civilians against
attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army, but we urge
greater coordination of strategies with other United
Nations missions in the region and with regional
security forces.
The international community has an important
role to play in helping to address the challenges that
remain. We urge the United Nations to deliver a
coordinated approach in-country and encourage the
international community to support efforts that will
facilitate the transfer of tasks from MONUSCO to
United Nations agencies in support of building

10

capacity within the Congolese Government as security
conditions improve.
The United Kingdom remains a committed
partner of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
addition to the United Kingdom’s contributions
towards the wide-ranging European Union development
assistance programme and our United Nations
contributions, we will provide $1.2 billion in bilateral
funding over the next four years through our
development programme with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Even in the current difficult financial
circumstances, we believe that this investment is worth
making for the long-term future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its people.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome the Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Raymong
Tshibanda, to today’s meeting.
We believe that the process of settling the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
seen substantial positive progress. The prevailing
relative stability throughout the country is evidence of
the country’s move towards a post-conflict
reconstruction phase. At the same time, in the eastern
provinces of the country, serious threats to security
remain because of the activity of a number of armed
groups.
The military capabilities of those groups remain
fairly high. An alarming factor is the alliances created
by Congolese and foreign rebels to achieve their goals
and maintain their control of the illicit proceeds from
mineral resources. We firmly condemn the punitive
actions by the armed groups against the peaceful
population, attacks on peacekeepers and the seizure of
hostages,
including
those
from
humanitarian
organizations, for ransom. We note that the number of
human rights violations in those territories is not
decreasing. Those crimes must not go unpunished.
It is quite obvious that resolving the issue of
armed groups in the eastern part of the country will be
possible only through a comprehensive and holistic
approach, one involving a broad spectrum of political,
economic, legal and military-political instruments. In
that context we welcome the efforts by the Great Lakes
countries to create joint mechanisms for border control
and for managing and certifying the proceeds of
mineral resources in the country, in particular

11-34509

S/PV.6539

agreements of the special high-level meeting in Lusaka
in December last year.
A key task is stepping up assistance to the
Government of the country for security sector reform.
Despite the Government’s efforts, progress in this area
remains limited. At the same time, the bottleneck in the
process of integrating former combatants exacerbates
problems within the regular armed forces. It is
important to ensure full-fledged implementation of the
agreements between the Government and the
Congolese armed groups of 23 March 2009. Priorities
here include the reconstruction and strengthening of
institutions of State authority in areas freed from armed
groups.
Resolving those issues is increasingly topical in
the context of upcoming general elections, bearing in
mind that preparations for their conduct are at the very
forefront of political life in the country. This period
might be marked by growing political and social
tensions.
Undoubtedly, providing electoral support to the
country by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) is an important task. Such
assistance must be provided on the request of the
National Independent Electoral Commission in an
unbiased way, strictly within the framework of the
existing mandate. We welcome the development of
dialogue and partnership relations between the
Government of the Democratic Republic and the
United Nations Mission to take stock together of the
situation regarding prospects for the United Nations
peacekeeping presence.
We note the Mission’s adopting of a range of
measures to enhance the effectiveness of the protection
of the civilian population, which provides for an early
warning mechanism in vulnerable regions and is
intended to bolster the confidence of the peaceful
population in its activities. Such steps are already
yielding palpable positive results.
To uphold long-term stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the international community
should focus its attention on assisting the Government
to resolve issues related to peacebuilding. Of key
importance in this regard is strengthening constructive
cooperation among the countries of the Great Lakes
region to resolve common transborder problems and
development of economic cooperation.

11-34509

Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for presiding over this
meeting and to thank you and your delegation for
organizing it. We thank the Secretary-General for his
intervention, and we join other in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We further
welcome the participation of the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank.
In 1960, during the celebration of the Congo’s
independence, the first democratically elected Prime
Minister, Patrice Lumumba, declared, “We are going to
rule not by the peace of guns and bayonets, but by the
peace of heart and will.” Later this year, more than 50
years after this vision was expressed, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will hold its third democratic
elections, still in pursuance of that lofty goal.
Significant progress has been made in the past
decade in improving the overall stability and security
of the country. There has also been progress in
improving the political climate, which has allowed for
the extension of State authority throughout most of the
country.
In spite of that progress, there remain challenges
that require a concerted effort to address, especially the
security situation in the east of the country and
challenges relating to stabilization, peacebuilding and
development. National ownership is crucial and should
characterize efforts for peace consolidation, with the
partnership and sustained support of the international
community.
I shall turn to three issues that we identify as key
for the consolidation of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo: security and stability,
governance and democratization, and socio-economic
development.
The country’s uneven stability, whereby the
eastern part continues to experience instability, is a
cause for concern. For the Democratic Republic to
maintain its sovereignty, it is important that State
authority be extended and exercised throughout the
country.
It is our view that the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stablilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
should continue to focus on establishing stability and

11

S/PV.6539

security in the eastern part of the country, working
together with Government forces. We welcome the fact
that relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries of the Great Lakes
region continue to improve. It is also important that
countries of the region have committed to working
together to comprehensively address the sources of
threats to regional stability, including those posed by
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
Some progress has been made with regard to
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration and to security sector reform. However,
the process will have to be accelerated. Further, it is
our view that the mandate of MONUSCO should be
able to focus on a comprehensive programme to help
develop capable and effective national security forces
that will ultimately be responsible for peace and
security in the country. MONUSCO’s future role
should complement the endeavour of the Democratic
Republic to extend its State authority. It is important
that MONUSCO’s role adjust to new challenges of
threats on the ground and the needs of the Congolese
people.
Secondly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has come a long way since the outbreak of the civil war
a decade ago, a war that turned into a conflict that
threatened regional peace and stability. It has now been
more than five years since the people of the country
chose ballots over guns and bullets, as envisaged by
Patrice Lumumba. They have not looked back on their
journey to democracy, peace and stability, justice and
freedom.
South Africa is pleased that relative peace and
security exist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
despite the challenges in the eastern part. The last
parliamentary and presidential elections were a major
breakthrough in the Congolese efforts towards
democracy, good governance and nation-building. We
are pleased that the Congolese will be returning to the
polls again this year, in November, for the third time
since independence. We are aware that the success of
the last elections was in large part due to the
commitment, resolve and focus of the international
community and the United Nations. South Africa
would therefore call on the international community
not to forsake the people of the Congo as they
approach their next important elections after a decadelong conflict.

12

South Africa would like to acknowledge to
Government’s commitment to commit significant
resources to cover the total cost of the elections in
November. We call on the international community to
match that commitment and provide the financial
assistance required to bridge the gap in the budget for
the elections. MONUSCO’s role in this regard will be
critical. It should of necessity extend to working
closely with the National Independent Electoral
Commission.
It is the view of my delegation that the coming
elections will be a watershed moment in the history of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and will go a
long way in determining the country’s future insofar as
peace and stability and economic and social
development is concerned. While elections are not an
end but are rather a means toward an end, the
Government of the Democratic Republic is encouraged
to do everything within its modest means to ensure that
the elections are a resounding success.
As we look to the issues of sustained socioeconomic development — the third issue I wish to
address — we are again encouraged to turn to the
vision set out by Patrice Lumumba in 1960: “I call on
all Congolese citizens to set themselves resolutely to
the task of creating a prosperous national economy,
which will address our economic independence.”
In that regard, we are encouraged by the report of
the International Monetary Fund that commended the
strong micro-economic performance in 2010, including
a growth rate of 7.2 per cent and annual inflation of
9.8 per cent. If sustained, that growth will translate into
important social dividends for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Regional cooperation among the countries of the
Great Lakes region is vital to stability and economic
development. The newly created United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa can also play a
facilitating role in regional cooperation. We welcome
the Lusaka Declaration to fight illegal exploitation of
natural resources in the Great Lakes Region, adopted at
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region in December 2010. That effort will assist in
improving regional cooperation among the countries of
the Great Lakes region and is crucial to stability and
economic development.
As part of the drive for sustainable socioeconomic development in the country, the development

11-34509

S/PV.6539

of strategies to manage natural resources will be
critical. The lifting of the ban on mining activities in
the Kivu and Maniema provinces this year should pave
the way for job creation and a better life for all
Congolese. In this regard, specific focus on youth
unemployment remains a pressing concern.
In conclusion, we cannot but refer yet again to
the words of that great African patriot and
revolutionary Patrice Lumumba, who said that the
independence of the Congo marks a decisive step
towards the liberation of the entire African continent.
His words remain true today and still reverberate on
the continent. The resolution of the challenges facing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be a
significant step towards the comprehensive resolution
of all the challenges facing the continent. South Africa,
for our part, remains committed to assisting the people
and Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to consolidate peace, reconciliation, democracy
and socio-economic development.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank France for its
initiative to hold this meeting on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We thank Secretary General
Sellal for making a special trip to host today’s meeting.
We also welcome Mr. Tshibanda, Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Allow me also to
thank
Secretary-General
Ban
Ki-moon
and
Mr. Tshibanda for their statements.
Over the years, under the leadership of President
Kabila, the overall security of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has been stable, its economy has grown
rather rapidly, incomes have been on the rise, living
conditions have improved and regional cooperation has
grown closer. We congratulate the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on those
improvements and its tireless efforts towards those
ends.
In November, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo shall hold a general election that will be a
milestone in the political life of the country; arduous
work will be required to ensure its smooth conduct. At
the same time, the country is faced with considerable
challenges in maintaining stability and promoting
economic development. The international community
should continue to provide practical support to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

11-34509

I wish to take this opportunity to make the
following points.
First, in regard to support for the preparations for
the elections, the Government has made progress on
election preparations. We call upon the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and international
partners to continue to provide financial and logistical
support at the request of the Government. We call on
the parties concerned to respect the Constitution and
laws of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
will of its people, and to refrain from interfering in the
internal affairs of the country so as to ensure that the
general election will be conducted smoothly and lay a
solid foundation for achieving national reconciliation
and lasting peace.
Secondly, with respect to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s achievement of sustained
stability, the Government has achieved much in its
joint military actions with its neighbours in the fight
against such armed groups as the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda and the Lord’s Resistance
Army. However, some rebel activities continue in the
eastern part of the country, and progress in
reintegrating ex-combatants has been slow. The United
Nations and the international community should
continue to support the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its efforts to stabilize the
situation in its country, provide it with training and
equipment, and assist it in accelerating security sector
reform and completing the expansion of the military
and police forces.
MONUSCO has done a great deal of work to
realize peace and stability in the country, for which we
wish to express our appreciation and support. As to the
future of the United Nations presence in the country,
the United Nations should continue to listen to the
opinion of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Lastly,
regarding
economic
and
social
development, we call on the parties concerned to create
a climate conducive to economic development, attract
domestic and foreign investment, and help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to assume
ownership of and actively explore its natural resources
in order to turn its resource wealth to development
advantage so that its people will be able to benefit from
a peace dividend as soon as possible. At the same time,

13

S/PV.6539

we hope that the countries concerned will strengthen
their cooperation and work with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its actions
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources by
the rebels.

calendar. If executed well, the elections will pave the
way for genuine national reconciliation and
reintegration. We are certain that this goal can be
realized with the unwavering support of the
international community.

Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
Nigeria’s appreciation to the French presidency for
convening this timely discussion on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as the country enters the critical
stabilization phase. I join other delegations in thanking
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing. My
delegation welcomes the presence of Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda, Minister for International and Regional
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for enriching our discussion with the perspectives of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also welcome the presence of the
representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and the European Union.

Without durable institutions, particularly in the
security and judicial sectors, the fight against
insecurity, impunity and human rights violations will
be difficult to achieve in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We therefore call on the international
community, including the donor community and other
development partners, to redouble their efforts in
assisting the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
areas of capacity-building, security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
judicial sector reform. Such reforms are indispensable
to strengthening the capacity of the Government to
extend security across the county and to create a fertile
economic environment for building the future of the
country.

Nigeria welcomes the steady progress being
achieved in the major sectors of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Most of the country is now
conflict-free,
relations
with
neighbours
have
normalized, and economic and social reconstruction
efforts are under way. That progress, however, is taking
place in a fragile environment fraught with serious
challenges. Insecurity is still rife in the eastern part of
the country, with persistent threats from the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the Lord’s
Resistance Army, and violations of human rights,
including sexual violence, are still evident in North and
South Kivu provinces. The limited capacity of the
Government to maintain nationwide security also
remains an issue of great concern.
Considering the magnitude of those challenges, it
is fitting that this debate was convened not least to
demonstrate our shared belief that the challenges are
surmountable if the right combination of military,
political and institutional solutions are found. Nigeria
therefore welcomes the Government’s determination.
We share its vision for consolidating its efforts,
exercising full sovereignty within its territory and
empowering national institutions.
With presidential and legislative elections on the
horizon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
poised to enter an era of credible governance. In order
not to lose the momentum that has gathered, it is
important to ensure strict adherence to the electoral

14

Recent economic achievements, including
improved economic growth, reaching the completion
point of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative and increased Government revenue, are solid
foundations for sustained peacebuilding.
The continued illegal exploitation of natural
resources by armed groups and elements of the
Congolese army, despite agreements on the
establishment of a regional certification mechanism to
curb it, remains a worrisome trend. Those activities
exacerbate conflict and deprive the Government of
valuable revenues that are critical to supporting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s development
priorities. The need to put an end to those activities
cannot be overemphasized.
At the regional level, building on the
rapprochement between the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda, the opportunity exists for greater interaction
and cooperation to tackle residual security problems.
As the Council discusses the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is our hope that
due cognizance will be taken of two tensions inherent
in the country, namely, a long history of resentment of
external involvement in what are regarded as the
internal affairs of the country, on the one hand, and a
dogged determination to remain united as a single
country despite all odds, on the other. The lesson we
draw from this is that there is a need for national

11-34509

S/PV.6539

ownership of development priorities and strategies, the
coordination of aid and the need to respond to national
priorities.

that the tasks to be carried out are still onerous and the
needs enormous in a country whose eastern part alone
is larger than the entire territory of France.

Let me conclude by expressing Nigeria’s
appreciation to the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for their
continuing support to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The proactive and
robust nature of its activities, despite the reduction in
troop strength, is particularly commendable. In this
important phase in the life of the country, it is
inevitable that MONUSCO aligns itself with the
changes taking place and responds to the areas of
greatest need in the country, including security, the
protection of civilians, targeted support for the armed
forces and the forthcoming elections. We must do all
we can to support them in their efforts.

The challenges in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are numerous and complex, on both the
humanitarian front as well as in the area of security.
Combating the activities of armed groups requires
working together more closely with Government
forces, as well as increased support for the process of
integrating militants, who must form part of the reform
of the security sector. Moreover, the frequency and
brutality of attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army
against the civilian populations of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as well as of many of the
countries of the region call for stepped up cooperation
on the part of the States of the region.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the French Mission for organizing
this important debate on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for the
quality of the concept paper it prepared in that regard
(S/2011/282, annex). I should also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Minister
Raymond Tshibanda for their very useful contributions
to this debate.
Almost a year to the day, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1925 (2010), by which the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was succeeded by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The
international community also expressed its support for
the efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
assume greater autonomy in managing its conflicts. For
its part, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
able to associate this change with the fiftieth
anniversary of its independence. MONUSCO is today
active in numerous areas, in particular in the protection
of civilians, disarmament and stabilization. It is also
participating in the preparations being undertaken by
the Independent National Electoral Commission for
next November’s election.
We would like to commend the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to bring peace to the country and strengthen State
institutions. However, we must nevertheless emphasize

11-34509

The latest reports on rapes committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are exceedingly
alarming. While the statistic of 15,000 rapes having
taken place last year in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last year was cited
in this Chamber last October, current reports mention
400,000 — an average of 48 rapes per hour. This
confirms the fears expressed by Ms. Wallström about
the country’s reputation being tarnished for being
known as the rape capital of the world. The
international community must respond firmly and in a
concerted manner in the face of the scope of this
tragedy. Rapes must end and the perpetrators of this
heinous crime must face justice. Women in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must suffer no
longer and should take their full place in society.
The measures taken to resolve the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons should be
encouraged, as should steps to limit infections and
contain epidemics, including cholera and polio.
We must also underscore the close link that exists
between stabilization and development. In that regard,
it is crucial to support the economy of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo through material assistance and
concrete programmes.
In addition, we must demand an end to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which would
contribute to putting an end to violence.
The international community should continue to
support the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in all the efforts being made to ensure

15

S/PV.6539

conditions for stability and prosperity in the country.
MONUSCO should have all the necessary means to
carry out its tasks, including helicopters and planes.

Democratic Republic of the Congo to implement the
recommendations of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.

In conclusion, I should like to express the
Mission of Lebanon’s sincere condolences to the
families of the 32 passengers aboard the plane that
crashed tragically on 4 April. Our sympathies also go
out to their friends and colleagues, MONUSCO, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
World Food Programme and the United Nations Office
for Project Services.

We also remain concerned about the high number
of cases of sexual violence against women and girls in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as mentioned
by the Secretary-General. However, it is significant
that the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have shown the political will to investigate the
cases of sexual violence that led to the trial and
conviction of officers of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo. We strongly
support the fight against sexual violence and the
defence of fundamental human rights. In that regard, I
would like to pay special tribute to the efforts being
developed by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Wallström in this field.

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this timely and
important debate on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I wish to extend a most cordial
welcome to Minister Raymond Tshibanda and to thank
him for his statement, which we heard with great
interest. It illustrated the significant progress made in
several decisive areas, and it clearly reflects the
commitment of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to tackle the challenges that still
lie ahead. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his important statement.
As a member of the European Union, Portugal
naturally shares the position that will be later
expressed by Mr. Pedro Serrano.
Allow me also to reiterate Portugal’s condolences
to the families, colleagues and friends of those who
lost their lives in the recent plane crash while serving
the United Nations and the international community.
Despite the substantial challenges that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo faces, there is a
positive structural trend that is essential to foster. To do
so, it is critical to continue enhancing security and
improving the protection of civilians. In that regard, we
express our satisfaction with the stability achieved in
the vast majority of the country and the progress
towards the neutralization of foreign and other armed
groups, namely through the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation.
The activity of armed groups remains an
intolerable source of instability and violence in the
Kivus and in Orientale province. It is at the root of
continued violations of human rights.
We remain concerned with the recruitment and
use of children. We call upon the Government of the

16

The reform of the security sector and upholding
the rule of law are essential to overcome those
challenges. We therefore encourage the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to
pursue those processes in an integrated way, while
closely coordinating with its international partners.
Allow me to underline the role played by the European
Union Mission of Assistance for Security Sector
Reform, which is led by a Portuguese general.
The upcoming presidential and legislative
elections will be a key moment in the stabilization and
peace consolidation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I paid special attention to what Minister
Tshibanda said on that important point. It seems to me
that it is particularly important that the national
authorities hold and keep up an enhanced dialogue with
the opposition and the international community in
order to ensure an environment that is conducive to a
peaceful, free and fair electoral process. In this regard,
I commend the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), both in technical
and logistical terms, and underline the European
Union’s support to this process.
The fulfilment of the medium- and long-term
expectations of the Congolese people depends on
furthering institution-building and economic and social
development. Only with legitimate, credible and
resilient institutions will the State be able to discharge
its functions. Only with economic and social
development will the State be able to sustain peace.

11-34509

S/PV.6539

Bearing in mind the decisive importance of
national ownership, the primary responsibility for these
endeavours rests naturally with the people and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
But as we heard today, the international community
stands ready to continue to work with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in this process. We welcome the
enhanced dialogue and close cooperation between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO.
I would now like to focus on two key challenges
facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo that have
a regional dimension and can only be addressed
through effective regional cooperation. The first
challenge is the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), which
is responsible for intolerable humanitarian tragedy in
Central Africa. We welcome the efforts of the African
Union, namely the recent joint experts mission to
LRA-affected regions. Moreover, we commend the
Secretary-General for dispatching the multidisciplinary
mission, which will soon visit the region to assess the
LRA threat. We look forward to hearing its
recommendations to strengthen and better coordinate
United Nations and African Union efforts to help
address this threat.
Secondly, the illegal exploitation and trafficking
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo fuels conflict and instability and deprives
the Congolese people of the benefits of their country’s
assets. The results of the Lusaka Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
are encouraging. We welcome President Kabila’s
pledge to fight mercilessly against the illegal
exploitation of natural resources in the Great Lakes
Region, and we hope that it will soon bring about
tangible results in a regional framework. In dealing
with these and other threats, it is thus fundamental to
further enhance regional cooperation and support the
efforts of the African Union and subregional
organizations. We hope that the work of the United
Nations Office in Central Africa will also be
instrumental in this regard.
(spoke in French)
I should like to address the Minister personally
and recall the words of Dag Hammarskjöld: “the
pursuit of peace and progress, with its trials and errors,
its successes and its setbacks, can never be relaxed or
abandoned”.

11-34509

The United Nations and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have already come a long way together.
This is a strategic partnership aimed at achieving peace
and progress for the Congolese people and the stability
of this vast region.
Portugal commends the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the progress
achieved and encourages it to continue along this path
despite the challenges it still faces. I have taken note of
the appeal made by Minister Tshibanda and I wish to
assure him of our unfailing support in the pursuit of the
goals he mentioned, which we fully share.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): Let me
also thank the Government of France for hosting this
important meeting on the stabilization of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful statement, and
Minister Tshibanda for his candid remarks.
The United States is committed to working with
the Congolese Government and the international
community towards our shared objective, namely,
peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region, in which the country plays such
a substantial role. We support ongoing efforts to
increase stability, reduce the insecurity in which too
many civilians still live, and ensure legitimate
governance and a strong, credible democratic process
for the country’s upcoming elections.
On behalf of the United States, let me again
express our deep sorrow for the tragic United Nations
air accident on 4 April, in which 32 individuals lost
their lives. We offer our condolences and our lasting
appreciation to Special Representative Meece, the men
and women of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and all United Nations
personnel who work with such dedication in
challenging environments.
I will focus on three points today. First, for longterm stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to take root, the country’s civilians need and deserve
greater security. We therefore commend MONUSCO
for its efforts to implement its mandate fully, especially
its innovative efforts to protect civilians. We applaud
the development of a Mission-wide strategy, including
the deployment of community alert networks and
community liaison assistants. These important
initiatives
better
connect
peacekeepers
with

17

S/PV.6539

communities at risk and enable MONUSCO, despite
the all too real risks, to work quickly and effectively to
respond to potential crises.

these efforts, and we urge its Government to take steps
to demilitarize the mines and reduce armed actors in
the east of the country.

Important progress has been made. Much of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is relatively stable.
Although important challenges remain in the east,
security there has increased. The reduction of armed
groups
continues.
Important
efforts
towards
reintegration and disarmament have taken place.
Nonetheless, insecurity persists in the east and
northeast. State authority remains extremely weak and
violent militias continue to fuel conflict. To take two
troublesome examples, the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) and the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda continue to kill, rape, abduct and displace
civilians in shocking numbers. Armed entities,
including elements of the State security forces, also
illegally exploit the country’s natural resources,
terrorizing innocent civilians as part of their efforts to
control communities that live near lucrative mining
areas. That can allow them reap ill-gotten miningrelated profits, which in turn sustain the conflict and
prolong its suffering and abuses.

The second point I would like to address is the
upcoming national and legislative elections. These
could be historic. The Congolese will lead these
elections, which we hope will be credible and fair. The
Congolese can demonstrate their commitment as we
approach the 28 November presidential and legislative
elections.

Far more must be done to deal with these violent
armed groups. We remain committed to helping the
Democratic Republic of the Congo address this
scourge, in part through security-sector reform
assistance. We have trained a light infantry battalion in
Kisangani, which is now operating in areas victimized
by the LRA. We provided ongoing support to develop
more Congolese military-justice personnel and
strengthen the country’s military-justice system. We
are also helping develop Congolese defence
institutions.
Armed groups often rely on the mineral trade to
sustain their operations. My Government is therefore
actively working to enact regulations that will require
companies publicly traded in the United States to
ensure that their mineral purchases do not help violent
groups. We call on all Member States to support
resolution 1952 (2010) and urge companies within their
jurisdictions to exercise due diligence over their supply
of minerals that stoke conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are also
working with companies, civil society groups and
Governments in the region to ensure that the trade in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s minerals does
not help armed groups. We continue to partner with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region on

18

Hurdles remain. A new electoral law has yet to be
passed. The recently released electoral calendar is
ambitious and it leaves scant room for error. The
logistical challenges are substantial. Security remains a
serious concern. In the past, members of the State
security forces have abused and threatened journalists.
Intimidation of domestic human rights defenders
continues. MONUSCO may lose key mobility and air
assets that could help the elections, just as they are
needed most.
We therefore call on the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to demonstrate the
highest regard for the democratic process and to
continue its work to ensure transparent, open and fair
elections, with freedom of movement for all candidates
and journalists. We will be closely monitoring
developments in urban and rural areas alike, as the
electoral process should be credible throughout the
country. We will also provide approximately
$11 million in electoral support, including election
monitoring and civic education, in coordination with
partners such as the International Foundation for
Electoral Systems and the Carter Center. We also
support MONUSCO’s efforts to improve the elections’
technical and logistical aspects, as well as Radio
Okapi’s work to help cover these elections.
While the international community plays an
important role supporting the electoral process,
ultimately it is the Congolese Government’s
responsibility to provide the necessary support and
security. We look forward to working with the
Government in this regard.
Thirdly, let me underscore the importance of
longer-term stabilization for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its neighbours. True progress will
depend on tackling the underlying causes of insecurity
and impunity in order to build the institutions that can
support good governance.

11-34509

S/PV.6539

The conviction of nine military personnel for
having ordered and carried out mass rapes in Fizi is a
milestone. By taking action, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has strengthened
the message to perpetrators of sexual violence: no one
is immune from prosecution.
The United States is deeply committed to ending
impunity and developing democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including initiatives to support
free speech, governance, the rule of law, judicial
independence and accountability. For example, we
have helped build up the Congolese justice system’s
forensic capacity to investigate mass killings and
sexual and gender-based violence. That has made it
easier to prosecute dozens of rapists and perpetrators of
sexual violence. We have also allocated more than
$2 million in new communications technologies to
better protect civilians in the Kivu provinces through
early-warning mechanisms and to support joint field
investigations in the east by United Nations and
Congolese military prosecutors.
The United States, working with the strategies of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
and the United States, has developed a comprehensive
approach to help tackle sexual and gender-based
violence. That includes $42 million in the Kivus and in
Orientale and Maniema provinces to prevent future
violence and take better care of survivors, as well as a
three-year, $15 million initiative to scale up
programmes to fight HIV/AIDS.
We continue to strengthen the Congolese civilian
and military justice systems through long-term
capacity-building and efforts to reduce impunity.
In conclusion, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must continue to take concrete
steps to address the full spectrum of challenges the
country faces. As Council members, we must also
provide our political support to peace and stabilization.
The United States is committed to doing so and to
working with the Congolese Government and the
international community towards our common
objective of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
having convened and presiding over this important
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

11-34509

(spoke in Spanish)
I should like also to express particular
appreciation for the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as well as for the presence
of and the statement made by Mr. Raymond Tshibanda,
Minister for International and Regional Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The proposal to focus our discussions today on
the gradual stabilization of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo and identify key areas
to that end has led us to reflect on the immediate tasks
that we must accomplish without losing sight of our
main objective. Those tasks include helping and
cooperating with the authorities and institutions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the fulfilment of
its fundamental responsibility to provide security to its
people; leading the peacebuilding process; and
establishing a peaceful society in which the human
rights of all Congolese are respected and promoted,
with a view to laying the foundation for long-term,
sustainable development.
Over the past 15 years, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has faced difficulties of a unique nature
and of a magnitude such that it is difficult to find
examples in the international community that can serve
as references or enable us to gauge the extent of the
challenges that have been overcome by the country’s
Government, institutions and society as a whole. That
is why Colombia welcomes the progress made so far
and the good relations that prevail between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations, whose contribution and
cooperation are essential.
While much work remains to be done in the
process of stabilization and peacebuilding, the concept
paper prepared by France clearly identifies and defines
the priority areas on which we must focus our actions.
The security situation, especially in
the
eastern
provinces and in North and South Kivu, is of particular
concern. The fight against armed groups must be
carried out in parallel with security sector reform,
offering comprehensive solutions that take account of
the political, legal, economic and human rights
dimensions, as well as of individual responsibilities in
the area of justice and the cross-border presence of
certain armed groups.
That will require a full assessment of the process
of the reintegration of former combatants of the Forces

19

S/PV.6539

armées de la République démocratique du Congo,
which will serve as the basis for a dialogue with all
stakeholders and which will lead to the adoption of
corrective measures aimed at enabling the legitimate
authorities to exert full control over all components of
the armed forces.
Army and police reform must be promoted
through the adoption and implementation of the
necessary legislation, along with training and the
establishment of institutional structures that reflect the
clear subordination of the armed forces to the civil
authorities.
The successful outcome of the elections of 2011
and 2012 is of paramount importance for the future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
participation of the United Nations in particular and of
the international community in general in the
upcoming elections should therefore be based on the
recognition of the ownership and responsibility of the
Congolese authorities and institutions with respect to
the entire electoral process.
Legislative, institutional and logistical measures
to ensure the holding of peaceful, free, fair and
transparent elections must be carried out in a peaceful
political environment that is orderly and promotes
productive discussions and in which all political actors
enjoy their full rights. In that regard, civic education
for the people is of fundamental importance. A
continuous, fluid dialogue with the National
Independent Electoral Commission is crucial in order
to identify specific areas where assistance may be
required. Here we call upon the donor community to
honour its commitments in financing the upcoming
elections. The Government, by funding 60 per cent —
as Minister Tshibanda has just told us — is doing its
part and shouldering its responsibility.
The consolidation of democratic institutions and
State authority throughout the territory will be possible
only through the adoption of measures that take
account of the interdependency of issues related to
security, institutional capacity, the promotion and
protection of human rights, and development.
In that context, it is particularly important to
combat violations of human rights and all types of
violence, including sexual violence. This has been one
of the most extreme cases that the Security Council has
dealt with, as a number of my colleagues have stated.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the strong

20

support of the international community, must continue
to take actions such as the trial and conviction of
Lieutenant Colonel Kibibi and 10 other officers,
because the prosecution of those held responsible is an
essential element in preventing this type of situation
and promotes the development of national capacities to
reduce
impunity
and
strengthen
institutional
legitimacy.
The stabilization process will be successful only
if it takes place in the context of broader actions aimed
at developing the country’s productive potential.
It is important that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo continue its fight against the illegal export
of natural resources and that it implement the decisions
taken at the Lusaka summit, as this will contribute to
the full utilization of its natural resources as an engine
for development and the welfare of its people.
Finally, allow me to wish every success to the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the preparations for and
holding of the upcoming elections, so that a solid,
democratic foundation can be laid that will ensure
peaceful coexistence and prosperity in the country.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I should like to
thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this timely debate. I should like
also to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Minister Tshibanda for their comprehensive briefings.
The issues that they raised and the approach they
suggested should guide us in today’s deliberations. We
hope that today’s debate will determine the contours of
the international community’s approach to sustaining
the progress made so far in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I would like to join others in expressing our
deepest regret over the tragic crash of an airplane
contracted to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) on 4 April in Kinshasa, which
resulted in the loss of 33 passengers and crew
members, including United Nations staff. We express
our heartfelt condolences to those who lost their loved
ones, colleagues and friends.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
witnessing a critical period in its history. The progress
achieved so far in restoring peace and stability needs to
be consolidated by entrenching democratic values,

11-34509

S/PV.6539

focusing on improving security and the rule of law, and
adopting policies conducive to the overall economic
development of the country. The challenges are indeed
difficult, but not insurmountable.
The holding of credible elections this year would
go a long way towards sustaining stability in the
country. We hope that the elections will be held
according to the timetable in a free and fair manner.
The National Independent Electoral Commission has
already started work on voter registration,
consultations with opposition parties and a code of
conduct.
Civil
society,
the
media
and
non-governmental organizations should support the
Commission in creating awareness among the
population.
India, as the largest democracy in the world,
strongly believes in the importance of creating
effective, representative, democratic institutions to
address the problems of society. The international
community, including the United Nations and
MONUSCO, should help the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in conducting the
elections.
Long-term peace and stability cannot be sustained
without security, which can be ensured only by the
effective enforcement of the rule of law. Today, most
parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo except
the eastern region are free of the conflict that the
country endured during the civil war. The presence of
armed groups in the eastern provinces of the Kivus,
Maniema and Katanga pose a serious threat to the
existence of State authorities and their capacity to
protect civilians. Unabated acts of violence by
elements of armed groups, such as the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, the Forces
nationales de liberation and the Mayi-Mayi
Yakutumba, are a matter of serious concern. The
situation has been further aggravated by human rights
violations and sexual violence committed by elements
of the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo. The involvement of various armed groups,
including some elements of the security forces, in
illegal mining is also worrisome. Furthermore, the
menace of the Lord’s Resistance Army is not limited to
Orientale province, but is affecting the entire region.
We are also gravely concerned over the precarious
humanitarian situation.

11-34509

The focus should therefore be on the effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of various armed groups. The success achieved so far
in the DDR process should be sustained, and issues of
impunity dealt with. We are glad to note that the
reforms in the security, police and justice sectors —
starting with training and sensitization to human rights
issues, effective prosecution and expeditious judicial
process — are indeed priorities for the Government.
Security
and
law-and-order
issues
are
intrinsically linked to economic development. It is now
time for the international community to look beyond
peacekeeping and to help the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in their
peacebuilding efforts, including investments in
agriculture, infrastructure and industry, towards overall
economic development.
MONUSCO peacekeepers have been doing
commendable work in the most difficult circumstances.
The soldier-to-population and soldier-to-land-area
ratios are extremely low in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where MONUSCO is largely
deployed. There is an urgent need for the Council to
address the issue of resource gaps for MONUSCO,
because security, the rule of law, institution-building
and effective governance are processes that will have
to be pursued simultaneously by the Mission. An
integrated approach incorporating these objectives
requires the cooperation of all stakeholders and the
provision of adequate resources by the international
community.
India has had a long association with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as one of the major
troop-contributing countries over the past five decades.
Our first presence in the country dates as far back as
March 1961 during the crisis in Katanga province.
Currently, our contribution to MONUSCO stands at
4,318 troops. Keeping in mind the resource gap in
MONUSCO, we extended the service of our six utility
helicopters until April this year. We continue to extend
the services of four combat helicopters beyond the
commitment period.
The Indian contingent has made significant
contributions to the humanitarian and development
activities in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including building and
rehabilitating
community centres and vocational training schools, as
well as setting up laboratories for information

21

S/PV.6539

technology training and building markets. In the course
of India’s involvement in peacekeeping operations in
the Congo, 36 of our soldiers have made the supreme
sacrifice.
In addition to its contribution to MONUSCO,
India has also cooperated with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in development
programmes. We have lines of credit worth $318
million for such projects as power generation, railways,
rural water supply and the supply of buses. We have
also offered to set up an information technology centre
of excellence and three learning stations under the
Hole-in-the-Wall computer education project in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. India offers 70
training slots for short- and medium-term technical
courses, and 10 slots for longer-term professional
courses. The two countries are cooperating in building
low-cost housing.
India remains committed to playing its part in
supporting the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in strengthening and building the
capacities of its national institutions in the security and
civilian areas.
Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important debate on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Secretary-General for his very
informative and helpful briefing, and I would like to
warmly welcome His Excellency the Minister for
International and Regional Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The briefings we
have heard and the French concept paper (see
S/2011/282) have set the stage for our discussions. The
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
evolved and progress has been achieved over the past
decade. However, serious challenges remain, notably in
the eastern part of the country.
Taking into account the long-standing presence of
the United Nations and the involvement of the
international community in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the key questions are how to pursue our
policy now that the country is entering the stabilization
phase and preparing for an inclusive electoral cycle.
What kind of division of labour and of responsibilities
between the various actors should be adopted? More

22

specifically, how should the focus and structure of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
be defined to complement and support the primary role
of the Congolese Government in peace consolidation?
The priorities should centre around four basic pillars:
security, governance, elections and socio-economic
development. These pillars are also reflected in the
benchmarks set by resolution 1925 (2010) for future
reconfigurations of MONUSCO. Let me highlight
some specific aspects of particular concern to us in
these four areas.
First is security. The current political and military
situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
does not correspond to a stabilization phase. Civilians
suffer extreme violence, including sexual violence,
mostly affecting women and children. The violence and
potential insecurity arise from a number of sources,
one of which is the remaining presence of Congolese
and foreign armed groups such as the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the Lord’s
Resistance Army. We encourage all actors to engage in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
related processes to vigorously pursue those efforts.
Another paramount challenge is, of course, the
reform of all components of the security sector.
Concerning the army, a real integration of the former
members of armed groups, such as the former Congrès
national pour la défense du peuple, into the Congolese
army is necessary. There will be little progress in
security sector reform if those processes are not
effectively completed.
How can we overcome the limited progress
achieved so far in the decisive area of stabilization?
International support is needed, and it is provided, for
example, through the two European Union (EU)
missions: EUSEC, the European Union mission to
provide advice and assistance for security sector
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
EUPOL, the European Union police mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Among other
objectives, the two missions work to secure the chain
of payments of the Congolese armed forces. We need
better coordination among the international actors. The
international community should also play a greater role
in improving the capacity of the police and the justice
system.

11-34509

S/PV.6539

The most important component, however, is the
political will and determination of Congolese actors to
address
core
security
issues:
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform, fighting impunity, protecting civilians and
control over natural resources by armed groups or
armed forces. Taking into account the regional
dimension of the security threats, the political will of
regional actors is also imperative. The same holds true
for the support provided by the African Union (AU)
and subregional organizations.
Secondly, I would like to turn to the issues of
governance and human rights. The lack of Government
capacity is of particular importance when considering
the issues of civilian protection and, specifically,
preventing the use of child soldiers. Child exploitation
is illegal under the Congolese Constitution and is
prohibited under various other legal acts. Despite such
provisions, the practice of using child soldiers remains
a problem. Therefore, I want to appeal to the
Congolese Government — also in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict — to implement an action plan to
halt the recruitment and use of children. Looking at
human rights from a broader perspective, we are
convinced that the Congolese Government could
benefit from the advice of an independent expert of the
Human Rights Council.
Thirdly, with regard to the electoral process, the
upcoming elections represent an important opportunity
to make substantial strides in the political stabilization
process. The elections are essential to the future
legitimacy of the Congolese Government. They need to
be conducted in a timely manner and to be inclusive,
transparent, credible, peaceful and secure. A peaceful
environment allowing for adequate democratic space is
a prerequisite for the elections. The primary
responsibility for the elections lies with the Congolese
Government. We appeal to the Government and all
Congolese stakeholders to fulfil their responsibilities in
the electoral process.
Finally, endemic poverty, lack of employment for
demobilized combatants and youth, and competition
for economic resources are potential sources of tension
and violence. It is therefore crucial to lay the
foundation for long-term economic development in the
peacebuilding and stabilization processes. The AU and
relevant subregional organizations have an increasing
role to play. We should support the development of

11-34509

their capacities. Germany remains engaged in that
field. We consider regional cooperation and integration
to be vital. Therefore, we would like to encourage the
Great Lakes countries and all relevant organizations to
actively engage in that process.
Furthermore, an effective and legal mining
industry, operating in accordance with the principles of
good governance, is key for the development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The country’s
natural wealth must benefit its people. The illicit
exploitation of and trade in natural resources, which is
fuelling the conflict, in particular in the Kivus, must be
brought to an end. My country is engaged in fighting
the illicit exploitation of and trade in natural resources
and supports a mineral certification system, which will
strengthen the legal mining industry and thus the
development of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Arriving at a sustainable solution will require the
will of the Congolese Government, targeted resources
from donors and strategic cooperation among all
relevant actors, notably with the United Nations and
MONUSCO. My country is willing to work the
Congolese Government and the United Nations to that
end.
Finally, allow me to express my gratitude to the
French delegation for their leadership in organizing
today’s debate and for preparing the draft presidential
statement, which we fully support.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the French delegation for having organized
today’s very timely debate. I wish to also thank the
Secretary-General and Minister Raymond Tshibanda
for their statements.
(spoke in English)
Through Minister Tshibanda, I would like to
commend the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for the notable progress made over the
past few years. Security and stability have improved as
the Government has progressively achieved greater
control over its territory and enhanced its relations
with the countries of the region. Nevertheless, as has
been noted by previous speakers, challenges remain,
particularly in the east, where rebel groups still pose a
serious threat to the civilian population. The
persistence of cases of sexual violence and the
recruitment of children is of special concern.

23

S/PV.6539

We welcome the very clear vision that Minister
Tshibanda has expressed concerning his country’s
priorities for the near future. They deserve our full
support.
The elections to be held in November will be an
important milestone in the consolidation of peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All
of us expect the polls to be free, fair and transparent,
and to thus contribute to strong democratic institutions
and to serve as a sound basis for social and economic
development. We trust that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and bilateral
partners will do their best to meet the country’s request
for assistance. Brazil stands ready to participate in that
effort.
Sustainable progress in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will require the strengthening of
institutions and national capacities. In that regard, we
welcome the Government’s development of a peace
consolidation programme, with the support of
MONUSCO. We also welcome its integrated approach,
which stresses the importance of the three pillars:
justice and the rule of law, security sector reform, and
economic recovery and access to basic social services.
We encourage MONUSCO, with the participation of
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, to
fully support that strategy.
We take this opportunity to welcome the
constructive dialogue between the United Nations and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The joint assessment process has proven to be a
useful tool and has provided for excellent
communication with the local authorities.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
would also like to commend the cooperation between
the Government and the Committee’s Group of
Experts. That dialogue was particularly important for
the development of guidelines on due diligence so as
reinforce the fight against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. On that issue and regarding other
challenges faced by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, it is important to underscore the role that
regional cooperation can play.
Brazil remains a committed partner in support of
peacebuilding in the Democratic Republic of the

24

Congo. Last November, we donated $1 million to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to finance projects designed to assist
victims of sexual violence. Brazil stands ready to
deepen its bilateral cooperation with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We look forward to Minister
Tshibanda’s upcoming visit to Brazil and hope that it
will lead to the further development of our bilateral
ties. We are confident that, with the support of the
international community, the Congolese people will be
able to achieve long-term peace, democracy and socioeconomic development.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of France for initiating this
important discussion. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his insightful briefing. We welcome
the participation of the Minister for International and
Regional Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Raymond Tshibanda.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the progress
that has been made in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and commends the Government on its efforts to
provide security to the population and establish the
infrastructure required for development. However,
more progress is needed in many areas, including
extending and strengthening the rule of law,
reinforcing legitimate State authority and providing
services to the population. Building the capacity of
State institutions, including the security sector, justice,
local administration, education and social services, is a
vital element in restoring peace and stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in its
eastern sector. To that end, it is imperative that the
country’s Government, with the support of
international stakeholders, intensifies its efforts to
establish and strengthen effective State authorities,
particularly at the local level.
We firmly believe that security sector reform and
the strengthening of security forces require a strong
commitment on the part of all stakeholders, including
the Government, the United Nations and international
partners. Reform of the national army and police is not
only a precondition for consolidating peace, it is also
one of the basic elements of long-term stability and the
effective protection of civilians.
The general elections to be held in November
constitute an opportunity for the Democratic Republic

11-34509

S/PV.6539

of the Congo to ensure stability and strengthen its
domestic institutions. In that regard, it is essential that
the electoral process be conducted in a secure
environment and a democratic and transparent manner.
It is vital that the United Nations, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and international
partners provide assistance to the national authorities
in holding free, fair and credible elections.
The security situation in the eastern part of the
country is still fragile. Congolese and foreign armed
groups continue to have a serious impact on the
security situation, as well as on the local population
and their human rights. It is important that the
Government, with support from MONUSCO, continue
activities that neutralize armed groups, while the
international community must bring pressure to bear on
armed groups, including the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda, through strict implementation of
the relevant sanctions regime. Concerning the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), we welcome the African
Union’s efforts to define steps designed to protect
civilians and diminish the capacity of the LRA. We
also stress the importance of continued coordination
between peacekeeping missions and the Governments
of countries in the region in order to address the
challenges posed by the LRA.
We are concerned that a number of human rights
violations have been committed by elements of the
national security forces. We reiterate our firm belief
that the perpetrators of crimes against civilians must be
brought to justice. We welcome the steps taken by the
Government and the judicial authorities to bring to
justice those responsible for crimes committed against
civilians. Furthermore, every crime committed by
elements of the national security forces must be
properly addressed. Only security forces that enjoy the
trust and respect of the civilian population can fully
exercise their constitutional role and contribute to the
protection of human rights.
Since its establishment, the United Nations
Mission has played a significant role in ensuring peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as well as in protecting civilians. We fully support
MONUSCO’s continued efforts to strengthen the
protection of the civilian population. We welcome its
more robust posture and its efforts to develop and
implement new approaches to the protection of
civilians. By the same token, close cooperation

11-34509

between the Government and MONUSCO is crucial in
dealing with the root causes of insecurity in the eastern
part of the country.
Regional cooperation and relations among
countries of the Great Lakes region represent a key
factor for lasting stabilization of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are encouraged by regional
cooperation aimed at combating the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, bearing in mind that this issue is
not only related to the economy but also has a security
and stability dimension. Effective cooperation on the
matter at regional and international levels would
significantly contribute to reducing the scope for
activities of illegal armed groups.
Despite its thorny history and many challenges,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
significant progress in recent years. We are convinced
that, with the support of the international community, it
will continue to advance on its path towards stability
and economic development.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I too would like to warmly thank the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for accepting our invitation. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the World
Bank, the United Nations Development Programme
and the European Union for their participation in this
debate.
I should like to emphasize three elements in my
statement today. The first is the importance of a
strategic dialogue between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations. At a time when that
country is entering a stage of progressive stabilization,
this discussion affords us a valuable opportunity to
take stock together of the actions taken so far and to
analyse the challenges to come. Today’s debate is thus
part of a process of dialogue that should continue, both
in New York and on the ground. In that regard, I
welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Roger Meece.
Secondly, this dialogue is all the more necessary
in view of the fact that the Congolese are preparing
elections at all levels, as Minister Tshibanda discussed
earlier. This is an essential stage in the country’s
democratic transformation. As a number of members of

25

S/PV.6539

the Council said this morning, the organization of the
electoral process is a major challenge that requires
special vigilance in order to ensure that the elections
will serve to consolidate peace in the country. France
will pay particular attention to the conditions under
which the elections will be organized. They should be
free, transparent, peaceful and credible. We would like
the United Nations and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to lend all
possible support to the process, which means backing
the efforts of the Independent National Electoral
Commission. The first and most pressing challenge is
registering all the voters. Earlier, Minister Tshibanda
presented us with a timeline for the organization of the
elections, which we welcome and will seek to see
implemented. France is ready to support the process
fully. We are committed to working side by side with
the United Nations and the Congolese authorities in
order to set up two police battalions for rapid response.
We call on other partners to contribute to training the
Congolese police.
Finally, we are aware that the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains precarious.
There are four particularly pressing challenges,
namely, neutralizing the activities of armed groups in
the east; setting up effective security forces; improving
the mining sector and the exploitation of natural
resources; and ensuring the protection of civilians,
particularly against sexual violence, and strengthening
the fight against impunity.
In conclusion, the international community,
which for a long time has been committed to improving
security in the region, is ready to back the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We require a clear commitment
on the country’s behalf on how it intends to continue
with its democratic transformation, such that together
we will be in a position to build a partnership of trust.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Tegegnework Gettu, who
will speak on behalf of the United Nations
Development Programme.
Mr. Gettu: We thank the French Ambassador and
his delegation for taking the lead in organizing this
discussion. On behalf of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), I am grateful for

26

this opportunity to address the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo today is a
different country from what it was 10 years ago. There
are many positive changes there, as well as some
persistent challenges. The Government has made good
progress in improving the overall security situation in
most parts of the country. In this, it has benefited from
the support of the international community, including
through the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Progress has also been made on
democratic governance. Since the 2006 election, efforts
have helped to strengthen the legislative branch,
including expanding the oversight capacity of the
national Parliament. On the economic front, important
reforms have been undertaken, contributing to higher
growth rates in recent years.
Major challenges remain, however, and it is
critical that we recognize this and orient ourselves and
our efforts to addressing them. To consolidate peace
and security, for example, effective institutions and
governance systems, including at the local level, are
needed. Managing conflict, reducing community
tensions and delivering basic services are also critical.
If this to work, state authority need to be more
effective and extended throughout the country.
For its part, UNDP is committed to continuing its
assistance to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with the overall objective of
expanding the opportunities and capabilities of the
Congolese people and enabling them to improve their
own lives and those of their families and communities.
To that end, UNDP supports efforts in all four of the
following areas: security and stabilization, electoral
processes, governance and institution-building, and
economic development.
Following the request of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in February 2010
and the adoption of resolution 1925 (2010) in May
2010, it remains critical to advance security and
stabilization by addressing the drivers of conflict
throughout the country, including in the western
provinces. To do this, the United Nations, including
UNDP, the World Bank and several key partners are
supporting the formulation of a new peace
consolidation programme. This will complement the
stabilization programme already under way in the

11-34509

S/PV.6539

eastern region, the Stabilization and Reconstruction
Plan in Conflict-Affected Areas of Eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo (STAREC). UNDP is
supporting STAREC to achieve its objectives,
including to restore and strengthen State authority, to
facilitate return, reintegration and recovery and to
combat sexual violence.
With regard to the electoral process, it is clear
that this year’s presidential and legislative elections
scheduled for 28 November will present the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with a major test.
Successful elections will be critical to sustaining
stability and peace and opening new opportunities to
advance human development. The Government’s
ownership is commendable. Its commitment to
financing 60 per cent of the overall budget for the
electoral cycle 2007-2013, compared to 10 per cent in
2006, represents a significant advance.
The
international
community,
including
MONUSCO, the United Nations and UNDP, are
helping, including through technical and capacity
development support to the new Independent National
Electoral Commission. Meeting the June deadline for
voter registration will be challenging and require
concerted effort. The timely adoption of the new
electoral law is also needed to comply with the
electoral calendar.
The Independent National Electoral Commission,
MONUSCO and UNDP will continue to collaborate
and help facilitate fair and credible elections. UNDP
stands ready to support provincial and local elections
in 2012 and 2013. We also recognize that such support
is not just about election day, and UNDP will work
throughout the electoral cycle to strengthen the
institutions needed to make elections fair and
ultimately meaningful, including with respect to human
rights, the rule of law and the participation of all
political parties.
In terms of economic development, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made important progress in maintaining
macroeconomic stability and increasing pro-poor
expenditures. To sustain high growth rates and ensure
that the benefits of growth reach poor and rural
populations and the marginalized, economic and
human development initiatives must be expanded,
along with the consolidation of peace and security at
both the central and local levels.

11-34509

To be effective, decentralization, including the
free and fair elections of local leaders and the transfer
of resources to legitimate decentralized entities, will be
critical. Efforts must also be taken to grow and enable
a vibrant and job-intensive private sector. The
Government can help by establishing a transparent and
conducive
business
environment,
removing
bureaucratic barriers and developing the competencies
of its civil administration. Social protection systems
can be a good and affordable investment in stability,
protecting the most vulnerable and building resilience
against economic shocks and downturns. The effective
management of the country’s rich endowment of
natural resources will also require further attention
from the Government.
The year 2011 is critical for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Progress is needed on all
fronts. Luckily, the objectives are mutually supporting.
Successful general elections can help sustain and
accelerate development progress, as well as the
consolidation of peace and security. Expanding
security and State legitimacy can help make
development initiatives possible and effective.
Empowering women, including by ending sexual
violence, is not just an important objective in itself, but
also a critical investment with multiple proven
development benefits. Development progress, in turn,
is critical to generating the jobs and opportunities that
can lead ex-combatants away from violence and
conflict.
A secure and sustainably developing Democratic
Republic of the Congo will, in turn, contribute to a
stable and developing Great Lakes region and a more
peaceful Africa. To realize this objective, the sustained
engagement of international partners is essential, and
the political will and initiative of the Government will
be critical. UNDP looks forward to continuing to
strengthen our partnership with the Government —
which we view positively — the international
community and the rest of the United Nations system,
to simultaneously advance security and human
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
making 2011 a benchmark year in the lives of its
citizens.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Colin Bruce of the World Bank.
Mr. Bruce (World Bank): We at the World Bank
are deeply honoured to be able to participate in this

27

S/PV.6539

discussion. We identify with many of the statements
that have been made already, but wish to briefly add
six points.
First, we would like to confirm that the evidence
indicates that peace and improvements in security have
yielded economic benefits. During the period from
1996 to 2000, the years of war, for example, gross
domestic product (GDP) actually contracted by about
4 per cent. In the period since then, we have seen GDP
not only in positive terrain, but increasing. As recently
as 2010, the GDP growth figure was about 5 to 6 per
cent. So we see continued improvement. Underlying
that is good news about improvements in agriculture
and improvements at the top, if you like, of the
hierarchy in terms of large companies. We see
improvements in education and health outcomes, albeit
from a low base, and we see improving results in terms
of achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Having said that, we will soon be releasing a
report that points to areas of concern in terms of the
dividends of peace, and I would like to highlight one in
particular, which is what we call the “missing middle”.
The small and medium-sized enterprises sector, which
we know is very much involved in creating jobs
globally, is an area that requires attention. That is my
first point.
Secondly, I would like to embrace what many
participants have said about the importance of
institutional development. This year, for the first time,
the World Bank released the World Development
Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development. In
the report, we saw that countries that were able to
develop strong institutions were able to avoid repeated
cycles of war, which were quite pervasive in many
African countries. But what we also saw was that
countries that failed to do so — that were involved in
the abuse of human rights and where there was low
Government effectiveness — were 30 to 40 per cent
more likely to slip back into violence. So we want to
encourage the progress that we have already seen and
ask the Government to stay the course.
My third point, which is a very interesting one to
us, is that this institutional development that we have
been talking about is something that takes a long time.
Our estimates of the 20 best-performing countries
shows that the 20 fastest of them took 17 years to get
the military out of politics, 20 years to achieve
functioning bureaucratic quality, and 27 years to bring

28

corruption under reasonable control. The message of
those findings is that that takes time. It is a
generational effort and it is important that all of us stay
the course.
My fourth point is not only to embrace what
many Council members have said about the importance
of fair and timely elections, but also to identify two
particular risks that have not been mentioned so far. We
know from experience across Africa and elsewhere that
elections are often associated with deterioration in
economic governance, and we want to encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic to buck that
trend, so to speak, and to continue the course of fiscal
discipline.
The second related risk that we see, particularly
in this context, is that if current trends in food prices
and oil prices are anything to go by, when the elections
are held we could be facing a situation where there is
considerable pressure in places like Kinshasa, where
we are seeing cereal prices rising quite substantially.
For example, whereas inflation during 2010 was about
10 per cent, we have already noted that prices have
risen over 16 per cent in the first quarter of 2011.
Cereal prices, in particular, have risen 33 per cent. That
is worth watching as a complicating factor as we
approach the elections.
My fifth point is to underscore what others have
said about gender violence and to stand squarely with
those who are challenging the Government to do more.
Here, I also want to associate the World Bank with the
comments made by my colleague from the United
Nations Development Programme, which point to other
actions that the Government can take to help to reduce
gender disparity. We know, for example, that there are
some laws that limit what women can do without their
husband’s permission in terms of routine legal
processes. We would argue that such measures and
laws are standing in the way of progress in the area of
gender equality.
My final point, which is implicit in all that I have
said so far, is that the kind of engagement that many
speakers have referred to in their statements and that
the World Bank embraces is one that needs to stay the
course for the long haul. I just want to assure the
Council that the World Bank, as well as the Africa
region that I represent, are strongly committed to that
long-term process. Right now, we have a portfolio of
about $2.2 billion. Together with many members of the

11-34509

S/PV.6539

Council, we are providing support to the processes of
institution-building. We are focused very much on
providing basic services, including access to electricity,
education and health outcomes. We are very much
involved — together with many Council members —
in the work on governance. Only recently, we began to
activate a project that will support improvements in
governance in the mining sector. I spoke earlier about
our concern about rising food prices, particularly in the
context of elections. I would point out that we have an
operation that is a social action fund of about
$100 million, which will be very helpful in assisting
Congolese in dealing with some of these food price
increases.
We are there for the long haul. We welcome this
discourse. We hope that everyone will also stay
focused on the longer-term issues and the longer-term
engagement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Mr. President, I
thank you for having organized this strategic debate on
the Democratic Republic of Congo and for inviting the
European Union to brief the Council on its views. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important briefing and for the message that he has
conveyed, which the European Union (EU) supports.
The European Union’s engagement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is based on two
axioms: the importance of local ownership and the
need to ensure a coordinated international effort with
the United Nations at its core.
Progress in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be achieved only if Congolese political
leadership is fully engaged. Since the conflicts of the
1990s, the Congolese authorities have shown their
commitment to working with the international
community, including the European Union, towards the
stabilization of their country. I welcome the
participation at today’s meeting of Mr. Raymond
Tshibanda, Minister for International and Regional
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and thank him for his important message. In his
presence, I wish to reiterate the European Union’s
engagement in support of peace and stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

11-34509

Peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo require the full involvement of the
international community. Today, the United Nations
lies at the heart of this effort. The European Union will
continue to support United Nations activities, including
the essential security role played by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the
stabilization process.
Allow me to outline three challenges that lie at
the heart of the strategic relationship that the European
Union is building with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and with the region.
The first challenge regards the strengthening of
an open, democratic political system in the Democratic
Republic. Progress in this area was the centrepiece of
the political transition in 2006. The Congolese people,
with the support of the international community, have
made great efforts to set up democratic institutions.
These efforts need to be continued.
The European Union, which was the leading
donor to the electoral process in 2006, will remain
engaged. Working with the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the EU will pursue
a three-pronged approach: a financial contribution of
€47.5 million; support of Congolese and international
efforts to secure the elections, in particular through the
purchase of communications equipment for the
Kinshasa police; and a possible European Union
electoral observation mission. The European Union
will also make a special effort to support dialogue
among all Congolese stakeholders, including civil
society, before and during the elections process.
The second challenge lies within the crucial area
of governance. In its partnership with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the EU has prioritized security
sector governance — defence, police and justice.
Security sector reform must be the backbone of lasting
peace and stability in the country.
Two European Union missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — the European Union Mission
of Assistance for Security Sector Reform (EUSEC) and
the European Union Police Mission (EUPOL) — assist
and advise the Congolese Government in the reform
and reconstruction of the army and the police. These
two missions operate in close coordination with the
United Nations and other relevant international actors.

29

S/PV.6539

EUSEC is comprised of some 50 staff, mostly
military. The mission provides advice and assistance to
the Congolese authorities in the defence sector. It
focuses, inter alia, on human resources, logistics
management and officer training. EUPOL is a police
mission headquartered in Kinshasa, with a field office
in Goma. It consists of some 50 experts in the areas of
police, justice, human rights and gender equality,
including specialists on combating impunity and sexual
violence.
As indicated by the Secretary-General and other
speakers, the fight against sexual violence is indeed
one of the greatest concerns of the international
community with respect to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Strengthening security sector reform in the
country is therefore more important than ever.
Appropriate legislation is currently being drafted, but
much work remains to be done. A comprehensive
approach addressing the political and technical
constraints that the Democratic Republic is facing is
crucial and should be continued, including during the
upcoming electoral period. With regard to the justice
sector, where the European Commission is one of the
main donors, a reform plan has been set up, but for the
time being the ministry in charge lacks the capacity to
meet its objectives.
The third challenge relates to the economy. We
acknowledge recent positive developments in the
macroeconomic policies carried out by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless, further efforts
are necessary in order to ensure economic progress,
which is a key factor for sustainable stabilization.
The
European
Union
is
contributing
approximately €634 million to development in the
Democratic Republic under the European Development
Fund for the period 2008-2013. An additional
€40 million per year are being provided as
humanitarian assistance. These amounts constitute
some 25 per cent of the total contribution made by the
European Union when the bilateral contributions made
by its member States are considered. The aim is to
support the reconstruction of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo while pursuing stabilization efforts in
some regions of the country. the Focus is on physical
rebuilding, in particular on transport infrastructure, as
well as on the reconstruction of the State through the
strengthening of good governance. In addition, the
European Union supports public health and
environmental protection activities.

30

Success in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will also depend on sustaining the improved regional
context. The European Union has made considerable
political and diplomatic efforts by contributing to
resolving regional crises and promoting greater
cooperation between former belligerents. Today’s
cooperation between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its eastern neighbours is reshaping regional
dynamics and creating renewed opportunities for peace
and economic growth. It is also a prerequisite for
addressing the remaining regional conflicts, in
particular in the Kivu provinces, where non-Congolese
armed rebel groups still pose a significant threat.
With that in mind, the European Union is
supporting the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries, a regional organization comprised of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi that works as a permanent post-conflict forum
for dialogue among the three countries. The
relaunching of this organization is bearing its first
fruits in areas such as regional security and the
development of a regional economic infrastructure.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
cornerstone of continental security. The European
Union is committed to remaining engaged in the
country and in the Great Lakes region stabilization
process. Joint, coordinated efforts by the international
community are necessary. We recently shared our
analysis with other partners in the international contact
group on the Great Lakes in a meeting in Brussels on
15 April. Those efforts must be supported by a strong
and ongoing commitment on the part of the Congolese
authorities, because sustained efforts and substantial
resources will be required to ensure sustained progress
on the main challenges that I have just identified. For
its part, the European Union will continue to make its
contribution to the goals of achieving peace,
development and stability in the country. In that regard,
we will continue our close cooperation with the
Congolese authorities, the United Nations and other
international partners.
The President (spoke in French): I once again
give the floor to Mr. Tshibanda.
Mr. Tshibanda (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to thank all of
today’s speakers for the outstanding quality of their
statements and their contributions to the debate.

11-34509

S/PV.6539

I am gratified to note that we have been able to
achieve consensus in at least two areas, namely, on the
progress made and on the challenges still before us. I
note that the assessment we have made here on both
sides of the table is almost the same and that there has
been a great deal of resolve to jointly continue our
work, solidifying and making more effective the
partnership between the United Nations and the
international community, on the one hand, and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, on the other.
I would like to reassure the Council yet again of
the resolve of the Congolese Government to continue
its efforts to build peace and democracy and, more
specifically, to organize over the next few months
elections that will be fair and democratic, and therefore
credible. Those elections must be open to all and take
place with guarantees of freedom of expression, access
to the media, as broad participation as possible and
security for all. We have indicated what type of
assistance we would like to receive from the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I
hope that we will very soon have the assistance we
need from MONUSCO for logistical support. The
challenge is not to make the resources available, it is to
make them available on time so as to prevent a
negative impact on the already very tight schedule that
has been set for the elections. Having heard the various
statements, I am sure that both at the level of the
United Nations and the Council and at the level of the
various partnerships, the figure I mentioned earlier for
the budget necessary to organize the elections properly
will in fact be made available.
I would like briefly to revisit a few issues
referred to by representatives of various States today,
especially the matter of rape and sexual violence. I
would like to reassure the Council that this issue is of
the very highest concern to the Government. The same
is true of the recruitment of children by armed groups.
To ignore the rape of even a single woman would be a
tragedy, and the fact that there are so many of them
keeps us, the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, from sleeping at night. The fact that progress in
resolving this issue is slow in no way reflects a lack of
political will. It is a function of the very complex
nature of the problem and of our limited capacity. We
are working to reform our judicial sector and
attempting to improve the ability of our army and our
police forces to ensure security in regions where it is

11-34509

now lacking in order to reduce the conditions of
lawlessness that breed the tragedy of rape.
I would like to say that we understand the need to
raise public awareness by citing statistics. But I beg an
equal understanding that the problem itself is tragic
enough as it is. I understand the positive motive of
consciousness-raising behind some of the statistics
cited. But I believe that they need to be taken in
context, as the figures go back to 2006. I think some
progress has been made since then. But I say context
also because, if one were to add up the figures, the
results would mean that every single woman in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would have been
raped. I certainly do not say this because I want to
minimize the problem in any way. But I believe that
together we should strive to avoid stigmatizing both
the country and its women. We welcome the work
carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Combat,
whom we recently hosted in our country and to whom
we would like to reiterate our readiness to cooperate to
ensure that together we come up with the most
effective ways to put an end to this scourge.
On the subject of the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, which was mentioned throughout the day, I
would like to say that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is very actively
engaged in the issue. We played a decisive role in the
preparation and adoption of instruments adopted at the
Summit in Lusaka. Since then, the Government has
championed the effective implementation of those
instruments. I am gratified to be able to say here that
thus far all the States in the region have shown
understanding and a readiness to cooperate. I think that
this cooperation is important in halting illegal
exploitation. In that regard, I should like to take this
opportunity to take note of the support and measures
being taken elsewhere at the international level, in
particular by the United States.
With regard to the return of refugees and
displaced persons, I should like to reassure the Council
that this is being organized in line with the provisions
of refugee law through meetings of the joint
commission involving my country, countries hosting
refugees and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. This process is under way
and provisions are being made on the ground for the
dignified and safe return of refugees and displaced
persons.

31

S/PV.6539

In conclusion, I would like to say a word on the
suggestions made by the representatives of the World
Bank, the European Union and the United Nations
Development Programme. I should like to commend
their notable contributions in rebuilding and bring
peace to my country. These are our country’s main
partners. We welcome not just their contributions but
also the suggestions and proposals they make to us in
the context of our dialogue with them. I take note of
the suggestions that have been made. I am aware of
their importance to the Government’s efforts under
way. I also note that many of them incorporate
elements to which I referred with regard to my
Government’s priorities in various areas, including
improving
growth
and
continuing
economic
development throughout the country, including the
so-called missing middle, namely, the role of smalland medium-sized businesses to generate wealth and
opportunity as widely as possible throughout
Congolese society.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
organizing this special meeting of the Security Council
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like to assure you that the Congolese Government very
much appreciates the contribution of the United
Nations system, the Security Council and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We hope that, in
the coming weeks and months, we will make progress
in our dialogue on redefining our cooperation in the
coming years.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Minister Tshibanda for his statement.
I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council.
“The Security Council welcomes its
enhanced dialogue with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It reiterates
that the challenges the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is facing as it enters a phase of
stabilization and peace consolidation require a
strategic partnership with the United Nations,
including with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO). The Security
Council
appreciates
and
welcomes
the
constructive approach of the Congolese

32

authorities, and welcomes the efforts made by
MONUSCO in this regard.
“The Security Council stresses the
importance of four key issues for the stabilization
of the country: peace and security, the
forthcoming elections, governance and institution
building, and economic development.
“The Security Council considers that the
overall peace and security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has improved
in recent years. It acknowledges the results of the
action taken to address the threat of foreign and
national armed groups, particularly the progress
made against the Forces Démocratiques de
Libération du Rwanda, including through the
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration process. The
Security Council underlines that significant
security challenges remain, in particular in the
Kivus and Orientale province. The Council is
concerned about the difficulties which have been
encountered throughout the integration process of
the Congrès National pour la Défense du Peuple
into the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the limited progress
made in the reform of the security forces, both
army and police. It calls on the Congolese
authorities to swiftly adopt the necessary legal
framework and implement their long-term vision
for the role and structure of the army and police,
and strongly encourages MONUSCO and
international partners to provide coordinated
support for these reforms.
“The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern about the persistent high levels of
violence, especially sexual violence, and human
rights abuses against civilians, mostly affecting
women and children, including the use and
recruitment of children by parties to the conflict,
in particular in the eastern part of the country. It
reiterates its deep concern about continuing
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army. It calls
for an urgent end to the attacks against the
civilian population by all armed groups. It
condemns all violations of human rights,
including those committed by some elements of
the Congolese security forces. The Council
welcomes progress with the recent prosecutions
after the incidents in Fizi and other cases. It

11-34509

S/PV.6539

reiterates the urgent need for the swift
prosecution of all perpetrators of human rights
abuses, and urges the Congolese authorities, with
the support of MONUSCO, to implement the
appropriate responses to address this challenge,
including in Walikale. It urges the Congolese
Government to take all necessary steps, including
ensuring proper conduct by their armed forces in
compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law, to facilitate the return of
refugees and displaced persons.
“The Security Council notes with interest
the electoral calendar presented by the Congolese
authorities and urges the Congolese Government
as well as all relevant parties to ensure an
environment conducive to a credible, inclusive,
transparent, peaceful, timely, free and fair
electoral process. It expresses its thanks to
MONUSCO and the international community for
their support to the electoral process to date, and
encourages continued support. The Security
Council recalls that ensuring freedom of
expression and freedom of movement for all
candidates, as well as for journalists, human
rights defenders and actors from civil society, is
of the utmost importance. It calls upon the
Government and all Congolese stakeholders to
meet their responsibility in this regard, and
further calls upon MONUSCO to support these
efforts, in particular through the good offices of
the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, enhanced and regular dialogue with the
Commission Electorale Nationale Indépendante
through the Election Partnership Committee, and
follow-up on human rights violations. It also calls
upon MONUSCO and all relevant international
actors to swiftly support the training of the
Congolese police, and for donors to provide
support for police equipment. It requests the
Secretary-General to keep it regularly informed
on the electoral process, including on
MONUSCO’s support to this process.
“The Security Council stresses the need for
urgent progress, with regard to governance and
institution building, on judicial reform and
support to domestic courts, in order to ensure the
rule of law and strengthen the fight against
impunity. In this regard, the Council notes the

11-34509

interest of the Congolese authorities for
establishing specialized mixed courts to address
serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, complemented by their
existing cooperation with the International
Criminal Court. It calls upon MONUSCO and
other relevant international actors to support the
efforts of the Congolese Government in these
fields, and to assist in the restoration of basic
services, including access to justice, road access,
priority health and education infrastructures, and
security infrastructures, throughout the country,
and especially in conflict-affected areas.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of economic development to ensure
long-term stabilization and peace consolidation.
It stresses that special attention should be placed
on women’s empowerment and participation in
the economy, job creation for youth, and
reintegration of former combatants. It also
underlines the need for further progress in
ensuring that the trade in mineral resources is
founded on sound economic governance
practices, and is therefore transparent, fair and
legal. It notes that urgent attention is needed to
create an enabling environment to attract the
public and private investment necessary to
address food security, infrastructure and energy
needs. The Security Council reiterates that
regional cooperation with neighbouring countries
should play a key role in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s economic development.
“The Security Council calls upon the
international community, the African Union and
all relevant subregional organizations to further
engage in support of the stabilization efforts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, notably in
the fields of security, the fight against illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources, and
socio-economic development.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/11.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

33
