S/PV.8002

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8002nd meeting

Thursday, 13 July 2017, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wu Haitao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Michon
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2017/563)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-21321 (E)
*1721321*

S/PV.8002

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2017/563)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/563, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: Despite laudable progress in
democratic consolidation, the security situation in
West Africa and the Sahel remains a cause for concern.
The efforts of Member States of the region to deliver
on development, improve infrastructure, create jobs
and strengthen human security are being hampered by
traditional and new drivers of conflict and insecurity.
Terrorism and violent extremism, in addition to the
humanitarian crisis and threats to State integrity that
they generate, have exacerbated traditional threats.
These factors, combined with climate change, youth
bulge and unemployment, and unchecked urbanization
constitute veritable push factors underpinning the surge
in irregular migration and human trafficking.
In the Sahel, persistent instability in Mali is
spilling over into Burkina Faso and the Niger, with
deadly attacks along border areas. The LiptakoGourma region, linking Mali with Burkina Faso and
the Niger, has experienced a significant expansion of
violent extremist and terrorist activities in the past few
months, including coordinated cross-border attacks
against security posts and the ransacking of border
settlements. Violent extremist groups targeted the
northern provinces of Soum, Loroum and Yatenga in
2/6

13/07/2017

Burkina Faso and the western regions of Tillabéry and
Tahoua in the Niger. Insecurity in those border areas
has detrimental effects on the local economy.
The leaders of the three countries met in Niamey
on 24 January under the auspices of the LiptakoGourma authority and announced that they would be
setting up a multinational stabilization force. That
announcement came against the backdrop of ongoing
discussions on the operationalization of the Group of
Five States for the Sahel joint force, an initiative that
encompasses all three Liptako-Gourma countries, as
well as Chad and Mauritania, and which the Security
Council welcomed through the adoption of resolution
2359 (2017) of 21 June. I would like to commend the
countries of the Sahel for their continuous efforts to
tackle security challenges at the national and regional
levels. More support is needed to assist them in that
challenging task.
The Lake Chad basin remains an equally challenging
pole of insecurity. Despite the commendable efforts
of the Multinational Joint Task Force, which have
substantially degraded Boko Haram’s capabilities,
shrunk its geographical reach and freed thousands of
captives, recent attacks in Maiduguri and the Diffa
region demonstrate that Boko Haram continues to pose
a serious threat to the area. The mode and sophistication
of those attacks have raised suspicions that the Boko
Haram militants might have acquired reinforcements.
That situation continues to have devastating
humanitarian consequences. Up to 5.2 million
women, men and innocent boys and girls, many of
whom have been displaced across the Lake Chad
basin, are struggling for their very subsistence. The
failure to provide basic services and viable livelihood
opportunities for communities in affected areas risks
derailing recent successes against Boko Haram. The
Lake Chad Basin Commission regeneration plan offers
a useful framework of cooperation to tackle the root
causes of the worsening security environment.
In January, five field workers of the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission were killed in
an attack by unidentified armed elements near Kontcha,
a region that was believed to be unaffected by the Boko
Haram threat. While investigation into the matter is
ongoing, the United Nations is working closely with
the authorities of Cameroon and Nigeria to strengthen
the security protocol for the resumption of border pillar
construction in the area.
17-21321

13/07/2017

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The threat of terrorist and violent extremist groups
should not divert our attention from other pressing
security threats, such as the intercommunal tensions
witnessed in several countries. Clashes between
farmers and herders across the region threaten to
undermine peace, social cohesion and food security.
The United Nations continues to advocate for a
regional solution, while at the same time supporting the
countries of the region in strengthening their national
peace architecture.
West Africa and the Sahel also continue to be
negatively affected by transnational organized crime
and other cross-cutting threats to peace and security.
Smugglers of drugs, human beings and weapons
continue to criss-cross borders and establish new
operational zones where the State has withdrawn or
maintains only a tentative presence. Insecurity and
lawlessness also stretch to the Gulf of Guinea, where
criminal elements increasingly resort to piracy and
hostage-taking.
In that context, let me stress that the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel presents
a multidimensional approach to addressing the
challenges of governance, security and resilience in
the region. The implementation of the Strategy has
registered notable progress. I chaired two meetings of
the Steering Committee in May and June, which agreed
on a clear division of responsibilities among United
Nations entities for advocacy, strategic guidance and
programmatic activities. While aiming to streamline
efforts and reduce duplication among the various actors
in the Sahel, the United Nations is also focusing on
linking the Ministerial Coordination Platform of Sahel
Strategies to the mechanisms of the United Nations
Strategy. At the same time, the respective United
Nations country teams are stepping up efforts to ensure
tangible results at the country level.
In Burkina Faso and The Gambia, the United
Nations continues to pursue the sustaining peace
approach in support of the priorities of the respective
Governments. The United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) is focusing on
complementing ongoing development interventions
by the United Nations country teams with targeted
political interventions and institutional strengthening in
politically sensitive areas such as justice and the rule of
law, security sector reform and national reconciliation.

S/PV. 8002

In the context of transitions from peacekeeping, I
have already liaised with authorities in Côte d’lvoire,
and I plan to visit the country soon after today’s
briefing to the Security Council. My objective will
be to work with Ivoirian stakeholders to sustain the
country’s strong recovery and to bolster peace and
security efforts. In the light of the recent mutinies
that have threatened the so far impressive recovery of
the country, continuous support to deepen the reform
of the defence and security sector, as well as national
reconciliation and disarmament efforts, is imperative.
Constitutional review efforts in the subregion
should be conducted in an inclusive, participatory
and transparent manner to strengthen the foundations
for democratic governance. I have continuously
engaged with national stakeholders, civil society and
diplomatic partners throughout the subregion, with a
view to building consensus on this and other critical
issues. I remain hopeful that countries in the region
will accelerate progress towards fully implementing
regional standards and respective national legislation
on promoting the participation of women in
decision-making, as well as overall respect for human
rights, including the effective integration of youth in
political and development processes.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council that
UNOWAS will continue to work closely with all
stakeholders and development partners in the region
to help consolidate peace and stability in West Africa
and the Sahel. I also reiterate my appeal to partners to
maintain their engagement, including through financial
support, to continue saving lives and to promote
sustainable solutions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Chambas
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
for his thorough briefing. The events and trends in
West Africa and the Sahel in the last period show
the countries’ commitment to sustainable peace and
stability in the region. It is for good reason that we
recently attended the closure of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, just as the Liberia mission
is withdrawing from its ground operations.

17-213213/6

S/PV.8002

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Uruguay wishes to congratulate the Government
and the people of The Gambia for the swearing in of
President Adama Barrow in January, and hails his
commitment and efforts to promote human rights
and fundamental liberties. A few days ago, from this
very Chamber, we also commended the people and the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire for the progress made in
peacebuilding and conveyed our wishes for success in
this new stage for the country.
Uruguay wishes to underscore the key importance
of democratic principles in the region and the
institutional stability that underpins such principles.
In that regard, we particularly encourage the political
leaders of Guinea Bissau to find a political solution to
the crisis that is based on inclusive and constructive
dialogue. We must not lose sight of the fact that it is the
country’s civilian population that bears the brunt of the
consequences of protracted political stagnation.
As for security, we are concerned about the
instability in the Lake Chad basin in the Sahel and
crime in the Gulf of Guinea. We applaud regional
countries’ work in creating the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, as well as for their work in the West
Africa Coast Initiative. Uruguay understands that
regional countries face enormous security challenges
and that many improvements are in order. Nonetheless,
it is our view that the political will to join regional
forces in pursuit of a common goal is noteworthy and
is to be supported. We are encouraged by the progress
in the fight against Boko Haram — in particular by the
release of another 82 girls that had been abducted in
Chibok. Their rehabilitation and social reintegration are
essential. We also emphatically condemn the terrorist
group’s cowardly practice of using women and girls as
suicide bombers.
The increased cooperation between the United
Nations and the G-5 Sahel shows the commitment of
the international community with that initiative and is
an implicit recognition that the efforts of its member
countries are on the right track. The Security Council
itself was able to see, through its visits to missions
ending in March 2016 and March 2017 in Bissau, Mali,
Senegal and, this year, the Lake Chad basin countries,
the enormous challenges that those countries and
Governments face.
Our talk with the Special Representative in March
was also quite useful, when he was starting to work at
4/6

13/07/2017

the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
after the approved merge and proactively addressed
anticipated challenges. As the Special Representative
aptly noted, the humanitarian situation in the region
is worrisome and is exacerbated by the effects of
climate change and insecurity — particularly in northeastern Nigeria and in the Sahel region. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of international partners that
provide support and we call on them to fully honour the
pledges made in the Oslo Humanitarian Conference for
Nigeria and the Lake Chad Region in February.
Finally, we note that the effective implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
will be key to supporting the long-term stability of the
entire region.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas
for his insightful briefing on the semi-annual report
(S/2017/563) of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and recent developments in
West Africa and the Sahel.
Since the beginning of the year, we have witnessed
significant positive developments throughout the
region. We highly commend the good offices and
important role that Mr. Chambas and UNOWAS have
recently played in conflict prevention in The Gambia,
Burkina Faso and other regional countries. Meanwhile,
the situation of various parts of the West African Sahel
remains fragile due to the threats of Boko Haram and
other terrorist organizations.
Taking those risks into account, the work of
UNOWAS may become even more challenging after
the closure of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
We believe that the establishment and deployment
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) will positively contribute to maintaining
stability in the region and helping UNOWAS to focus
on conflict prevention, mediation and addressing crossborder security threats — including drug trafficking
and piracy.
That can be only achieved through a more effective
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Addressing impunity and
corruption; advancing structural reforms and security,
justice and the rule of law; promoting human rights;
increasing resilience; and engaging women and young
people are equally important tasks within the Strategy,
17-21321

13/07/2017

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV. 8002

which could also serve as a model for achieving stability
and development in other African countries.

Africa, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and
other associated groups.

Kazakhstan is convinced that this subregional
and comprehensive approach, which links security,
development and humanitarian efforts, is the most
efficient way to achieve peace and prosperity. The
Security Council’s recent mission to the Lake Chad basin
once again reaffirmed the necessity of a sub-regional
and coordinated approach that focusses on the root
causes of the conflict and promoting development.
It is therefore essential to enhance coherence and
cooperation among UNOWAS, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations system as a whole,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the G-5 Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the Gulf of Guinea Commission, the West
African Economic and Monetary Union and national
Governments. We also need to mobilize international
financial institutions and donor countries to ensure
long-term sustainable funding.

Where good governance is concerned, we would
like to highlight the progress that has been made in
areas such as the peaceful resolution of a post-election
crisis in the Gambia, the preparations for elections in
Liberia and Sierra Leone and the initiative to promote
development in the region. With regard to initiatives
on gender issues undertaken by the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, we support and
encourage its work in promoting women’s participation
in political processes for peace and security.

Finally, Kazakhstan will work with the members of
the Council and key actors to find a solution to achieve
a lasting peace in West Africa and the Sahel.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS),
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his briefing.
Bolivia is gratified by the leadership of countries
of West Africa and the Sahel for their progress in
implementing political, institutional and constitutional
reforms. Côte d’Ivoire’s path to peace is a case in
point. The United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
successfully completed its mandate on 30 June. We
hail the commitment of the United Nations presence in
Côte d’Ivoire to support the Government and ensure the
maintenance of peace and the prosperity of the country
and its people.
Bolivia highlights the work of the UNOWAS
in the areas of good governance, security, human
rights, gender issues, preventive diplomacy and good
offices. We also know that we need the support of all
members of the international community to carry out
that work. In that regard, we value the support of the
United Nations, the Security Council and regional and
subregional bodies — such as the African Union and its
Peace and Security Council, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Commission for

We also commend the work that UNOWAS has been
doing in the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and
exercise of its good offices, as well as the constitutional
reforms that have been implemented in Benin, Burkina
Faso, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The links that UNOWAS
has established between best practices, interactive
dialogues, preventive diplomacy and strengthened
coordination between the parties concerned have made
it possible to launch initiatives for peace and security
as well as national ownership and inclusivity, paving
the way for consolidating peaceful solutions within a
democratic framework.
Bolivia supports the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as outlined
in presidential statement S/PRST/2017/2, and we
encourage the members of the G-5 Sahel to continue
their work in coordination with the Secretary-General
and the African Union, as laid down in resolution 2359
(2017). With regard to implementation of the strategy,
we firmly believe that the current coalition of partners
in the region, including the countries of the Sahel,
regional organizations such as the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
ECOWAS, can contribute in ways that will make it
possible to comprehensively tackle the region’s political,
economic, development and security challenges while
also identifying the causes of instability there.
We are concerned about the complex of problems
facing various countries in the region that are dealing
with enormous challenges to their efforts to achieve
peace and stability. Insecurity, transborder crime,
human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants,
and arms and drug trafficking are resulting in
conflicts that have a negative effect on the region’s
population and development, on top of instability,
terrible humanitarian situations and terrorism. Bolivia

17-213215/6

S/PV.8002

Peace consolidation in West Africa

condemns such actions, particularly terrorism, which
can have no justification and represents a serious threat
to international peace and security in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever and by whomever it
is committed. We call for the full implementation of
resolution 2349 (2017), of 31 March, in the fight against
terrorist groups, including Boko Haram and Da’esh.
Bolivia would also like to emphasize that part of
the reason for the serious crisis that the Sahel is dealing
with is the consequence of interventionist policies in
North Africa. It is impossible to discuss a crisis of
this magnitude in that part of the world without taking
into account the interventionist efforts in Libya, which
have resulted in arms and mercenaries pouring into the
region. Bolivia firmly rejects such interventionist and
interfering policies, which destabilize and undermine
international peace and security.
Lastly, we urge the States of West Africa and the
Sahel to continue with their stabilization process with
strict regard for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all of their members.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mohammed Ibn
Chambas, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his substantive and comprehensive
report (S/2017/563). We agree with his assessment
that the situation in the diverse and extensive region
that he covers is a complex one. The terrorist threat
remains acute, and eradicating it is one of the primary
tasks on the regional agenda. Until then it will be
impossible to achieve sustainable political stability
or make substantive progress in solving the region’s
socioeconomic issues. We are concerned about the fact
that various criminal groups, pirates and smugglers
are working closely with terrorists, exploiting gaps
in national and border security for their own illegal
activity and essentially profiting from chaos, instability
and the suffering of civilians.
All of that puts an additional burden on the already
difficult humanitarian situation in West Africa and the
Sahel. Unfortunately, for many ordinary people, the
dry statistical data that is comprehensible to specialists
familiar with the region does not convey the tragic scale
of the realities in the region. It will take a long time and
redoubled international assistance efforts to overcome
the negative trends. We note the response of the Lake

6/6

13/07/2017

Chad Basin Commission and its work in forming a joint
multinational rapid-reaction force together with Benin.
We welcome the establishment by the countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel of a counter-terrorist
force, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution
2359 (2017), and we urge that it be deployed on the
ground as soon as possible. We emphasize that efforts to
improve security and stability should be carried out as
part of a comprehensive approach, combining military
counter-terrorism measures with efforts to strengthen
State institutions, promote systemic economic and
social development, spread a culture of respect for
human rights and the rule of law and provide jobs for
young people.
We greatly appreciate the steps that have been taken
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and the specialized United Nations agencies to
provide various types of assistance to countries in this
part of Africa. It is important to ensure that, as before,
these efforts are coordinated with regional associations
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Mano River Union, the Lake
Chad Basin Commission, the Group of Five for the
Sahel and others. We also think it important to ensure
that we improve the effectiveness of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, whose potential has
not yet been fully realized, and that the United Nations
agencies in West Africa and the Sahara-Sahel region
take that factor into consideration in coordinating their
aid efforts with the Governments of the region.
In that regard, the views of the countries for which
the Strategy was developed should be a priority. Above
all, we should ensure that external assistance does
not take the form of solutions imposed on African
Governments by outsiders. We support the principled
position that outside meddling is unacceptable. We all
remember that the roots of the precipitous degradation
of the situation in the region go back to 2011, when
outside interference resulted in an operation aimed at
regime change in Libya.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

17-21321
