UNITER NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

CONTENTS

Page

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/l812)
.. .. .... ... ... .... .. .. .. ... .. .... ....
Adoption of the agenda 1.*,,..,......*..,...,..,..*.,....,,.....I......

1
1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 13 December 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Upper
Volta to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11575) *, t , I,. . . I,, . . . . . , I.. . . . , . . . I.. , I.. . . I,. . , . . , 1.. . . , . . . .

11

l

l

S/PV, 1812

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

EIGHTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWELFTH MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 December 1974, at 3 p.m.
l+esident:

Sir Laurence MCINTYRE

(Australia).

Pr’ese?rnf: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya,
Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon and United States of
America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l812)
1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 13 December 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Upper Volta to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1575)
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
TRe agenda was adopted.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 13 December 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/11575)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at the 181 lth meeting, I now, with the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Morocco, Upper Volta,
Nigeria and Somalia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation o/the President, Mr. zOfmi(Morocco), Mr.
Yao (Upper Volta),Mr. Ogbu (Nigeria) and Mr. Hussein
(Somalia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I also invite the President and the
other members of the delegation of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to take places at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr: Jackson (President Of
the []&ted Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

3. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (interpretation
Jfom
French): The item on the Council’s agenda today is excep
tional from every point of view. It is exceptional first of all
because of the scope of the debates to which it has given rise
in the United Nations since the inception of the Organ&non. It iS exceptional also, and especially, because of the
number of resolutions adopted in connexion with it and the
variety of international bodies which have had to express
their views on it.
4. The United Nations, which is directly concerned with
the future of a people and of its territory, has not been
successful so far in imposing upon a Member State, South
Africa, the force of international law. Neither has it succeeded in imposing upon that State respect for the Charter
or for the obligations flowing from it.
5. On 27 October 1966, the General Assembly adopted, by
114 votes to 2, with 3 abstentions, resolution 2145 (XXI), by
which it terminated the Mandate it had entrusted to South
Africa over what was then called South West Africa. In
taking that important decision theGenera Assembly put an
end to the efforts which it had been vainly exerting for 20
years to make the South African Government respect the
commitments it had freely and solemnly undertaken. By
refusing, in fact, to respect its obligations, South Africa was
unilaterally denouncing the Mandate that had been
entrusted to it. Hence, there was nothirig for the Assembly
to do but to declare the Mandate that had beeqntrusted to
South Africa null and void and consequently to adopt the
measures necessary for the transfer of power to the indigenous population of what is today Namibia.
6. By the same resolution the General Assembly established an ad hoc committee of 14 members with the task of
recommending practical means by which Namibia should
be administered, so as to enable the people of the Territory
to exercise the right of self-determination and to achieve
independence.
7. The Ad Hoc Committee met between January and
March 1967 and submitted its first report to the General
Assembly at its fifth special session. In the light of that
report, the General Assembly on 19 May 1967 adopted
resolution 2248 (S-V), by which it decided: first, that everything was to be done to enable Namibia to accede to independence by June 1968 at the latest; secondly, that until
independence the Territory would be administered, with the
maximum possible participation of the population, by a
United Nations Council for Namibia; thirdly, that that
Council would entrust executive and administrative tasks to
a United Nations Commissioner for Namibia; fourthly, that

the Council would have its headquarters in Namibia and
would proceed there in order to establish the practical
methods for the transfer of the administration of the
Territory.

16. In its second opinion, of 21 June 1971,2 the Intern&tionat Court of Justice declared the continued presence of
South Africa in Namibia illegal,
17. In spite of those two opinions of the International
Court of Justice and of numerous resolutions of the Genera1
Assembly and the Security Council, South Africa did not
feel that it had to heed the appeal of the international
community Confronted by this categorical refusal, the Security COUncil met on 4 February 1972 at Addis Ababa to
examine the question of Namibia again.

8. Naturally, the General Assembly once again called
upon South Africa to comply with the provisions of that
resolution by facilitating the transfer of the administration
of the Territory. At the same time, the Assembly requested
the Security Council to take all appropriate measures to
enable the United Nations Council for Namibia to discharge
its functions.

18. At that series of meetings the Security Council adopted
resolution 309 (1972), by which it invited
‘6..I the Secretary-General, in consultation and close cooperation with a group of the Security Council, composed of the representatives of Argentina, Somalia and
Yugoslavia, to initiate . . . contacts with all parties concerned, with a view to establishing the necessary conditions so as to enable the people of Namibia, freely and
with strict regard to the principle of human equality, to
exercise their right to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations”.

9. In accordance with the recommendations in that resolution, the United Nations Council for Namibia,on 28 August
1967, addressed a letter to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Government of South Africa requesting him to indicate
the measures that his Government intended to take to facilitate the transfer of power with the least confusion.
10. On 27 September 1967, the South African Minister of
Foreign Affairs replied that his Government had no intention of complying with the provisions of these resolutions,
which it regarded as illegal,

19. On the basis of this decision of the Security Council,
the Secretary-General a few days later made the first move:
he sent the text of the resolution to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa.

11. On 16 December 1967, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 2325 (XXII), in which it requested the Security
Council to take effective steps to enable the United Nations
to discharge the responsibilities it had assumed with respect
to Namibia.

20. The Secretary-General, on his return from Addis
Ababa, received on 7 February 1972 in New York the representative of South Africa, who transmitted to him the text of
the statement made by the Prime Minister of South Africa
on 4 February 1972. In that statement the Prime Minister of
South Africa had said:
661 . . . do not wish . , . to anticipate this matter, except

12. Since then several other resolutions-76,
to be
specific-have
been adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Council, all condemning South Africa for its
refusal to co-operate with the United Nations.
13. It was necessary to wait until 1970, more specifically 29
July 1970, before the Security Council, by resolution 284
(1970), decided to submit, in conformity with Article 96 (1)
of the Charter, the question to the International Court of
Justice for an advisory opinion.

to say that if the Secretary-General of the United Nations
wishes to come to South Africa to discuss . . . seifdetermination of non-white peoples with the [South African] Government among others, he will. . . find US to be
willing partners in the discussion , . . . But if he wishes to
come to South Africa to act as a mouthpiece for the
extremists of the Organization of African Unity . I I I can
tell him in advance that he will be wasting his time.”
[S/10738 of I7 JuIy 1972,para. 6.1

14. I am bound to point out that a first opinion had
already been given by the Court in 1950, when Pretoria had
refused to submit to the new international system, on the
pretext that the Mandates system had disappeared with the
League of Nations.
Court of Justice

21. And yet thosewhom the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
South Africa describedas extremistshad adopted on 16
April 1969at Lusakathe historic documentcalled the Manifesto on Southern Africa.

“Their razkn d’&re and their original object remain.
Since their fulfilment did not depend on the entity of the
League of Nations, they could not be brought to an end
simply because this supervisory organ ceased to exist. Nor
could the right of the population to have the Territory
administered in accordance with these rules depend
thereon.“]

22. 1should like to point out that that document, prepared
and adopted initially by the headsof State of eastern and
central Africa, wasadopted by the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and presentedto the United Nations here by
His Excellency Mr. Ahmadou Ahidjo, Presidentof Cameroon and at that time the Chairman of the OAU. In the

1 Internationaf

1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued F?esence of South
Africa in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notwithstanding
Security
Council
kesolution
276 (1970),
Advisory
Opinion, I. C.J.Reports 1971, P.16.

15. In this connexion, the International
stated:

Reports

IPSO,

status of South
p, 133.

West Africa.

Advisory

Opinion:

1.C.J.

2

Namibian people, with the direct assistance
of the United
Nations, of all powersnecessaryfor the establishmentof a
genuine, independent, unitary State, the solemasterof its
own destiny.

,aka Manisfesto, the heads of State and Government of
ica declared:
“We would prefer to negotiate rather than destroy, to
alk rather than kill. We do t-101advocate violence, we
Ldvocate an end to the violence against human dignity
Yhich is now being perpetrated [in South Africa]. If
Xaceful progress to emancipation were possible, or if
lhanged circumstances were to make it possible in the
‘Uture, we would urge our brothers in the resistance
movements to use peaceful methods of struggle even at
:he cost of some compromise on the timing of change.
But while peaceful progress is blocked by actions of those
at present in power in the States of southern Africa, we
have no choice but to give the peoples of those Territories
all the support of which we are capable in their struggle
against the oppressors.“3

27. If this appeal were to be heededit would be the first
positive sign which would not only leadto the beginning
ofa
settlement of the dire controversy which setsthe South
African Government againstthe international community
but also, and in particular, saTeguardpeacein Africa and
therefore international security. In any event, the United
Nations and especiallythe Security Council must remain
vigilant in the future with regardto thedramabeingenacted
in Africa that is degradingthe humanrace and threatening
the very future of the Organization.
2X. I should like now, Mr. President,with your permission, sinceI hope this may bethe lastmeetingofthe Council
this month, to addressthosecolleagueswho are about to
leave us at the end of their mandate.

&at position surelycannot be describedasextremist.That

ief historicalsummarywasrequired,especiallysincesome
11 believethat the OAU and the United Nationshave not
v’en the South African rigime sufficienttime to reflect and
adopt an appropriateposition.

29. We have all appreciatedthe contribution which you,
Sir, have made as our colleagueand friend, as well asthe
contribution of the representativeof Austria to the debates
and action of the Council. I shouldlike, asan African anda
representativeof a country friendly to your own, to tell you
how grateful I am for this year that I have spentwith you,
which hasmadeit possiblefor meto benefitfrom your great
experienceand your knowledgeof theproblemsconfronting
Africa and the international community.

1. It isonly because
of thecategoricalrefusalof the South
frican regime,only becauseof its intransigenceand its
‘rogant attitude towards the obligationsthat it is duty
Dund to respect, only becauseof its refusal to honour
nited Nations resolutions,that other meanshave been
ied.
3. It was certainly in that spirit that the United Nations
:ouncil for Namibia recommendedto the GeneralAssemly at its twenty-eighth sessionthat contactsbetween the
ecretary-General and the Government of South Africa be
nded. That recommendationwasadoptedby the Assembly
rn 12December1973[resolution3111 (XXVIII)]. The S~CUity Council alsoadopted,on 11December1973,its resoluion 342(1973)in whichit decidednot to proceedto further
.fforts on the basisof resolution 309 (1972).

30. Turning to my colleaguesandbrothers,therepresentatives of Indonesia, Kenya and Peru,1shouldlike to tell them
how much I have appreciatedthe constantsupportof theif
solidarity with us, the logicaloutcomeof the commonstruggle whiqh our countries are waging not only in the Council
but also in all international bodies.That is our common
struggle for peace, for equality betweenmen and for the
freedom of peoples,I am convinced that your examplewill
go down in the annalsof the Council as the exampleof a
man moved by an unshakablefaith in the Organizationand
its ideals of justjce and freedom. Throughout the whole of
their mandate they have always tried to servethe causeof
mankind, and I can tell them that they haveservedit well. In
conclusion, Mr. President,may I assureyou of my Unfailing
friendship.

‘5. Too much blood has been shedin Namibia for the
Council not to take the decisionrequired of it, namely to
1elp the Namibianpeopleto recovertheir freedom,wrested
iom them by a r&ime which quite obviously hasfailed in
he missionentrustedto it. Neverthelesswewanted to give
.he Pretoria rCgimeanotherchanceby askingit to beedthe
appeals addressedto it by the international community
through the Council.

3 1, Mr. NJlNE (United Republicof Cameroon)(interimrariun from French): The international status of Namibia,
formally South West Africa, as a country under the Mandate of the League of Nations, should, like that of other
colonial Territories coming within the competenceof the
League of Nations, have been redefined after the Second
World War in the light of the new principles that have
governedthe internationalcommunitysincethen. That fact is .
not disputed by anyone.

26. The resolutionwasa very moderateone-what some
people called balancedand others called weak-but we
hope that the weaknesswill be compensatedby the force
representedby the unanimity with which it wasadopted by
the Council, It should thereforebe possiblefor the South
African regimeto commit itself to solemnrecognition both
of the validity of all United Nationsresolutionsand also of
the opinion of the International Court of Justice. That
unambiguous recognition by South Africa of the sovereignty of the Namibian peopleover its national Territory
should befollowed by the withdrawal, without delay, of’all
occupying South African troops and the transfer to the
j Ofjcial

Records

of the General’ Assembly.

Twenty-n&h

32. Speaking in the Security Council the representativeof
Pretoria himself said[ l8OLJzh
meeting]:“The Governmentof
South Africa hasalways recognizedthat South West Africa
has a distinct international status. We have no designson
it.” How, then, can oneexplain the persistenceof a colonial
type of situation in Namibia?

Session,

Annexes,
agenda
item196, document
A/7754, para.12.
3

33, The truth of the matter is. that ever sj.ncs .Jhe first
session of the General Assembly South Africa, rejecting any
change in the territorial status to bring it into conformity
with the principles and purposes of the Charter, has set in
motion the PrOCeSS of annexation of Namibia by extending
to that Terrirory its methods of government based essentially on OpflYthpid and the repression and exploitation of
Africans.

allusions to self-determination of the “homelands” made by
the South African Government in order to reassure international public opinion, the fact is that those “homelands” are
being kept strictly in the present stntus (/vo, which means
that the natural wealth of Namibia is to remain in the hands
of the whites, while the black, if he is to survive, is condemned to the precarious life of a farmer.
40. During this period, moreover, repressive measures
against political movements under the South African Emergency Laws and public floggings of unspeakable savagery
reached alarming proportions described in detail in the
report of the United Nations Council for Namibia.4

34, The United Nations has reacted energetically to such
criminal acts. In its resolution 2145 (Xx1) of 27 October
1966 the General Assembly decided to put an end to South
Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and to bring that Territory
under the direct responsibility
of. the United Nalions,
entrusting the administration of the Territory, until its independence, to the body now known as the United Nations
Council for Namibia,
35. When asked by the Organisation what would be the
legal consequences for States of the continued presence of
South Africa in Namibia, the International Court of Justice
replied unambiguously
in its advisory opinion of 21 June
197 1 that the presence of the Pretoria regime in Namibia was
illegal and that South Africa should be obliged to cease
immediately its administration
and occupation of that
country.
36. In resolution 310 (1972) of 4 February’l972, the Security Council itself strongly condemned the repression prevalent in Namibia and declared that the continued occupation
of the Territory
by the ,South African Government in
defiance of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
and of the Charter created conditions detrimental to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region.

41. Faced with the persistent bad faith of the South African racist Government, which has quite bluntly rcfuscd to
recognize the right of the Namibian people to selfdetermination and independence, in his report of 30 April
1973, the Secretary-General reached the conclusion that
“ . . . the position of the South African Government is still
far from coinciding with that established in the resolutions of the United Nations concerning Namibia”
[S/10921, para. 181.
42, Confronted with the de facto annexation of Namibia
by South Africa, one cannot attach any credit at all to the
statements made by Mr. Botha in the Council on 24 October, when he said that self-determination for Namibia could
cbme about within 10 years. So it was very right for the
Security Council in its resolution 342 (1973) to decide not to
continue the contacts which the racists were plainly seeking
.to exploit in order to pursue their dilatory tactics to improve
their image in international circles and give themselves
respectability they do not merit in the cycs of the world
Organization.
43. In the present circumstances the United Nations
should fulfil its obligations towards the people of Namibia
fully and effectively. There arc no grounds at all Ibr capitulation to the challenge of the racists. The patience of the
Namibian people also has certain limits. That people, which
has placed such trust in the Organization, is expecting the
promises the Security Council has always made it to be
fulfilled, and it is looking forward to the day when the racist
uypcrs
will at last be obliged to transfer power to it.

37, Although, ns usual, the racist Government rejected out
of hand the views thus expressed by highly respected organs
of the international community, the Security Ctiuncil, in one
last effort at conciliation, in its resolution 309 (1972) of
4 February 1972, invited the S&retary-Genera1 to initiate
contacts with South Africa and all partics concerned with a
view to establishing the necessary conditions to enable the
people of Namibia
to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence in accorda,nce ,witl! the
Charte?.

44. My delegation believes that in view of the aggressive
and expansionist policy of the South African rkgime’in
Namibia and the extreme patience shown by the Organization towards South Africa, this present debate will give rise
to very little controversy; surely no delegation present
wishes to deny the Namibian people its inalienable right to
self-determination, national independence and protection
of its territorial integrity. Those rights were reaffirmed by
the Security Council in its resolution 323 (1972) of 6 December 1972.

38. Later developments more than justified the scepticism
tllat had been voiced in various quarters as to the usefulness
and purpose of such a dialogue. What happened was that
while the Secretary-General-to
whom my delegation
wishes to express sincere gratitude for the skill and wisdom
with which he performed his delicate mission in the
was holding talks with the Pretoria authoricircutnstancesties, the fatter saw fit to intensify their policy of the balkanization of Namibia into “homelands”
by setting up the
notorious Consultative Council, which is nothing other than
a divisive tribal organ in the pay of the racists.

45. The unanimous vote that has $1~1taken place in the
Council regarding Namibia has given added meaning to
what the President of the United Republic of Cameroon said
as he recalled the result bf the recent debate in the Security
Council on apartheid. President .4hmadou Ahidjo said:

39. This system of exploitatidii”whicll
has Ieefi -inflicted
upon the Namibian people has been strongly denpunced by
the International Commission of Jurists in an article entitIed
“Bantustan honlelands in Namibia: a new servitude”, which
appeared il-1issue No, 11 of the Commission’s @urnal, dated
December 1973. In it. we read that notwithstanding
vague

--

“Fully aware of the profound attachment of the peapies of these great countries to the principles of fi-cedom,
4 fiid.,

,-4

Twenty-ninth

Session. Supplement

NO. 24.

tinn (SWAPO) as a well-dtil’culated a’nd deliberate political
manoeuvre aimed at misleading world public opinion, at
cntrcnching bantustnns and subsequently annexing Namibia to South Africa.
52. In this connexion,
even some Western papers have
admitted that the South African authorities are carving up
Namibia in a planned way. They intend to allocate small
picccs of sterile land in the northern part of the Territory and
elsewhere for the creation of a so-called “independent”
Ovamboland, etc., and thereby
place the rest of the Territory with fertile soil and rich mineral resources under a white
ruling rtgime for their perpetual occupation. In the event of
opposition
rrom the indigenous
people, the white racists are
prcparcd to demand a union with South Africa straight
away. In discussing this issue, Du Pies&, the head of the
Nitti(j[lai Party of South West Africa, who is also the South
African Minister of Community Development, openly
atlmittcd that the future of Namibia must be determined
with
the approval of the South African Government
and
that there was no question of South West Africa being
separated entirely from South Africa.
53.

On 20 November this year,

Dirk Mudge, Member of

tlw Excculive Committee of the so-calledSouthWestAfrica

National Party, tabled a motion in the so-calledSouth West
Africa Legislative Assemblyon the talks about the future of
South West Africa. The m&on contained 14points. Now
let us take a look at the essentialpoints of this motion.
54. Point I nfthe motion saysthat thereshouldbe rccognition of the l’act that there were various peoplesin “Sotitii
West Africa”, and the rights of eachshould be recognized.
On
he
surface, this appears to be quite fair, but it has
complctcly ignored the objective fact as to who are the
mastersof Namibia and who are the aggressorsillegally
occupying Namibia. It is closigncdto blur the basicdistinction bctwccn
occupation and :tnti-occupation, between
aggressionand anti-aggression,thereby creatingconfusion
am1,Wg

the

pcopic.

55, In our view, only with the immediatewithdrawal of
the reactionary South African authorities from Namibia
ant1the removal of that rock weighingdown on the Namihian people will it be possiblefor the indigenouspeopleto
become
the masters
of their
own
land and for the rights of
each people there to be r&pected. Otherwise, the white
racistsand colonialists will be allowed to da whatever they
please,while the broad’massesof the black inhabitantsare
crudciy deprived of their basicright to subsistence;
and such
;m intokrabie
state of affairs will continue indefinitely.
Point
S ol’ the motion
refersto the maintenanceof law
and order in “South West Africa” in the processof moving
towards sc!f-determination,
and it adds: “therefore, South
Africa would not withdraw Ii-OIII ‘South West Africa’
bccauscthat would l&i to chaos”.
.
57 Point 6 assertsthat South Africa could only leave
South West Africa once the peopleaskedfor it and that no
other
body
or country
could
replace
South
Africa. This is
.
exactly the tone of a slave-owner,asof theresimply did not
exist a U&ccl Nations, asif the Namibian peopiecould not
survive without the South African racists.Theseare nothing
56.

but excuses used by the South African authorities for their
continued illegal occupation of Namibia: it is simply gangsters’ logic. It must be pointed out that it is on the basis of
this logic that the South African racists have thus far persistently refused to recognize the correct United Nations resolutions on the Namibian question and refused to recognize the
United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal administering authorities in Namibia.

the General Assembly in its resolution 3295 (XXIX) of 13
December 1974, the Security Council is again considering
the question of Namibia.
63. The problem of Namibia deeply affects the interests of
the whole of free Africa and of the whole of freedom-loving
mankind. The just struggle of the Namibian people for its
freedom and independence is an integral component of the
struggle of the African peoples against the racist and colonialist rkgimes in southern Africa and against colonialism
and aggression as a whole. The perpetuation of a hotbed of
colonial domination in southern Africa has an adverse effect
upon the political situation not only in Africa but in the
whole of the world. It creates a threat to international peace
and security for the countries of Africa.

58. The South African racist rCgime has acted so truculently because it has the all-out political, diplomatic, military
and economic support of imperialism. In order to strangle
the national liberation movements and preserve its enormous economic and political interests in southern Africa,
imperialism has tried by all means to sustain the Fascist rule
of the South African authorities. Herein lies an important
reason why the Namibian question has remained unsettled
over the past two decades and more, and why the South
African authorities have dared to defy the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

64. This situation is against the efforts of all the peaceloving countries which are aimed at the deepening and
further expansion of the easing of international tensions and
at the strengthening of the process of the restructuring of
international relations on the basis of the principles of peacefu1 coexistence. The easing of tensions, which has now
become the governing factor in the development of international relations, establishes favourable conditions for the
further rise of the national liberation movement of the
colonial peoples on the African continent.

59. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the just struggle of the Namibian people.
We maintain that the South African authorities must put an
immediate end to their illegal occupation of Namibia, withdraw all their military and police forces as well as their
administration
from Namibia and let the United Nations
Council for Namibia take over and prepare for the independence of Namibia. The national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia must be guaranteed against sabotage by the
South African authorities; the South African authorities
must immediately repeal their barbarous measures of
infringing on the political and basic human rights of the
Namibian people and release at once all the detained political prisoners.

65. The breadth of the national liberation struggle is growing in scale all the time, and this struggle leads on to further
important victories. A new independent State has been born
upon the African continent-Guinea-Bissau.
There have
been positive changes in the achievement of setfdetermination and independence by the peoples who were
formerly under theadministration of Portugal. The continuing unlawful occupation by South Africa of the Territory of
Namibia and the existence of South African and Southern
Rhodesian colonial racist rigimes in the twentieth century is
an anachronism left over from previous centuries-and an
end must be put to this state of affairs forthwith.

60. Although the Chinese delegation has voted in favour
of draft resolution S/l 1579, we would prefer that, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council resolution immediately call
for strong measures to apply effective sanctions against the
South African racist rCgime for its persistent gross violation
of the Charter principles and refusal to comply with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

66. The United Nations has adopted a whole series of
resolutions on Namibia whose purpose was the liquidation
of the unlawful occupation of that Territory by South
Africa. The United Nations has recognized and has confirmed on numerous occasions in its resolutions the inalienable right of the people of Namibia to freedom and
independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. By an official decision of the United Nations, the
Mandate of the Republic of South Africa to administer
Namibia has been terminated. The national unity of the
people of Namibia and the territorial integrity of that country have been officially recognized and have been confirmed
on numerous occasions, Therefore, any further presence in
that country of South African authorities and troops and
any attributes of racist domination by the Republic ofSouth
Africa is unlawful and is in conflict with United Nations
decisions.

61. An excellent situation prevails in the world, even more
so in Africa. The struggle of the Namibian people has won
not only the support of the African countries and peoples
but also the ever broader support of all thejustice-upholding
countries and peoples throughout the world. There will yet
be setbacks and difficulties of various kinds along their road
of advance, but the difficulties cannot stem the progress of
the revolutionary struggle of Namibia. We are deeply convinced that so long as they strengthen their unity, heighten
their vigilance, persevere in various forms of struggle,
including armed struggle, the Namibian people, with the
support of all the justice-upholding countries and peoples of
Africa and the rest of the world, will certainly drive out the
South African racist rCgime from their homeland and win
national independence and liberation.

67. At the present session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations, in elaboration and confirmation of the
numerous earlier decisions of the United Nations, resolution
3295 (XXIX) was adopted, again confirming the inalienable
right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and

62. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (rranslation~from Ruxsirm): At the request of the African
countries and in accordance with the recommendation of
6

indcPel]dence. By that resolution the United Nations offici:llly rcCOgniZeS
the national movement of NamjbiaS’WRPO -as the genuine representative of the people of
Namibia. Today the representative of SWAPO, Mr. Mueshil~:%e,
spoke in the Security Council, But the South
African racist rtgime is continuing to ignore the decisions of
the united Nations and is obdurate in its colonialist and
racist POiiCy Of oppressionand enslavementofNamibia and
its people.

operation, in violation of United Nations decisionson
Namibia. As hasbeenshownin practice,the South African
authorities in thesecircumstances
are not goingto beinfluencedeither by talks or by persuasion.
72. Almost &ee yearsago,early in 1972,duringthe series
of meetingsheld by the Security Council in Africa, voices
were heard in support of a dialoguebetweenthe United
Nationsand the rbgimein theRepublicofSouth Africa. The
delegation of the USSR at that time expressedserious
doubtsconcerningthe appropriateness
ofsuchactionby the
Security Council, consideringits unpromisingnature in
view of the position of the racistsof SouthAfrica. Nevertheless,this coursewasexperimentedwith, inasmuchassome
still continuedto believein it naively, However,now all have
becomeconvinced,and indeed,life itselfhasconfirmedthat
dialoguewith racistsis not only useless
but canactually be
harmful, inasmuchasit createsillusionsof the possibilityof
coming to termswith racists,Thereby the correctnessof the
approach of the Soviet Union to the presentquestionwas
convincingly confirmed.

68. The representativesof African Stateswho have spoken
here have rightly pointed to the true reasonfor the challengi% attitude of South Africa in relation to the United
stations, the reason why the racists of South Africa arc
continuing to be defiant towards the United Nations and
towards the peoplesof Africa and arecontinuing to accepta
direct confrontation with the numerousresolutionsof the
Gcncral Assembly and the Charter of the United Nations
and are ignoring world publicopinion. The reasonisclear;it
cannot be concealedor paperedover; it residesin the open
support given by certain Western Powers to the racist
rigime of tho Republicof South Africa. It ispreciselythisaid
trtld this support on the part, first of all, of certain States
members of NATO, aswell ason the part of the imperialist
transnational monopolies, that makes it possiblefor the
racist r&gime 6f the Republic of South Africa to pit itself
against the United Nations, against the peoplesof Africa
and against world public opinion.

73. The consistentpositionof principle of theUSSRin the
struggleagainstcolonialismandracismiswellknown. Colonialism,racism,apartheid,Zionismand all other manifestations of heinousness
towardsmanare resolutelyrejectedby
the Soviet Union. Twenty million Soviet peoplegave their
lives in order to liberatemankind from the racistplagueof
fascism.The USSRfirmly and consistentlyhasbeenfollowing the preceptsof the great Lenin and is in favour of total
and final liquidation of colonial and racist rkgimes.The
Soviet Union, both on a State basisand through its social
organizations,hasconstantly beenproviding andcontinues
to provide comprehensiveselflessassistance
and supportto
the national liberation movementsof Africa in their struggle
to attain national independence.
The Soviet Union supports
the inalienable right of the people of Namibia to selfdeterminationand independenceon the basisof the principle of territorial integrity of that country and non-interferencein its domesticaffairs, We recognizethe lawfulness
of the struggleof the peopleof Namibia by all meansat its
disposal.

169. This support of the racist regimeof the Republic of
South Africa constitutes a direct violation of resolutions
both of the Gcncral Assemblyand of the Security Council.
111other words, we have before us selfishnessand selfinterest on the part ofindividual Powersandmonopolies,so
that by basingthemselvesupon the racist rbgimeof Pretoria
they can continue to inflict colonial exploitation on the
indigenous inhabitants of Namibia and to appropriate its
natural wealth for the purposeof their own self-enrichment.
70. In the documents of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementationof the Declaration on the Granting of Independenceto Colonial Countries
and Peoplesand in the report of the United NationsCouncil
for Namibia, there is a concrete exposition of the nefarious
role of the imperialist monopolieswhich act as they will in
Namibia. In one of the documentsof the Committee it is
officially recognizedthat “Namibia can beconsideredasthe
‘most exploited Territory in history’, becauseat leastone
third of its grossnational product is exported asprofits by
foreign mining companies”.’

74. The USSR hassupportedand continuesto supportall
decisionsof the Security Counciland of theGeneralAssembly which provide for thespeedyliberationof Namibiafrom
the dominationof racists,aswellasrecommendations
of the
implementationof effectiveand valid measures
aimedat the
achievementof this just goal. Firmly condemningthepolicy
of racial discrimination and apartheid practised by the
Government of the Republicof South Africa, which isalso
being extended to the Territory of Namibia occupiedby
South Africa, the Soviet Union doesnot maintainwith the
Republic of South Africa any diplomatic, COnSUlar,
ecOnomic or other ties whatsoever.

71. Idowever, it is not only the economicintereststhat are
the basis for the support given to the South African r&&e.
~1~ important role is also being played by the designsto
block the national liberation movementin the southernPart
of Africa. It ispreciselythosedesignswhich are servedby the
last racist bastionsin Africa, namely, the Republicof South
Africa and Southern Rhodesia.We are bound to cometo
the concIusion alsothat it is preciselyfor thisreasonthat the
close ties of certain Western Powers and Israel with the
racists of Pretoria are not limited only to the economic
sPh&e. They expand into political and military co5Ibid., Supplement

75. The anti-colonial struggle of the oppressedPeoples
requiresthat there be an increasein the pressureof every
kind exertedupon the racistrCgimeofthe RepublicofSouth
Africa in order to isolateit to the utmostin the international
arena, That is why the Soviet delegationin the SeduritY
Council supported the draft resolution to exclude the
Republic of South Africa from the United Nations. The
Soviet Union considersthat the firmest measuresmustat

NO. 23, chap.IV, annex,appendix
IV, Para.7.

7

knowledgeable about the problems of their region and that
such problems have a more immediate bearing upon them
than upon anyone rlsc. It is thercforc, in our view, only
proper that greater preponderance bc accorded to the views
and interests of those countries.

last be taken against the racists from Pretoria. The Soviet
delegation is read) to suppiSrt proposals concerning the
application against the racist regime of South Africa .of the
kind of effective measures provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations which would compel the Republic of South
Africa to comply with those decisions.

81. It is the view of my delegation that the resolution
adopted by the Council this morning can be characterized as
both reasonable and timely. It is not as strong as most of us
would have wished. It should, however, offer greater chances of being implemented. By according South Africa a final
warning and an opportunity to comply with the various
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the resolution
adopted this morning makes every effort to solve the problem of Namibia without recourse to the sanctionary measures provided by the Charter, At the same time, it provides a
series of concrete steps by which South African withdrawal
from Namibia can be accomplished. lt seeks practical measures by which the suffering of the people of Namibia can be
put to an immediate end by requiring the South African
Government to implement the provisions of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, to rclcase all political prisoners, to abolish all discriminatory and repressive laws and
freely to permit all exiled Nnmibians to return to their
country. In the view of my delegation, the resolution offers
both concrete and effective mcasurcs for dealing with the
long unsolved problem of Namibia.

76, The Soviet delegation has supported the resolution
adopted today by the Security Council on the question
under consideration, the draft of which was introduced by
the African countries of Kenya and Mauritania and the
United Republic of Cameroon, although, frankly speaking,
we would have preferred a stronger text.
77. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): The Council meets
today in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 3295
(XXIX) which, in its section II:
“Urges the Security Council to convene urgently in
order to take without delay effective measures, in accordance with the relevant Chapters of the Charter of the
United Nations and with the resolutions of the Security
Council and of the’ General Assembly regarding
Namibia, to put an end to South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia”.
7X. It gives my delegation deep satisfaction that the Council has been able to respond in such a speedy and effective
manner to the request made by the General Assembly under
that resolution. Our appreciation goes in the first place to
our colleagues and friends from Kenya, Mauritania and the
United Republic of Cameroon, who have spared no efforts
in order to arrive at a formula which is both effective and
generally acceptable. Their deep concern for the plight of the
people of Namibia, shared by all members of the Council,
and their keen sense of the art of the possible haire been
greatly instrumental in bringing about the draft resolution
that has now been adopted unanimously by the Council.
The statesmanship and spirit of accommodation displayed
by all members is a further source of satisfaction for my
delegation.

82. The latest developments in the South African region
offer no justification forjubilation. There seems to be some
indication that the racist and colonialist rigimes in southern
Africa may now at last begin to feel the prcssurc brought
upon them by the international community, making them
realize that they can no longer defy at will the wishes of the
world community.
83. It is, however. still much tuo early tospeak of a change
of heart. The developments there are still too embryonic, too
slow and too uncertain. Much more tangible proofis needed
to dispel the justified suspicion and the sceplicism of the
world community with regard to the words and deeds of the
rCgimes at Pretoria and Salisbury in view of their behaviour
in the past. We believe, however, that the time has now
become more propitious for the winds ofchangc to set their
course in the southern part of the African continent. It is the
task of the United Nations, and in particular that of the
Security Council, to take the ncccssary steps that would
accelerate the process towards the linal solution of the
remaining colonial problems in Africa. The resolution
adopted this morning by the Council is, in my delegation’s
view, a step in the right direction. WC therefore voted in
favour of the draft resolution in document S/l 1579.

79. In supporting the draft resolution sponsored by the
delegations from Africa, my delegation has been guided in
the first place by the firm and constant stand that lndonesia
has always taken against colonialism in all its forms and
guises. The role that Indonesia has played in support of the
struggle for independence in Asia, Africa and other parts of
the world is well known and needs no further elaboration.
As a member of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
Indonesia has a special interest in the speedy resolution of
the Namibian problem in accordance with the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council, taking into
account the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice that South Africa is under the obligation to withdraw its presence from the Territory.

84. This is most likely the last meeting of the Council in
which my delegation will participate, as our term of Office
will end 017 31 December. Allow me, therefore, to avail
myself of this opportunity to express my profound gratitude
to all colleagues around this table and to the members of
their delegations for their co-operation and good will, which
have made it possible for my delegation to make its contribution, for whatever it is worth, to the work of the Council.
It has indeecl been a privilege for mc to be so closely associated, on an official as well as on a personal level, with such
distinguished represcntativcs of friendly countries. Indone-

80. AS I have stated on previous occasions; another basic
attitude constantly governing the approach of my delegation is that, in regard to matters considered of vital importance to a region, Indonesia is always prepared to be
primarily guided by the vietis and interests of the countries
in the region concerned. It is Indonesia’s firm belief, one that
is shared by all members of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, that the countries in the region are more
8

!iiil I?ClS CS~xxi~l~~~ privileged Lo have hat1 the opportunity
to
W’Olk t(Q!Ct IlN with tllc non-illigned
members ofthe Counctt
ill I,llC CWlIlN~ll e~‘forls to I’ind solutions to problems
with
which tllc C.‘ouncil Iios bcon confrontetl.
Prcviotis
rcpceseiitilli\~5 t)l’ 111~ f~~)n-i~ligtled countries in the Council, AmbasSi\Ci1?1. C’issC 01’ (;uinca,
Ambassador
Sen of India,

89. The two years that I have representedmy country in
the Council have beena great experiencefor me which I
would not have liked to miss.Though 1cannot deny that 1
Will feel relievedwhen at the end of this year the clocks chime
in the New Year, there will be certainly many occasionsin
the future when I will look back with nostalgiato my term in
the Council, to the closeand friendly working relationship
that exists in the Council betweenits members,a relationship which hasbecomethe basisfor lastingpersonalfriendships. My delegation wishesthe Council well and its
membersevery success
in their endeavourto main&n and
preservepeaceand security in the world,

Ambuss:ldor Uoyd of Panama, Ambassador Abdulla of
Sud:tn nncl An~bass:idor

Mqjxov of Yugoslavja,

have estab-

lished iin c.vCcllent reputation of service and dedication to
the {cork ~11‘
Lhc C’ouncil. My rlclcgation hopesthat we have
hclpctl to mnilltain th:~t reputation of the non-aligned
ltlcnlhcrs.
X5.

My pr~~tillldc

and tllal 01’ nly delegation

goes alS0 CO

90. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (ititerpretation from
@~!tislr): My delegationvoted in favour of the draft resolution in document S/11579 and wishesbriefly to explain
someof the feasonsfor our affirmative vote.

[lrc Sccrcl~~r,y-c;cncrald
his closecollaborators assigned
to tllc Sccllrlty
c’ouncil, to the membersof the Secretariat
who liavc‘ given such v;ilunblc co-operation during the two
~WI’S ~hnt I~lclot~csiaIlns hecn ;I non-permanentmemberof
hs (‘ouncil.
80,

AS III!, clclcgalion

is on lhc point

a!’

tern1inarin.g

w(~I!-cin 111~ C’OU~C~I. WC arc greatly heiirtened
thrrt

the

[rl:tcVs

to

hc

v;lGltrci

by

the

live

its

by the fact

non-perll~ancnt

metnbcrs will he occupied by countries known for their
dcdicotion and ct~mmilmcnt to the idealsand principles of
[III: C’hartcr. I um conl’idcnt that lhc Council, with their
p:lr licipatitm, will hc able (0 play, with increasingsuccess,
tlu2 Vitill
rcllc nssigncd lo it by the Charter asthe principal
trrpan cntrus~cd with the maintcnanccof peaceand security
in the worltl.
X7.

Mr. I’rosidcnl,

allow nlc to address a few words to you

IWWn;llly. ils I will Wl hnvc the occasion to do so next
fricmlli hccause bollt of us will be Icaving the Council at the
end of this year. 1 a111 WC rd the many who have been
privilcgcd to kn0~ you for qililc ;I number
al’ years
and
1
h;~t,c Iciil*llcd to like and :ldmirc
you. My first professional
cc)llt;\ct
wilh you wassome I5 years ago, during one of the
1oWcr
prints
in
the rclalions hctween our two countries,
when you wcrc rhc Ambassador of Australia at Jakarta,
You sl~c~w~cl ;I clucp unrlcrrstanding
of Indonesia and the
IrKlotlesion
pcoplc, an undcrsl:mding
which you have continued 10 show ever since. Your vision of the relations

bo~~ccn 0111’
two countrieshasbeenvindicated by the cleveloprncnts, cspccinlly during the lust live lo six years, when
tlhl~ rol:ltiuns lravc bccomcvery closeindeedon the basisof
mului~l
11ttclerslanding, I’ricndsiiip and co-operation. I had
lIl1CgWd I’cWtuncthat my two YWIX in the Council coincided
with yc~rs and I must thank you for the closeco-operation
ilnd continuccl personal friendship that you have accorded
tl:., me during thcsc last two years, within and outside the
(Iouncil. In my previous intervention in the COunCil, I have
c,qms~d my confidcncc that under your wiseguidanceour
work would ag;lin c~mc 10a fruitful conclusion.That confi&ncc W;IS IK.G rnispl;lccd. The Council has managed to
c~,n~ludc its d&at6 successfully on two important issues.
~:ty I, on hch:~I!‘~~f’myclelcgation,
expressour high appreci:l,tion fc>r the way you have acquitted yourself of your task
ilnLi c(~ngr~~lulate y0r.i on the successful outcome.
’
$18. Mnv I be pcrmittcd to thank my colleagueand brother
l’ronl M;;uri[ania, who has spoken SUCII kind words and
r:~I~rcs~cdSUCII kind sentimentsabout the role which I have
played in Ihe Council.

91. There can be very few subjects017 which the General
Assemblyand the Security Council haveshownsuchunanimous and continuousconcern asthey have with regard to
the Territory formerly known as South West Africa, later
recognized by the General Assembly under the nameof
Namibia.
92. My delegationhasa tradition of solidarity with those
who have sought to make that Territory

an independent,

free and sovereignnation, in keepingwith the historical
trends which mostfortunately have put an endto an era of
colonial rule whoselastbastionswereto befound in Africa.
My country has welcomedwith great pleasurethe attainment of independenceby all the newAfrican nationswhich
now sit in the United Nations,and wearegladto havethem
here today’as frCc andsovcrcignnationsand to sharewith
them many of their legitimateaspirations.My delegation
wishesto maintain its solidarity in the ,battlesthat still lie
aheadso that those peoplesin the African continent still
subjectto foreign rule may in the nearfuture alsoenjoytheir
right to independence.
93. My delegationhas followed closely the work of the
United Natiohs Council for Namibiaand wepay tribute to
the praiseworthy performanceof its membersat various
stagesof its work. Its thoroughreportshavedescribedfor us
the obstaclesplacedby SouthAfrica in the path of independencefor Namibia.
94. My delegationis convinced that, ever sinceGeneral
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), in which the General
Assemblydecidedto put anend to South Africa’s mandate
over Namibia and to .assUme direct responsibility for the
Territory until its independence,
the Assemblyhasbeenina
state of direct conflict with South Africa becauseof that
country’s refusalto respectthis and other decisionsof the
General Assembly and of the Security Council in which
thosebodies,expressingthemselvesin many different ways
requestedSouth Africa to withdraw from Namibia. My
delegationclearly cannot fail to give its SUppOrt to a new
resolution.according to which the United Nations would
recoverthe rightswhich havebeendeniedit to leadNamibia
to full independence,
95. My delegationagreeswith paragraph6 of the rcsolution just adopted by the Security Council, according to

9

-”

--

which the Council is to review the item on or before 30 May
1975 because, although South Africa’s recent behaviour has
not been very encouraging there are grounds for hoping that
positive changesare taking place in the conduct of that
nation which may facilitate a satisfactory transition and
which may lead to the early attainment by the people of
Namibia of their right to independence.

hope that that may happenin Namibia aswell, but we note
that sofar the situation referredto for more than 20yearsat
each sessionof the General Assembly has not changed
much. Certainly statementshave beenmadein the Security
Council, and in South Africa on 5 Novemberlast, concerning the way in which the Pretoria Governmentenvisagesthe
future of the Territory. In particular, we haveheardthat it is
intendedto advancethe date on which Namibiansmight
exercisetheir right to self-determination.We have learned
also that a certain flexibility might be introduced into the
legislationcurrently in force in regard to the movementof
persons,which might lead-at leastwe hope it would-to
the leadersof political parties having the right to move
about freely in Namibia.

96. Mr, DE GUIRTNGAUD (France)(inferpretationfrom
French): Mr. President,the French delegationwasnot surprised that the Group of African Statesaskedyou to convene the Security Council for the purposeof examining the
questionof Namibia. This meetingwasprovided for by the
resolutionadopted a few daysagoin the GeneralAssembly
[resolution3295 (XXIX)] and, althoughwe had to express
certain reservationsconcerningmany of its provisions, we
were not opposedto the principleof conveningthe Council
becausesuch a move appearedentirely justified to US.

100. However, we are bound to note that the former state
of affairs hasnot truly changedmuchup to now. The public
statementsthat have beenmade appearto us to be inadequate.They do not dispelcertainambiguitiesconcerningthe
right of the Namibianpeopleassuchto independencein the
unity of its Territory. The formula that “all options will be
open” to the inhabitants of the Territory, although at first
sightnot excludingindependence,doesnot really provide us
with any explanationof the genuinepolicy of South Africa,
which cannot be freed from its responsibilitiesunder the
Charter of the United Nations. Without losing sight of the
facts which affect the sometimes
difficult processof decolonization, which we are all awareof, wefeelthat the reasonable attitude for the South African Government to take
would beto indicateclearly very soonwhat new measures
it
will take in order to make it possiblefor the Namibian
peoplefreely to take a stand in favour of independence.

97. Our reaction could not have been any different,
becausefor many years now we have made known our
concern with the situation in Namibia.It isclearthat South
Africa hasnot fulfilled its obligationto transformthe political statusof the population of South WestAfrica andthat it
has not promoted that people’sexerciseof its right to selfdetermination and independence,
a right universally recognized as universally applicable.The result is an abnormal
situation which must be remedied.I shallrecall that for its
part France has favoured the formulation of proposals
madewith a view to finding a solution,but that South Africa
has not lived up to our expectations.This is why, last
December,the Security Council hadto suspendits work on
Namibiaafter having observedanddeploredthefact that no
genuine progresshad been made in the situation in the
Territory.
98. Since then a year haselapsed,important eventshave
taken placein Africa and, now that weareagainopeningthe
Namibian file, one observation becomesimperative. Our
debateis now taking placeat a timewhenthe international
situation is very different from what it wasat former meetingsof the Council. Breaking with yearsof inflexibility and
with the pursuit of a pointlesswar, the new Portuguese
Government has started on the processof decolonization
with which we are all familiar, After Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, the Sao Tome and Principe islands and
Angola will accedeto national sovereigntyin 1975.Two new
Statescloseto southernAfrica of considerable
landarca and
population will thus now not only take the place which is
rightfully theirs within the Organizationbut will also exercise their influence throughout the whole of the region.
Thesechangesmay lead to others.We are al] aware that as
of a few days ago in the rebel colony of Rhodesiaitself the
hope for a political solution at lastseems
to be making its
appearance.The beginning of a dialogueappears to be
emergingbetweenthe leadersof thewhite minority ant] the
representativesof theblack majority, The Frenchdelegation
would not, of course,wishto showtoo muchoptimismor to
anticipate events, but it doesappearsignificantto us that
perhapsa new wind might be blowing in Salisbury.

101. Thoseare the reasonswhy we voted in favour of the
draft resolutionsubmittedto the Council. Moreover, weare
bound to condemnthe application in Namibia of discriminatory lawsand practices,which weformally censure.Considering,as I have said, that South Africa must speakout
unambiguously on the right of Namibia to selfdeterminationand independence,in the unity of its territory, we agreethat the declaration we expect from South
Africa should be a solemnone.
102. Lastly, although certain elementsof flexibility have
already been introduced concerning the barriers blocking
public freedoms,we wish to associateourselveswith the
appeal addressedto the South African Government to
releasepolitical detainees,to abolish discriminatory laws
and practicesand to allow the return of political exiles.
103. Our affirmative vote was not cast without certain
rcscrvations. I shall rapidly passover the difficulties of
principle that we have concerningreferencesto resolutions
on which we have abstained.However, I should like to
recall,in connexionwith the referencesto the decisionof the
International Court of 21 June 1971and the consequences
that somedraw from it, that our positionwasmadeclearin
the statementmadeby my delegationin the Security Council on 5 October 1971[1588rhmeeting].
104. Having expressedthosereservations,we aregratified
that the sponsorshave found it possibleto confirm the
principles to which they are profoundly attached, even
though they were presentinga draft resolution which to a

99. The ties which exist betweenRhodesiaand South
Africa are too well known for usnot to draw the conclusion
that at Pretoria the needfor a changeis alsobeingfelt. We
10

large extent takes account of the facts. We are all gratified
also that the processof consultation, which so frequently
and so legitimately promotes our decisions,has made it
possiblefor USto reach agreement.

ll”.

UnitedNationsand SouthAfrica, my delegation
clearlyand
firmly stated its position on this grave aspectof that
problem-the questionof Namibia.Consequently,
wehave
no difficulty at all in castinga favourablevote on the excellent draft resolutionpresentedby Kenya, Mauritania, and
the United Republicof Cameroon,whichclearlycondemns
the continued itlegal occupationof Namibia by South
Africa and the applicationin that Territory of lawsand
practicesof M&l discriminationand repression
and at the
sametime, asa naturalConsequence
of that condemnation,
demandsthe implementationby the PretoriaGovernment
of measures
to establishlegalityin the Territory of Namibia
through the prompt applicationof all the resolutions01
United Nations organs,and mostparticularly the relevant
resolutionwe havejust adopted,

105. Sentiment and reasonwill in future concur in encouraging our work. Our African friendsfeel deeplya will
for equality, justice and dignity to which the whole of our
community subscribesvery willingly. At the sametime, we
havethe clear impressionthat the hour of negotiationandof
settlementby stagesis striking. May that belief be neither
disappointednor compromisedby any hasty actions.
106. It might perhapshave beenbetter if at thissession
the
United Nations had exercisedon South Africa the moral
pressurewhich is its principal meansofaction, while refraining from endangeringthe possibility of usefulcontacts.No
one, surely, believesthat measureswhich are to be taken at
last in Namibia and negotiationswhich are to be conducted
throughout southernAfrica will produceany resultsin a few
weeks,or evenin a few months.Eachof uscan,however,say
to himselfthat today joint efforts could promote the necessary solutions. My Government has not waited for the
current developments to encouragethe Government of
SoluthAfrica to showthat it is willing to compromise.It has
repeatedto the Pretoria authorities the appealsand warningsthat 1formulated at thistable on 30Octoberlast [l808fh
meeting],It hopesthat thoserepresentationsandthat advice
will not remain without effect and that the authorities in
questionwill show realism,in order to bring their doctrines
and practicescloserto the idealsof the United Nations. My
Government will continueto act alongthoselinesand to call
for the progressivedisappearanceof somethingthat shocks
usso much, in the hope that a frank, rapid and peaceful
transformation in southern Africa, and particularly in
Namibia, may take place,
107. As I conclude this statement, Mr. President,I am
aware that this meetingisperhapsthe last that weshallhold
this year, the last at which we shall have the pleasureof
working under your lofty and well-intentioned authority.
May I pay a particular tribute to your wisdom,your competelnce
and your talent as a diplomat, which have madeit
possibleboth this year and last year, in particularly difficult
and tragic circumstances,to overcomesuccessfullyobstaC~Swhich appeared to be quite dangerous,I expressmy
admiration and friendship for you.
108. I should also like to tell our colleaguesfrom Indonesia, Kenya, Peru,and Austria, who like thosefrom Australia
will be leaving the Council at the end of this year, how mtich
1 have appreciatedthe co-operationestablishedbetweenUS
during the two yearsduring which they have beenmembers
01‘our Council. I wish them all the best of luck in their
continuing activities in the United Nations.
109. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof
Francefor the very generous.
words hehasaddressed
to me.
May I saythat I reciprocateby looking back on the degreeto
which ] myself have benefitedfrom his wisdomand experience during thesepast two years on occasionswhen we
have had an opportunity to negotiatetogether on someof
the difficult issuesthat’have facedthe Council. 1shallrecollect those occasionswith great satisfactionand pleasure.

Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru)(interpretation

from Spanish):In our recentdebateonrelationsbetweenthe

111. MY delegationwasprofoundly satisfiedto note the
Unanimityshownon thisresolutionby theAfrican members
of the Council. We interpret that unanimity as a clear
demonstrationof universalawareness
of the intolerable
colonialand racistsituationin southernAfrica, particularly
in a Territory that is truly a Trust Territory of the United
Nationsitself. At the sametime wecannotfail to note with
interestand cautioushopecertainsignsin SouthAfrica and
Rhodesiawhichcould meana movementtowardscommon
senseand respectfor law by those respectivertgimes.
Clearly it isfor the UnitedNationsto encourage
anysignof
progresstowards liberation of the peoplesof southern
Africa, but it isimportantthat in sodoingit doesnot lessen
its vigilance or slackenits juridical and moralpressureto
obtain respectfor its resolutions.
112. This isprobably the lastpublicmeetingof the Security Council in which Peruwill participate,sinceitstermof
office expireson 31December.I shouldnot like thisopportunity to passwithout first stating my delegation’sgreat
satisfactionat the fact that we are beingreplacedin the
Council by a young South American State-Guyana,
which, happily is, presenttoday, the youngestof all the
South Americancountriesbut oneof themostactiveOfthI
numberon the internationalscene,whereit haswith great
coherenceand muchspirit defendedits own nationalinterests,the interestsof the Latin American areato which it
belongsand the interestsof non-alignment.
] 13. Secondly,1 shouldlike to say that our two yearsof
membershipin the Security Council have beenat oncea
great pleasureand of great benefitto my Countryand, in
particular, my delegation.This has been a rnemorablr
period, a period of much hard work, in which sensitive
issueshave beendealtwith, issues
closelyconcerninginternational peaceand security:the situationsin Zambiaand
the Middle Eastin 1973,the situationin Cyprus.the problemof therelationsof theOrganizationwith the Government
of South Africa in 1974.In respectof thoseproblems,the
Council has,asis its primeduty, madeuseof all Possible
meansto preservepeaceand security,althoughit hasnot
always succeededin doing so to the extent desired,for
reasonsthat are understandableand indeedpr(Vr in an
Organizationthat is,after all, not supranationalbut, rather,
an organiation of Governments,one in which Member
Statesjealouslypreservetheir positionsand interests.

11

. .

114,: Peru believes it has fulfilled the mandate given it by
the General Assembly. Among other things, it was one of
the first countries to take part in the peace-keeping measures
adopted by the Security Councjl. My delegation trusts that
,throughout its term of office in the Council it has never lost
sight of the norms of the Charter of the United Nations or
the peaceful traditions of my country and of Latin America
‘or our traditional respect for law and the principles of
non-alignment to the extent that they imply authentic indepen(cnce of the major centres of political and economic
power.
115. I wish to state our gratitude for the intelligent and
generous co-operation shown by you, Sir, who are presiding
aver our work today with your characteristic brilliance and
by the representatives of Austria, lndonesia and Kenya
who, like the representatives of Peru, are now reaching the
end of their terms of office in the Council. The close COoperation my delegation has maintained with the nonalignedcountries and, in general, with the non-permanent
membersof theCouncil, has,we feel,beenaf greatbenefit to
the causeof peace;
116. We must not overlook the exceedinglybeneficialco-

ordination of our work with the distinguished representa. tivesof the five permanentmembersof the Security Council;
all of their countries are bound
to my own by closeties of
.
friendship.
117. My delegation and 1 personally wish, finally, to

express our admiration

and gratitude to the Secretary-

General for his constant co-operation with and respectfor
die Council. My delegationwitnessedthis attitude particu‘laily when, on two.occasions,ii presidedover the Council. I,
extend our thanks and admiration also to the UtiderSecretary-General for Political and Security Council
Affairs, as well as to the other Secretariat memberswho
have assistedhim in his tasks.

121. The provisions of the resolution adopted today are
but a minimum of the action expectedfrom the Council in
the fulfilment of its duties and obligations,My delegation
devoutly hopes, not only for the sake of the people of
Namibia but also for the sake of the United Nations itself,
that the Council will not fail this time to have the courage,
the wisdomand the determination to pursuefaithfully the
implementationof the decisionit hasunanimouslyadopted

today.
122. May 1 alsoavail myself of thisopportunity to extend
to the non-permanent membersof the Council who will
soon be leaving the Council, including you, Mr. President,
my delegation’ssincerebest wishesand our gratitude for
having had the valuable opportunity of working with you in
amity and in a spirit of co-operation in’the Council. We
considerourselvesthe richer for theexperience,and weshall
always cherish the memoriesof the eventful year we spent
together as membersof this augustbody.
123. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet SocialistRepublic)(trans/ationfrom’Russian): First of
all, my delegationwishesto emphasizcthat the Byelorussian
SSR, in taking part in the work of the United Nations, has
always been in favour of the speediestand unconditional
eradication of colonialism,and for the speediestgranting of
independenceand freedom to all colonial countries and
peoples.We have alwaysbeenon the sideof the fightersfor
national freedom and independence.This course-hasbeen
dictated by the wholeof our world outlook; it proceedsfrom
Lenin’s foreign policy, the corner-stone of which is the
brotherly union of the forces of socialismwith the national
liberation movementsand with the peoplesthat have cast
off the yoke of colonialismand semi-colonialbondage.Our
solidarity with the peoples fighting against imperialism,
racismand colonialismfinds its expressionin our comprehensivesupport, both political and material, for their just
struggle.

11% Mr. ZAHAWIE (Iraq): My delegation ‘voted in
. favour ofdraft resolutionS/l 1.579in the firm belief’that the
Security i7ouncil should shoulder its responsibility with
regardto Namibia without any further delay. The measures
enlisted in the resolution are, in fact, long overdue. The
General Assemblyterminated South Africa’s Mandate over
the Territory of Namibia ‘as long ago as 27 October 1966.

124. Our delegationconsidersit essentialalso to point out
that, through the international detente that has been
achieved, a favourable set of circumstanceshas been produced for the conclusion of the processof decolonization
and for the final liberation from colonialismof all countries
and. peoples.All this determinesour attitude towardsthe
questionof Namibia, now being consideredby the Security
Council.

119.-‘In spite of numerous resolutions adopted over a
number of yearsby the Security Council, and in spite of the
opinion of the International Court of Justice to the effect
that South Africa is under the obligation to withdraw its
presencefrom Namibia,,South Africa persistsin its refusal
to withdraw. In addition to its illegal occupation of
Namibia, South Africa hasfurther immeasurablymultiplied
its wrongs and,,violations by inflicting the evils and the
degradationsof uparfheid upon the inhirbitants of the captive Territory.

125. More than a decadehaselapsedsincethe questionof
South West Africa, and then of Namibia, beganto appear
consistentlyon the agendaof the United Nations. It would
seemthat its very permanenceimparted to it a characterof
pointlessness
and lack of prospects.But very much indeed
has changedsincethe question of revoking the Mandate of
the Republic of South Africa-then the Uniori of South
Africa-over South West Africa was raised.

120: Too often in the past the Council had resolved to
meet immediately to considerwhat action to take if South
Africa did not comply with the decisionsofthe Council. The
provisionscontainedin the resolutionadoptedthis morning
serveto show only too clearly that the Council has in fact
failedso far to take any effective action to extricate Namibia
and to rescueits inhabitants from the shacklesof Pretoria.

126. The international balance of forces has changed:
there has been a gredt growth iri the role of socialistand
non-alignedcountriesin international relations.The implementation of the Declaratipn on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which was
adopted on the initiative of the Soviet Union, hasbecomea
major historic phaseof the strugglebeingconductedwithin

,.....

.

12

‘,

.._.

5
,

:

the framework
and racism.

of the United Nations against colonialism

not adopted,owing to the positionsof threeWesternpowers.This situation, of course,makesnecessary
further strugglewithin the United Nationsagainstthe RepublicofSouth
Africa and its criminal policy.

127* It should be pointed out also that in recent years the
Gel-led Assembly and the Security Council began to adopt
resolutions Which, had they been implemented, could have
contributed to the acceleration of the solution of the question of Namibia in the interest of the people of that Tcrritory.
SoUth

I-lOwever,
African

this
racists,

has

Constantly
who
have

been
enslaved

blocked
Namibia

by

133. The delegationof the ByelorussianSSR voted for
366 (19741,
in Spite of its inadequacy.
Obviously
the resolutionthat hasbeenadoptedmarksonly oneof the
intermediateStages in the complexstrugglewhich is being
waged‘for the freedom and independenceof Namibia,
Everybody knowsperfectly wellwho isblockingthespeedy,
just and democraticsolution of the problemof Namibia.
From the data provided in the documentsc&the United
Nations we seewho are really responsible
for the colonial
tragedy of the peopleof Namibia.This alsoemerges
from
today’s statementsby the representatives
of African countries and by the representativeof SWAPO. The policy of
supportto the racistregimein the Republicof SouthAfrica
practisedby a numberof Westerncountries,andin part&
lar by Israel, and the selfish interestsof transnational
monopoliesare what constitutea barrier to that solution.
Without the assistanceand support of certain circlesof
NATO, Pretoria would not havedecidedto defythe United
Nations,the peopleof Africa andworld pubticopinion.The
Republicof South Africa is a bastionof imperialismupon
the African continent. The economicinterestsof the imperiaiist Powersarecloselyinterwovenwith their military and
strategicgoals.This is what determinesthe position of a
number of Western Powerswhich arc hamperinga just
solution of the questionof Namibia and the granting of
independenceand freedomto that much-suffering
country.
resOhtiOn

the
and

created there unlimited possibilities for its domination by
the foreign monopolies of a number of Western countries
WhiCh
are lTXX’Ch!SS~y
exploiting
the indigenous
population
and1plundering Namibia’s natural resources.
-12% But the struggle of’ the people of Namibia indicates
hat the dny iS not far off when that colony, which has
sufi‘ercd more than most others, will achieve its freedom and
independence. Eloquent evidence of this is the statement of
the representative of SWAPO, which, as pointed out in a
recently adopted General Assembly resolution, is the genuine representative of the people of Namibia [resolution
3295 (xxrx)].

125). The Byelorussiandelegation,expressingits solidarity
with lhc patriots of SWAP0 and with the people of
Namibia, wishesthem further successin the fierce struggle
which thy
arc waging, and expressesits confidencethat
Ihcir
jusl
cause
will
triumph.
The struggleof the Namibian
pcoplc is intimately connectedwith the efforts and determination of the peopleof Africa to put a linal end to colonialism, racism and apartheidupon the African continent.

134. Finally, the delegation of the ByelorussianSSR
wishesto statethat in standingout boldly for thedefinitive
liquidation of all colonialand racistrCgimes,
it continuesto
supportthe unconditionalright of the peopleof Namibiato
self-determinationand independence
and to advocatethe
territorial integrity of that country and non-interference
in
its domesticaffairs.
We recognizethe lawfulnessof the
struggleof the Namibianpeopleagainstthe criminaloccupation of the Territory of Namibia,which runsCounterto
the decisionsof the United Nations. We are againstthe
plundering of its wealth by the racistsof the Republicof
South Africa and their allies,the transnationaimonopolies.

130. In this historic processofliberation from colonialism,
oneof the important landmarksisthe collapseof the Portuguesecolonial empire, In thesecircumstances,mattersConne’ctedwith the struggleagainstthe colonialism,racisti’and
apartheidof the rCgimeswhich exist in Southern Rhodesia
and in the Republic of South Africa are coming to the
forefront of the struggle againstcolonialism. The struggle
for freedom and independencein Namibia is acquiring a
specialsignilicance.
I?,1, The delegationof the ByelorussianSSRstrongly condemnsthe racist authorities of South Africa for their brazen
refusal to carry out the decisionsof various organsof the
United Nntions, including the Security Council, for their
continning unlawful occupation of Namibia, for the establishmcnt of the criminal systemof upa~tlzeid there and for
tt,eir ;lttCnlptS
to convert Namibia into a hugereservation,a
sort of cemetery for the living, It condemnsthe terrorism
and the rcprcssioninllicted on Namibia’sindigenousinhabitants. Wc arc against the attempts of the South African
racists to &troy the unity and territorial integrity of
I\lanlibja by proclaiming so-calledself-governingregions
antl pItlying
out a comedy of electionsin that Tcrrltory.

135, The delegationof the ByelorussianSSRC0ntint.m
to
favour the adoption of the mostresoluteandeffectivemeasnrcsin this direction. We are for the freedomandindependcnce of Namibia. At the same time, our delegation
COnSi&rS
that
the elimination
of a hotbed of racismand
colonialismin southernAfrica will lessenthe threat of war
and strengthen peace
and security upon the African
continent.
136. In concludingmy statement,may I addressmyselfto
you, Mr. President,and to the representatives
of the other
countries,non-permanentmembersof the SecurityCouncil,
whoseterm of officc iscomingto an endthis year. As other
membersof the Sccnrity Council havedone.1shouldlike to
expressnlV 5vL,rnlcstfeelingsto the representatives
of Austria, Austr&ja, Indonesia,Kenya and Peru,countrieswhich
have
taken
an active
part
for two yearsin the work of the
Security Council in carrying out that complex.rcsponsiblc

132. Tile Bye[oruSsian
SSR does not maintain any relations :,t n11with the racist rkgimeof the Repllblic of South
Africa, ()ur consistentposition of principle againstthe Poticy (,f racisnl, colonialism and crpurtheidpursued by the
Republic
of South Aliica was reflected in our vote in the
s,pcurity Council for tile exclusionof the Republicof South
Africa from the United Nations. However, that decisionwas
3

and lofty mission entrusted to the Council under the Charter
of the United Nations.

and also by the South African Government itself. We welcome these developments. Our vote is designed to promote
similar change in Namibia. This is in our view a realistic
resolution.

137. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): There seems to
be growing up an unwritten rule ofprocedure in the Organization, namely, that the Soviet Union is entitled to attack the
good faith, the motives, the intentions, the honesty of any
other nation, but it is somehow out of order or contrary to
the accepted and established practice or, indeed, just bad
form for anyone to reply.

142. Of course we cannot expect changes overnight, noI
can changes be delayed indefinitely. Already there are signs
that the South African Government is taking a fresh look at
its policy in Namibia. I do not think that I riced quote the
statements made recently by the South African Prime Minister: they will be familiar to all the members of the Council.
But there are also some encouraging signs that the leaders of
the white community of Namibia are beginning to rccognize
the need for early ‘action. As the Deputy Leader of the
National Party of South West Africa, Mr. Mudge, said
recently in an interview:

138. Mr. President, you will perhaps not be surprised to
learn I find this general proposition somewhat unacceptable. We were indeed having a very helpful and a useful
debate designed to assist the situation, save once again for
the contribution made by the representative of the Soviet
Union. It is perfectly but regrettably clear that the Soviet
Union is more concerned with advocating its now somewhat
eccentric brand of propaganda than it is with genuinely
helping to find a solution to the very real problems of
Namibia and South Africa.

“We would have preferred more time, but we dcm’t
have it. We South Westers will have to move a great deal
faster than many of us would like.”
And later in the same interview he said:

139. The Soviet contributions-since
they were twowere irrelevant to our proceedings. They were negative in
content and they were ideological in tone. They were well
below the level which the occasion and the issue demands,
especially from a country as great and as powerful as the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. It was, indeed, almost
irresponsible to have made such a speech at such a time
when at last there is some real sign of a change of heart in
southern Africa. I much regret that it was thought necessary
to do so and I suspect the Soviet Union may in due course
come to regret it too.

“Clearly we will have to start talking to South Africa
about withdrawal at some stage.”
143. We therefore hope for early change. The exact direction of that change may not yet be clear, but already there is
a sense of movement, and we welcome this. Our task, and
the task of the Security Council, is, we believe, to try to
encourage these developments and also to make clear to the
South African Government the need to keep the United
Nations fully informed of its future intentions. The United
Nations has a natural and a proper interest in the future of
this Territory, with its unique form of international status.
My Government, for its part, will continue to keep in touch
with the South African Government. We shall do everything
we can to promote that peaceful change in Namibia.

140. The resolution we have just adopted unanimously is
important, in our view, on two counts. It is important
because it marks, I understand, a welcome return to the way
in which the Council has traditionally tried to conduct its
business. There were full consultations before the draft resolution was submitted in an effort to accommodate the various points of view of different members of the Council. As a
result, we have been able to adopt a resolution which has the
full, if not the unqualified, backing of all of us. I believe that
the Council’s authority has been strengthened by the way in
which this resolution has been adopted. I believe, too, that
the resolution itself will be heeded all the more by those at
whom it is directed. I am grateful to the sponsors of this
resolution, the representatives of Kenya, Mauritania and the
United Republic of Cameroon for taking other delegations’
views into account before they proceeded to submit it, A
great deal of the credit goes also to our distinguished and
experienced President-but
I shall have more to say about
him in a moment.

144. As members of the Council will be aware, my
Government recently reviewed its own policy towards
Namibia, The details are set out in the letter from the
representative of the United Kingdom to the SecretaryGeneral of 4 December 1974: and I need only therefore
summarize some of the main points. My Government concluded that the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia
could no longer be regarded as being in force, since South
Africa had itself repudiated that Mandate and the obligations which it had accepted under and by virtue of that
relationship. It follows therefore, in our view, that South
Africa’s occupation of Namibia is unlawful and that it
should withdraw from the Territory. My Foreign Secretary
said in the House of Commons:
“The Government looks to South Africa to heecl the
United Nations calls on it to withdraw from this international Territory, and we shall lend our support in the
international community to help bring this about.”

141, The second reason why this resolution is so important
is that it comes at a time when immense changes are taking
place in southern Africa. The news from Rhodesia must
encourage all of us who hope for an early and a peacefully
negotiated settlement in that country, based on the wishes of
the majority of its population. It is far too early to predict
the outcome-and I entirely agree with what the representative of Indonesia said in this respect-but it is only right that
the Council should take note of the statesmanlike role
played by the African Governments principally concerned,

That is what we believe we are doing here today.
145. There are, however, certain features of the resolution
on which my Government has reservations which it is only
right that I should make clear. These relate primarily to the
~ -6 A/9918.
14

advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice. We
cannot ngrec with the view expressed in that opinion that the
General Assembly had the executive competence to terminate the Mandate. We cannot therefore accept that it wasso
terminated by Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI). This reservation has of course to be viewed together with our opinion
on the illegality of South Africa’s continued occupation of
Namibia, to which I have already referred. Nor can we agree
that resolutions of the Security Council are mandatorv in
the absence of any prior finding under Article 39 of-the
Charter that there existed a threat to or breach of the peace
or an act of aggression. Consequently, we cannot share the
view that Security Council resolution 276 (1970) imposed
obligations upon States Members of the Organization.

and your wise guidance in the ways ofthese United Nations.
Your departure, Mr. President, will diminish this place. You
have played an influential role in so many different areas of
United Nations activity. In times when some voices are
perhaps immoderate or intolerant, you have always been a
persuasive example of the virtues of moderation, tolerance
and compromise in the conduct of international affairs. Mr.
President, you will be missed greatly.
150. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): When the Security
Council met last year in December to consider the question
of Namibia, it unanimously terminated the contacts
entrusted by it to the Secretary-General in close cooperation with a group of three Council members.I as ore1
vided for in resol&on309 (1972). Speaking in the debate at
that time [175&h meetitzg], my delegation stressed the hope
that further developments would enable the Council in the
foreseeable future to deal with the question again on a more
positive note.

146. As the Council will appreciate, these reservations
touch on matters which go far beyond the particular issue
bel’orc us today. They relate to our view of the way in which
the Charter is to be interpreted, and the relationship
between the various organs of the United Nations. This
being SO, it is only right that while voting for this resolution
and Supporting it whole-heartedly in relation to Namibia, l
should make it clear that in so doing we do not accept any
possible implication which might arise relating to the interpretation of the Charter or the jurisdiction of the General
Assembly. But I think I have said enough to make it clear
that we associate ourselves with the aims of this world body
in relation to Namibia, even if there are inevitably differencu of emphasis between us and SOIIIC other Members, When
the Council last discussed South Africa, I said [180&h
MlCTYi~(fjJ

151. Positive developments have taken place during the
course of this year in the Portuguese colonies surrounding
the Republic of South Africa. The new Government of
Portugal has recognized the right of the peoples of its colonial Territories to self-determination and independence, By
the end of July of next year two former colonies of Portugal,
Mozambique, on the one hand, and Sao Tome and Principe,
on the other, will have become independent States side by
side with the independent RepubiicofGuinea-Bissau, which
has already joined the United Nations. By then we hope
provisional Governments will have been established in
Angola and in Cape Verde with a view to the attainment by
those Territories during 1975 of the goals set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations and in theDeclaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The winds of change, to which reference has so often
been made, have thus begun to blow in southern Africa.

“I hope [South Africa] will recognize the weight of international opinion that is opposed to its policies, I hope it
will hcccl the voices we have all heard in this chamber, I
trust it will act accordingly.”
147. That remains our hope and our belief, We want the
people of Namibia to bc given the chance to determine their
o’wn l’uturc freely and at the carlicst reasonable date. We
mw
look to the South African Government to make the
necessary arrangements, in consultation with the United
Nations, and in doing so to remedy a situation that has
lasted far too long and which has perpetuated a conflict
bctwcon South Af’rica and the Organization almost from the
day it was founded nearly 30 years ago-indeed before, if
nay msmory serves me right, NATO came into existence.

152. NO corresponding trend, however, has become manifest in Namibia. Quite to the contrary, we are bound to state
that the conditions prevailing in this Territory have deteriorated. During the general debate on Namibia in the Fourth
Committee this year, 82 speakers, Austria among them,
elaborated on this subject. The General Assembly, consequently, adopted resolution 3295 (XXIX), urging the Security Council “to take without delay effective measures, in
accordance with the relevant Chapters of the Charter of the
United Nations and with the resolutions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly, to put an end to
South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia”.

148. Finally, may I refer to the contribution made to the
work of the Security Council by the representatives of Austria, Peru, Indonesia and Kenya. All of them have made
major and significant contributions to the work of the
Council, certainly in the short time since 1 have been on it.
011 behalf of my country and my delegation, as well as on
my own behalf, may 1 say that it has been a great personal as
well as a public pleasure to have been associated with them
in the work of the Council.

153. By adopting unanimously today what will be known
as resolution 366 (1974), the Security Council calls upon
South Africa to make a solemn declaration that it will
comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations and the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice of 21 June 1971 in regard to Namibia and that,
furthermore, it recognizes the territorial integrity and unity
of Namibia as a nation.

149. As for you, Mr. President, my delegation’s appreciation of your skill is somewhat tempered by the realization
that this is the last period during which you will occupy the
s#eatof President of the Security Council. YOU will shortly be
r#eturning to Canberra and retiring from diplomatic life. All
of us-and in particular a relative newcomer like myselfhave benefited from your long experience, your friendship

154. I would like to congratulate the sponsors of this
resolution, my African colleagues on the Council,
Who SUCceeded through intense consultations in working out a text
acceptable to the whole of the Council. This is indeed a
15

memorable achievement. Austria fully subscribes to this
resolution and we express the hope that the Government of
South Africa will see tit this time to react positively to this
unanimous appeal of the Security Council. It seems difficult
indeed for any country in the world not to heed such a strong
and authoritative appeal.

to

influence

the

course

of

events

in

order

to

slop

military

conflagration. It acted without
delay on acease-fire proposal, and the decisiveness and care the Council invested in the
composition and dispatch of the Ilnited Nations Emergency
Force to Egypt have hccn rightly acclaimed. The Council
later sought to contribute to the proper functioning of the
Geneva Conference in the United Nations context. Several
months later the United Nations Disengagement Observa*ion Force was stationed on the Golan Heights.

155. AS many speakers have pointed out before me, we are
at present witnessing important developments in southern
Africa and we are confident that these efforts to bring about
peaceful change by peaceful means through negotiations
will succeed. Quite independently of the outcome of these
initiatives, we have to pay a high tribute already at this stage
to those African statesmen, in particular President Kaunda
of Zambia, President Nyerere of the United Republic of
Tanzania and President Seretse Khama of Botswana, and
other leaders, for the humanist spirit in which they have
entered these endeavours.

160. The events in Cyprus which developed as a result of
the coup in July 1974 thrust upon the Council the urgent
task of dealing responsibly with the fate of a small country
exposed both to a most difficult domestic situation and to
military intervention from outside. It is to the credit of all
parties concerned that the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus could be extended only
recently, thus continuing to provide an element of security
ancl peace to the population of the island.

156. It is of paramount importance that the United
Nations keep the evolution of events under close and critical
scrutiny, because for the first time representative leaders of
black and white Africa have found sufficient common
ground for a serious exchange of views. A new element of
fluidity seems to have been introduced into what has
.hitherto been a completely inflexible set of relationships.
This is particularly encouraging in the context of Southern
Rhodesia where, for the first time in many years, free political life has begun to flourish, thus opening up prospects of a
real dialogue between the majority and the m’inority.

161. During all this time, as indeed today, the Security
Council has addressed itself repeatedly to various serious
aspects of the situation in southern Africa, which remains
one of the most complicated issues on the agenda, but where
some hope for progress now seems co bc justified.
162. My delegation has attempted to contribute to the
debates and decisions of the Council in all these fields to the
best of its knowledge .and ability. We have done so in the
same spirit I sought to define in my first statement before
the Council in January 1973 [168&h meeting]. For it was
logical that we would endeavour to bring the specific contribution of Austria, a European country, to the work of the
Council. In the process it was equally our intention to
demonstrate in a new context in what way the concept of
permanent neutrality and the independent foreign policy
which flows from it can be put to the service of those specific
aims and objectives which belong to the Security Council.

157. Let me conclude, therefore, by expressing the hope
that the people of Namibia will soon be in a position to
realize their right to self-determination and independence in
accordance with the principles laid down in our Charter. ‘A
heavy responsibility has been placed on the Government of
the Republic of South Africa, and we can only hope that its
response will be rapid, positive and constructive.
15X. This may well be the last meeting of the Council in
which my delegation wili participate before Austria’s term
of office on the Council ends on 31 December of this year. I
would therefore, Mr. President, ask for your indulgence in
allowing me briefly to cross the borderlines of today’s
agenda and make a few observations of a more general
character.

163. We have come to the Council in the firm belief that
the independent foreign policy of a country dedicated to the
concept of permanent neutrality can be ofsuch service. This,
as we said earlier, stems from the very origin of neutrality
which, in its true sense, is not a concept of inaction, of
passivity, or of indifference, but a concept in active search of
peace. If during our years of membership in the Council we
were able to support a great number of initiatives, it was in
the firm beliefthat we could thus bring permanent neutrality
tn the pcrmancnt service of peace. WC have endeavoured to
formulate our policy in a positive, active and forwardlooking way without departing from the basic principles
which have characterized the foreign policy of an independent and sovereign Austria for the past 20 years, It may still
be too early to assess properly and fully the interaction and
interrelation between the peace policies of the [Jnitcd
Nations and the .peaceful functions of permanent neulrality
such as those carried out by Austria and a nun~ber
of other
European countries. WC feel, however, that in a modest way
new proof has been furnished not only of the compatibility
of these policies but also of their complementary nature.

159. The years 1973 and I974 have been two most signiticant and indeed spirited years in the history of this body.
Briefly recalling the most important items will demonstrate
the breadth of the work of the Council during these two
years, The situation in Zambia was the first question to
preoccupy the Council early in 1973 and I myself had the
privilege of taking part in a mission to that country together
with two most distinguished colleagues, Ambassador
Anwar Sani of Indonesia and Ambassador P&ez de Cutllar
of Peru, who are still on the Council, as well as Ambassador
Abdufla of Sudan, who has left the Council on a new
assignment. In March of 1973 the Council went to Panama
City for its first historic series of meetings in Latin America.
The summer months of .last year witnessed another determined effort to set in motion a process towards a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East. Yet war broke out in October
1973 and, in its wake, the Security Council spared no effort

164. The past two years have provided us not only with
this opportunity to demonstrate our concern as a Member
16

Stat12with important issues ofthe United Nations but also. to
see for the first time the inner functioning of the main organ
of the United Nations charged with the maintenance of
international peace and security. In this connexion,
members of t!le Council will recall that my Government was
among those which forwarded extensive comments on the
question of enhancing the effectiveness of the Security.
r Cbuntiil in accordance with the principles embodied in the
provisions of the Charter. On 17 January 1974 [1761st
meeting], I had occasion to refer to the desirability of reviewing and updating the provisional rules of procedure, and my
delegation subsequently circulated to members ofthe Council a series o’f informal suggestions in this regard. In view of
the many urgent matters of which the Council was seized,
there was only limited time available to study all the aspects
and implications of those proposals in a detailed manner. It
is gratifying to note, .however, that our proposals have
received careful attention and stimulated valuable commenIts. My delegation hopes that discussions on this qucstion will continue and will be concluded in an agreed and
satisfactory manner in due course.

great importal!ce to*Nam,i@a and the rest
. of southern Africa
have taken place, as we are all aware.
169. The April events in Portugal have irrevocably altered
the political map of southern Africa. Those events have set
in motion a continuing and dramatic movement towards
full decolonization in Portuguese Africa. More recently,
meetings held in Zambia involving the various political
forces on the Rhodesian scene have raised hopes that a
solution to the Rhodesian problem acceptable to a majority
of the people may soon be negotiated. These developments,
we believe, must necessarily impel South Africa to rei
examine its basic policies regarding Namibia in the light of
the new realities.
170. The position of my ‘Government on the’Namibian
question is clear and unequivocal. We have informed the
Government of South Africa of our views on this issue and
will continue to do so when appropriate. We believe that
there is an urgent need to resolve this long-standing and
contentious issue peacefully an&as soon as possible,,, .’
171. We are encouraged by recent indications that South
Africa may be reviewing its policies in Namibia. The South
African Government has announced that the people of
Namibia will be called upon to decide their own future; that
all options, including full independence, are open to them;
and that the pebple of the Territory may exercise’their right
to self-determination “considerably sooner” than the IOyear forecast made by theSouth African Foreign Minister in
1973. We believe that a peaceful and realistic solution
should be sought now, We understand that a meeting is
planned between representatives of various groups in the
Territory and the leaders of the white population to discuss
the constitutional development of the Territory. We believe
that no significant element of the Namibian people or of
Namibian political life should be excluded.

165. Thcsc, then, have been two most rewarding years for
myself and for my delegation-as they would be for any
country which had the honour of serving on the Security
Council for the first time. May I therefore take this opportunity of expressing my delegation’s profound appreciation of
the understanding and co-operation it has received from all
the members of the Council. On behalf of the members of
my delegation, as well as in my own name, I wish to thank
you,
Mr. President, and all clelegations for their cooperation and for the spirit of friendship in which this was
extended by the five permanent members as well as by the
non-permanent members. I hope that the spirit of’ t’riendship, mutual respect and understanding we have established
will not only remain in thjs chamber but will also last
between those who remain and those who leave it. Our
thanks are due in equal measure to tl?e Secretary-General,
the Under-Secretary-,General for Political and Security
Co,tmcil Affairs and their staff members,by whom ‘we have
bpen particularly well served.

172. However, much as we we1com.e the changes in recent
South African Government statements on Namibia; we
wish to state in a11candour our view that those Statements
lack the necessary precision and detail. It is this very precision, along with positive actions, which is required to lay to
rest the scepticism with tihitih South African pronouncements on Namibia have been received in many quarters.
What is called for is a specific, unequ/vocal statement of ”
South ‘Africa’s intention with regard to the Territbry. ‘WC
urge that Government to make known as soon as possible
its plans to permit the people of Namibia to exercise their
right to self-determination in the near future.

166. Finally, may I greet the incoming members: first of all
our fellow European csuntries, Italy and Swedkn, but also
the friendly countries of Guyana, Jepan and the United
Republic,of Tanzania, which will, accep! the heavy respo~isi:
bilities of Council membership on 1 January 1975. We wish
them the best of success in their new functions.
167. My concluding words go to you, Mr. President, as did
my first statement this month. This,has been a most gratifying association and I wish to thank you once again on behalf
of my delegation for all you have done not only during your
two terms of Presidency but also on the many occasions on
wl:~ich WChave been privileged to work with you, and to pay
the highest tribute to your quiet and patient statesmanship.

173. We favour the development of renewed contacts
between the Secretary-General and the South African
Government to assist South Africa in arranging-for the.
exercise of self-determination,
The constructive involvement of the Unitecl Nations and the Secretary-General can
be of significant importance in ensuring an orderly transii
tion of power in the Territory, which is to everyone’s benefit.
We’also believe thatSouth Africa shouldabolish discriminai
tory laws and practices and encourage freer political expiession within the whole Torritory.

165. I&. SCALI (United Siates of Amkrica): United
Nations concern over the South African administration of
Namibia spans the life of the Organization. For the seventh
Consecutive year the Security Council is considering this
same question. Since the Council met last December to
discuss the future of Namibia, political developments of

174. While awaiting further South African clarification of
its Namibian policy, the United States will continue to
17

. ; -:

Namibia since the General Assembly terminated its mandate in 1966. My delegation has persistently stated that
Soirth Africa must leave the United Nations Trust Territory
of Namibia.

adhere to its present policy.with regard to the Territory. AS
we have done since 1970, we shall continue to discourage
United States investment in Namibia and deny ExportImport Bank guarantees and other facilities for trade with
Namibia. We will continue to withhold United States
Government protection of United States irivestments made
on the basis of rights acquired through the South African
Government after 1966, against the claims ofa future lawful
Government of Namibia. This policy reflects our belief that
South Africa should act quickly and positively to end its
illegal occupation of Namibia.

181. We have all condemned South Africa’s refusal to
comply with the united Nations decisions on Namibia, My
delegatioli views with great concern the continued defiance
by South Africa of the United Nations. Indeed, it is theview
of my delegation that the non-compliance of South Africa
with the decisions of the United Nations concerning
Namibia is an act of hostility by South Africa against the
United Nations which calls for stern measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.

175. In addiiion, we are pleased that we were able to join
together in advance consultations with members of the
Group of African States to adopt this important new
resolution.

182. Lately we have been hearing concern expressed about
the authority and dignity of the United Nations. There have
been suggestions that the dignity and authority of the
Organization are being eroded. My delegation considers
that that dignity is being eroded by such acts as the defiance
by South Africa of the decisions of the United Nations on
Namibia. What then should the Security Council do in the
light of this persistent defiance of South Africa?

176. Mr. President, in the expectation that this will be our
last meeting this year 1 want to reiterate the high respect and
admiration with which you are regarded by my delegation.
Your work in the Council, especially during two separate
and arduous Presidencies, has been in the highest tradition
of the Council. If additional evidence were needed, you have
proved that Australia in its devotion to the maintenance of
international peace al!d security admirably meets the most
important criterion for the election of non-permanent
members of the Council.

183. When the General Assembly adopted resolution 2145
(XXI) terminating the Mandate of South Africa over
Namibia, it also placed that country under the direct responsibility of the United Nations. The responsibility for administering the Territory until it became independent was
entrusted to the United Nations Cotincil for Namibia, which
was established in 1967. The United Nations, through that
Council, has attempted on various occasions to enter into
arrangements with South Africa for the purpose of the
orderly transfer ofauthority from South Africa to the Council for Namibia. Despite the abhorrence by the Africans of
the so-called dialogue with South Africa, the African
members of the Council were prepared to authorize the
Secretary-General, assisted by three members of the Council, through its resolution 309 (1972), to enter into discussions with South Africa regarding this orderly transfer.

177. To our other colleagues who will leave the Council at
the end of the month-Austria,
Indonesia, Kenya and
Peru-I would like to express my deep gratitude for their
hard work, their co-operation, dedication and courtesy and
belief in the common ideals which have marked our work
together. Even on those rare occasions when we were not in
full agreement, we have always shared the common aim of
doing our utmost to help to maintain international peace
and security.
178. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President? as I am speaking for the first time since you assumed the Presidency of the
Council, allow me tojoin the others who have paid tribute to
you. As a newcomer I had heard of your reputation for skill
and dedication to the work of the Council, and these qualities have once again been demonstrated since you assumed
the Presidency this month. We are grateful to you for all
your efforts. Mj, tribute goes also to your predecessor,
Ambassador Scali, who presided over our affairs very ably
last month.

184. We know that South Africa acted in bad faith, contrary to the opinion of those who counselled moderation
and patience, The Council and the General Assembly terminated the fruitless discussions last year. It is important to
note that when the talks were halted there was no sign of
conciliation on the part of South Africa; indeed, South
Africa assumed an arrogant posture. Its Prime Minister is
alleged to have boasted, when campaigning for elections
early this year, that South Africa would never surrender
Namibia to the United Nations. Indeed, it was not until the
now notorious debate on the relationship between South
Africa and the United Nations that South Africa onceagain
returned to its deceitful path of appearing to be changing or
becoming enlightened.

179. The Council is once again caIled upon to consider the
question of Namibia. The resolution referring the case to the
Council this time is very clear. It states:
“Urges the Security Council to convene urgently in
order to take without delay effective measures, in accordance with the relevant Chapters of the Charter of the
United Nations and with resolutions of the Security
Council and of the General Assembly
regarding
Namibia, to put an end to South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia”
[General Assembly resolution 3295
(XXK!g] .

185. I am referring to the statement of the representative
of South Africa in the Council [180&h meering] when he said
that South Africa should be given time to change. 1 am also
referring to the so-called “voice of reason’lattributed to Mr.
Vorster, when he pleaded for a six-month period of grace to
make changes, particularly in Namibia. My delegation has
not been taken in by these utterances,and we believe that the
Council and the international community must take suita-

180. We are all agreed, as is indicated by the unanimous
vote on the resolution adopted this morning, that South
Africa has been in unlawful occupation of the Territory of
18

ble action to compel South Africa to relinquish its stranglehold on Namibia.

compel South Africa to abandon its abhorrent illegal OCCUpation and practices of uparfheid in Namibia.

186. Jt is the view of my delegation that if all Member
States implemented the resolutions ofthe General Assembly
and the Security Council regarding Namibia, and in particular Security Council resolution 283 (1970), South Africa
would not be able to continue its deliance of the United
Nations. My delegation condemns South Africa for its refusal to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations,
We do hope that the wind of change that is blowing in
southern Africa has given a clear indication to South Africa
and its supporters that the writing is on the wall and that the
sooner they get the message the better for all.

190. Three months have elapsed since Mr, Vorster asked
to be given six months in which to bring about changes. The
Council cannot be accused of pushing Mr. Vorster and his
so-called white nation, since the time fixed for the review of
this matter is well beyond the six-month period requested by
Mr. Vorster in October, We urge the United Nations to take
appropriate action under Chapter VII of the Charter in
1975, if no acceptable changes have taken place by that time.
191. As it is our prayer that we do not suffer any misfortune compelling you, Mr. President, to convene another
meeting of the Council, we regard this as our last meeting
this year. Kenya’s term in the Council also comes to an end
on 3 1 December 1974. We therefore wish to take this opportunity to wish everyone a Merry Christmas and a Happy
New Year. We thank all those who have made Kenya’s
contribution to the Council possible. In our list we include
all members of the Council, all Members of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General and his staff, particularly the wonderful people who sit at the inner table and
produce our records, as well as the interpreters. .We constantly think of them when meetings drag on unavoidably
for many long hours.

187. The Council and the international community cannot wait any longer. It should be remembered that Namibia
was not the only Mandated Territory after the First World
War. We cannot believe that the people of Namibia are
different from the peoples of the former Tanganyika or
Cameroon, for example, who were under the same German
oppression before the First World War, but who are now
sitting with us as sovereign Members of the United Nations.
‘There were many other Mandated Territories, both in
Africa and in Asia, that have become independent and we
must ask: why not Namibia, too? This appears to have been
a case of the United Nations entrusting the sheep to the
wolves. It is a shame. It is a comfort, however, to remember
that the will of a people cannot be destroyed for ever.
However oppressive South Africa becomes, we are confident that the peoples of Namibia will rise, like those of
Guinea-Bissau, and others elsewhere, to crush the forces of
injustice.

192. Finally, 1 should like to say that Kenya has gone
through a very momentous period in the Council and has
made, 1 believe, its modest contribution. We havegreat faith
in the United Nations and in thesecurity Council and we do
not share the gloom of others. We urge all members of the
Council, particularly the permanent members, to have
greater faith in the Council and in the United Nations., It
should be the commitment of all to strengthen the Organization rather than to look for its faults, or for alternatives to it.
We have so much faith in the United Nations that we are
inclined to regard the tendency to do the latter not as a
malignant ailment but as a temporary fever that will pass
away. We can see no alternative to the United Nations but
chaos and disaster for mankind. We hope that others will see
it the way we do.

188. Speaking now as an African member of the Council, I
wish to comment generally on our understanding of the
resolution that has been adopted by the Council. The resolution was arrived at after lengthy negotiations with the other
interested parties. My delegation deems it a very mild resolution. It does not truthfully reflect the gravity of the issues in
Namibia, but we as Africans are prepared at all times to give
other people a chance to demonstrate their good faith. It
will be recalled that previously we have been accused of
presenting resolutions that embarrassed other members 01
the Council. We have also been accused sometimes of introducing resolutions calling for immediate and on the spot
solutions of complex issues. We do not of course share the
sentiments of our accusers, maybe because we are the wearers of the shoes of imperialism and colonialism and they
have been the manufacturers, and, as the saying goes, it is
the wearer who knows where the shoe pinches.

193. The PRESIDENT:
Speaking now as the representative of AUSTRALIA,
I should like to express, in a very few
words, my delegation’s satisfaction that the Council has
found itself able to adopt this resolution unanimously, That
surely reflects a welcome spirit of moderation and realism
on all sides, both within the Council and outside it, which 1
like to think takes account of the new sounds that seem to be
emanating these days from southern Africa. At the same
time, this is coupled with a firm determination to maintain
pressure on the South African Government to acknowledge
the will of the United Nations as a whole, and to act
accordingly.

189. The Namibian people are entitled to self-determination and independence. The South African Government has
no right to be in Namibia, and we ask its friends to counsel
South Africa to cotnply with the provisions of this resolution. We also urge those countries that continue to exploit
the natural resources of Namibia for the benefit of South
Africa to stop such exploitation and to channel their efforts
towards aiding the Namibian people to achieve their independence. We are confident that those countries, given the
political will, could use their economic interests, in both
Namibia and South Africa, in an appropriate way so as to

194. My own Government has made quite clear on numerous occasions its view that South Africa has no lawful right
to occupy and administer Namibia and that it has failed to
discharge the Mandate given to it 54 years ago. We are
entitled now to expect clear evidence of intention on the part
of the South African Government to co-operate with the
United Nations, without equivocations and reservations,
and we look to it to facilitate and not obstruct the future
19

independence of the whole of the Territory. Although we do
not expect to make any further direct contribution through
the Security Council, Australia will expect to play its full
part in promoting Namibia’s movement towards indepcndence, especially if, as we hope, we are elected to serve on
the Council for Namibia.

political reasonswhy the United Kingdom is very closely
involved in the existingcompkx
of racismand colonialism
in the southernpart of Africa.
201. Finally, if today’s statementby the representative01
the United Kingdom may be understoodto meanthat he
would wisheachstatementby theSoviet delegationcontaining a referenceto NATO to make specific mention of the
United Kingdom as well, then WCcan certainly do that. We
are merely waiting for confirmation that that is indeed the
wish of the llnited Kingdom representative.

195. In my capacity of PRESIDENT, I shall now call
upon those representatives who wish to exercise their right
of reply.
196. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trunslfltion from Russian): A few words in connection
with the statementby the representativeof the United Kingdom, Ambassador Richard, It isindeeda strangesituation.
Whenever the soviet delegationtalks about the invidious
manoeuvres of’ NATO, the representativeof the United
Kingdom starts, raiseshis hand, and says“It is I who am
bad, it was the United Kingdom to which the Soviet rcpresentative was referring”. It isofcoursehisright to take upon
himself’,and upon his country, all the responsibilityfor all
the invidious manoeuvresof NATO. Rut I personallythink
this is also a matter of a bad conscience
on the part of the
United Kingdom representative,

203. The point 1 madeearlier on-ancl 1had hoped it was
not too complex-was that in a debatein which the Security
Council isagreed,whenaction istaking placeover Namibia,
at a time when there is a real chanceof changein southern
Africa, this kind of ideologicalskirmishingby the Govcrnment of the Soviet Union is irrclcvnnt, unfortunate and, in
our view, inappropriate,

197. He talked here about demagoguery.1 take that to
mean that he WOLIICI like to hearrathermorespecificfigures
and to have more specificinformationasto how the United
Kingdom is assistingthe racistsof the Republic of South
Africa. Well, I shall be very happy to give him that
satisfaction.

204. Mr. OVINNIKOV (U manof Soviet SocialistRepublics) (frmzslatianfrom Russian):I note that the intervention
just madeby the representativeof’ the United Kingdom did
not contain a requestto the effect that every time the Soviet
delegation refers to NATO, it should include a specific
referenceto tht: United Kingdom.

198. According to statisticsrecentlypublishedby the Harvard BusinessSchool, 16 per cent of all the affiliates of
British transnational monopoliesare in the Republic of
South Africa, Namibia and SouthernRhodesia.In South
Africa alone, British investmentshave long exceeded$3
billion. The averageannual incomeearnedon thoseBritish
investments runs from 25 to 30 per cent. In individual
instances,as Professor Ripley, a well-known student of
foreign investment, has indicated, the income earned by
British investmentsin SouthAfrica anddirectly in Namibia,
wherethe de BeersCompanyoperates,is runningat 200per
cent annually. That, then, is the economicfoundation that
constrains the United Kingdom to maintain its relations
with the racistsof the Republicof South Africa.

205. The PRESIDENT: My fellow membersof the Council whoseterm on the Council will, like mine, expire at the
endof this month have pronouncedtheir valedictionsto the
Council and have spoken with appreciation of the cooperationthey have enjoyedover the pasttwo yearswith all
their colleagues,permanentas well asnon-permanent,and
with the Secretary-Generaland his staff. I cannot forbear
mentioningthe enormousassistance
Mr. Kurt Herndl has
given me on the occasionswhenI have beenunderpressure
as President.They have spokenalso
of the privilege and
honour of having servedthe causeof the United Nations on
the Council during this period.

202. Mr. RlCI-IARD (United Kingdom): The representative of the Soviet Union provesmy point. None of the figures
hc hasgiven and noneof the factshehasdisclosedarenew in
any way, shapeor form.

206. As representativeof Australia, I should like to join
them in expressingthe hope that their presumptionis not
premature.As PresidentI am still very consciousthat two
weeksremain before the end of December.As PresidentI
shall hold myself ready and availableand I hope my colleagueson the Council will alsobe ready and available for
action if the Council should find itself faced with, shall we
say, a breachof or threat to the peace.

199. As far as the military basisis concerned,it is well
known that the shooting upon the African population at
Shnrpvillc in 1960 was carried out using, among other
things, British armoured cars. It is also well known that
there is a British military baseat Simonstownwhich is apparently now being abandoned,not so muchbecausethere
is IJO longer a desireto maintainit but becauseresources 207. If I may, however, be allowedto presumethat this is
are lacking.
indeedour last meetingof the year, 1would saythat I believe
that the Security Council hasduring the pasttwo yearsdone
200. In political terms,the LJnitedKingdom hasrecently
much to vindicate itself in the eyesof its critics-and, aswe
shown its support for the racistsof the Republic of South
know, we do have critics--throughout a crucial period durAfrica by using the veto in the SecurityCouncil againstan
ing which it hasbeencalleclupon to addressitselfto a variety
entirely justified draft resolution [S/11.543 of 24 Octobe,
of difficult and critical questions.If my delegationhasbeen
19741proposed by African countriescalling for the expulable to make a contribution to theseactivities and these
sion of the Republic of South Africa from the United
decisionsover the past two years, that in itself givesus a
Nations. Those, then, briefly, arethe economic,military and
senseof satisfactionand of modestachievement.
20

208. In any event, my delegation and I look back on a
period of fruitful co-operation with all our collcagues on the
Council. We have enjoyed and benefited from a closer
relationship with the permanent members of the Council
and with their particular problems than is normally given to
the rest of the membership of the United Nations. We have
also profited greatly from the opportunity of working
closely from time to time with our non-permanent-member
colleagues in finding solutions to difl~cult questions. We
have particularly valued that association for the mutual
respect, understanding and tolerance-not
to mention
friendship-it
has engendered.

209. In short, we shall look back-and probably even look
back with nostalgia, as my Indonesian collcaguc has
suggested-on
our membership of the Council over these
past two years as a memorable and exhilarating, even if
sometimes demanding, cxperiencc. I should like to regard
this as a kind of heritage that we retiring members can hand
on to our successors, in whom we have full confidence and
for whom we wish continued success, along with the rest of
the Council, in fulfilling the functions laid down in the
Charter for this vital organ of the United Nations.
The meeting rose a? (5.50 p.m.

21
