United Nations

A/RES/60/212

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 57 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/493/Add.2)]

60/212. South-South cooperation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/220 of 23 December 2003,
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
Recalling further its resolution 59/250 of 22 December 2004, which, inter alia,
called on organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to mainstream, in
their programmes and through their country-level activities and country offices,
modalities to support South-South cooperation,
Welcomes the report of the High-level Committee on South-South
1.
Cooperation at its fourteenth session 2 and the decisions taken at that session; 3
2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of SouthSouth cooperation; 4
3.
Stresses that South-South cooperation, as an important element of
international cooperation for development, offers viable opportunities for
developing countries in their individual and collective pursuit of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development;
Recognizes that developing countries have the primary responsibility for
4.
promoting and implementing South-South cooperation, not as a substitute for but
rather as a complement to North-South cooperation, and in this context reiterates the
need for the international community to support the efforts of the developing
countries to expand South-South cooperation;
Encourages the international community, including the international
5.
financial institutions, to support the efforts of developing countries, inter alia,
through triangular cooperation;

_______________
1

See resolution 60/1.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/60/39).
3
Ibid., chap. I.
4
A/60/257.
2

05-50032

A/RES/60/212

6.
Recognizes that regional integration initiatives between developing
countries constitute an important and valuable form of South-South cooperation and
that regional integration is a step towards beneficial integration into the world
economy;
Welcomes the initiatives and partnerships being undertaken at the
7.
subregional, regional, interregional and global levels towards establishing publicprivate partnership mechanisms aiming to enhance and expand South-South
cooperation in trade and investment;
Takes note with appreciation of the launching of the third round of
8.
negotiations on the Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing
Countries as an important instrument to stimulate South-South cooperation;
Recognizes the considerable contribution of South-South cooperation
9.
arrangements, which promote development activities in developing countries;
10. Also recognizes the importance of initiatives and arrangements, including
public-private mechanisms, in the undertaking of efforts to enhance cooperation
between developing countries, including, inter alia, in the areas of information and
communication technologies, science and technology, culture, health and education;
11. Welcomes the contributions made by developing countries in the context
of South-South cooperation to countries and peoples stricken by natural disasters,
including through the Voluntary Trust Fund for the Promotion of South-South
Cooperation within the framework for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
countries affected by the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster and through the South Fund
for Development and Humanitarian Assistance;
12. Urges all relevant United Nations organizations and multilateral
institutions to intensify their efforts to effectively mainstream the use of SouthSouth cooperation in the design, formulation and implementation of their regular
programmes and to consider increasing allocations of human, technical and
financial resources for supporting South-South cooperation initiatives, and in this
regard takes note of the initiatives contained in the Havana Programme of Action
adopted by the first South Summit, 5 the Marrakesh Framework for the Implementation
of South-South Cooperation and the Doha Plan of Action; 6
13. Recognizes the need to mobilize additional resources for enhancing
South-South cooperation, reiterates in this context its decision, in its resolution
57/263 of 20 December 2002, to include the Voluntary Trust Fund for the Promotion
of South-South Cooperation in the United Nations Pledging Conference for
Development Activities, as long as it exists, recalls the decision to include the
Pérez-Guerrero Trust Fund for Economic and Technical Cooperation among
Developing Countries in the same Pledging Conference, and invites all countries, in
particular developed countries, to support South-South and triangular cooperation
through, inter alia, these funds, bearing in mind the need for these funds to continue
to use such resources in an effective manner;
14. Invites the United Nations Development Programme to rename the
Voluntary Trust Fund for the Promotion of South-South Cooperation, which was
established in accordance with General Assembly resolution 50/119 of 20 December

_______________
5
6

2

A/55/74, annex II.
A/60/111, annex II.

A/RES/60/212

1995, as the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation, while maintaining
its mandate and voluntary nature, and to designate it as the main United Nations
trust fund for promoting and supporting South-South and triangular initiatives;
15. Invites the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation and the
United Nations Development Programme Executive Board, as appropriate, to
consider measures to strengthen further the Special Unit for South-South
Cooperation within the United Nations Development Programme as a separate entity
and a focal point for South-South cooperation in the United Nations system, so as to
enable it to carry out its full responsibilities, in particular through the mobilization
of resources for the advancement of South-South cooperation, including through
triangular cooperation;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session a
sub-item entitled “South-South cooperation for development”, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit at that session a comprehensive report on the state of
South-South cooperation and on the implementation of the present resolution.
68th plenary meeting
22 December 2005

3
