OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TH/RTY-FIRST

YEAR

947’”

MEETING:

NEW

30 JULY

1976

YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . , ,

1

complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargi d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent
Mission of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12147) , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l947)

S/PV. 1947

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~lpplernerzrs of the Officirrl Recorvls offhe Security Couwil.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions crnd
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1947th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI

(Italy).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l947)

30 July 1976, at 10.30 a.m..
of the delegation of thctt Council tool; plrrces at the
Security Comcil
table, nmi Mr. Bothn (South Afiira),
MI.. Mogami (Botswom),
Mr. Acosta (Cuber),
Ml.. Akmed (Egypt),
Mr.
Ilmhim
(Ethiopin),
Mm. Bsooks-Randolph (Liberia), Mr. Rrrsolondraike
(Mndagoscar), Mr. El Hnssen (Mcwitanio), Mr. Chissmo (Mozambique), Mr. AI-Obnidl? (Qatar), Ms. Blvden (Siewa Leone),
Ms. Mlr~rr1lgcrgr1hl,1l~(1
(Ugtr~dtr),
Mr. Mujezinollic
( Yugoslmkr) rrrrd Mr. Unibn di Llltete
(Zaire)
took the places reses\*eLIfor them at the side
of the Couucil dmnlber.

of the agenda

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargi d’affaires, a.i., of the Permanent Mission of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12147)
The meeting was called to ordes at I I .35 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

Complaint by Zambia against South Africa:
Letter dated 19 July 1976 from the Chargk d’affaires,
a.l., of the Permanent Mission of .Zambia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12147)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings [1944th to 1946th
meetings],
I shall now, with the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Zambia, South Africa,
Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mozambique, Qatar, Sierra Leone,
Uganda, Yugoslavia and Zaire to participate in the
Council’s discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
2. In accordance with the Council’s further decision,
I shall also renew the Council’s invitation, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to the
Acting President and the other members of the delegation of the United Nations Council for Namibia.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I have received a
letter from the representative of Guinea, in which he
also requests to be invited to participate in the debate.
I therefore propose, if there are no objections and in
accordance with the usual practice, to invite him to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
4. I invite the representative of Guinea to take the
place reserved for him at the dide of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when it is
his turn to address the Council.

5. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone, whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
6. Mr. BLYDEN
(Sierra Leone): Permit me first of
all, Mr. President, to express my delegation’s appreciation to you and to the members of the Security Council foronce again inviting us to participate in the debate,
the subject-matter of which continues to arouse grave
and serious concern not only to the Republic of Zambia
as the aggrieved party, but indeed to the entire
continent of Africa.
7. I must also congratulate you on your assumption
of the high office of President of the Council for the
month of July. You have already, during this month,
demonstrated your skill and experience which I am sure
will enable you to guide our deliberations to a successful conclusion.
8. Let me assure you, Mr. President, that on this
occasion my delegation in particular has no intention
of giving you a pedagogic lecture such as those you

with any redress. Notwithstanding
the lip-service
incessantly paid to the principles of international lally
upon which, it is widely but erroneously believed, the
United Nations was founded, we have become regular
witnesses to the prostitution
even of those meagre
tenets of international law which may be invoked on
occasion for purposes of restoring calm to a troubled
world community.

listened to during the last debates in the Council
involving the question of aggression, from learned
jurists who thought it was about time we, the newer
States and younger nations, as we are called, got some
discipline in the rules of international law from Brierly,
Oppenheim, Lauterpacht, and others. I avail myself
of this opportunity, therefore, to commiserate wtth
you, Mr. President, on the infliction upon you of those
exercises that were so bizarre as not to warrant our
attention. We are not here to peddle or parade our
intellectualism
when we come, and if sometimes we
keep quiet-we from the so-called third world, backward and underprivileged countries-it
is not hlecause
of any lack of familiarity with the rules or the norms
of international law which have been allowed to be
flouted in the Organization throughout its history, but
because of good sense and a desire on our part to
uphold the principles of the Charter, that is, to promote
harmony, conciliation, peaceful co-operation among
States, and not the castigation of Member States.

12. Lest our colleagues and the world community
tend to forget, there are only two references in the
entire Charter that even take cognizance of the expressions “international law” or “the principles of international law”. Thus this lip-service that goes on without
comment from some who were not parties to the
Charter in 1945 is no more than sheer and blatant
hypocrisy, from our point of view. This is a naive
statement, of course, coming from a representative of
an underdeveloped country that was not part of thle
Western civilization that provided the roots of internntional law; but we do have norms of our own, even
within the framework of backward and underdeveloped
communities, that can stand, perhaps, supreme above
some of the norms which we claim to practise here,

9. Let me also take this opportunity to convey our
sincere condolences to the Government and people of
the People’s Republic of China for the disaster and the
untold sufferings of its people as the ‘result of two
recent powerful earthquakes which have struck northeastern China. We extend our heartfelt sympathy to
you, my dear colleague, the representative of China,
and we hope you will convey this to your Government, for the grievous loss in life and property you
have been called upon to bear.

13. .It was scarcely a month ago that African menrbers of the Council and sympathizers with the African
cause vehemently condemned South Africa for the
brutal and cold-blooded murders of innocent school
children who were engaged in peaceful demonstration
in Soweto against the teaching of mathematics and
other innocuous school subjects through the medimn
of the Afrikaans language.

10. As always, my delegation has listened with
keen interest to the very detailed and lucid explanation
by the Foreign Minister of Zambia, Mr. Mwale
[1944tl1 meetirlg], of South Africa’s most recent
aggression, this time against Zambia, his own State.
According to the representative of Zambia, on I1 July
1976, a South African military aircraft violated the
territorial
airspace and the territorial integrity of
Zambia and dropped armed men who planted landmines around a camp. The South African soldiers
then attacked the camp and killed 24 persons, seriously
wounding 45 others. This is obviously an example of
blatant and arrogant disregard for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of a Member State of the
Organization; indeed it would be the same for any
State in the world community.

14. Today, we have before us the complaint of thle
Republic of Zambia against the same incurable raci!:t
regime of South Africa, in which the latter is charged
with a series of violations of territorial integrity,
14 such violations in all, culminating
in the bizarre
incident of 11 July.
15. The African nations have decided, now as always
in the past, to give full support to the case of Zambiia
on this occasion. Perhaps for non-African members
of the Council it may be advisable to state some of
the reasons for our solidarity on this particular issue.
It should by now have become clear beyond any
shadow of doubt that African States are, without
exception, irrevocably committed to the furtherance of
the principle of the right of self-determination
and IO
the goal of political independence for all of Afric&
southern Africa included. African States are committed
to the principle of majority rule in Rhodesia-crudely
expressed as “one man, one vote”-for
this is what we
were taught democracy means, African States are
fully committed to the pledge of the total liberatioa
of Namibia through what we have come to reco!:
nize, my own delegation in particular-and
we have
said so in this hall on several occasions-as
il:~
legitimate
representative,
the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO).
My delegation in
the past made known our views on South Africa’s

11. My delegation notes with regret that, repeatedly
and almost trt/ I~(IIIS~~I/~Z, certain permanent members
of the Council, regrettably most of them with vested
interests in South Africa’s political, economic and
social policies, have, by the use of the veto, continued
to frustrate the aims and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations, thus permitting the recalcitrance of
one Member State, namely South Africa, to go
unchallenged and unpunished, today as it has been for
30 years. How true it is that international law, in the
language of that great jurist Hans Kelsen, is every day
becoming nothing more than “primitive law”, “jungle
law”, a law incapable of providing aggrieved parties
2

illegal occupation of Namibia, and our uncompromising
stand on the subject of its eventual eviction from that
Territory. We are committed with no less fervour to
the pursuit of the goals of political equality, human
dignity and full and unqualified participation in the
total life of South Africa by the indigenous black
inhabitants of that country, a people who represent,
as we all know, well over 80 per cent of its population.

centuries. 11 was announcing its incapacity for that
self-government
and independence it has sought to
deny to others. F,or, certainly, not even the smallest,
newest or weakest of our puny African States would
have dared to starrd before an audience such as this
and proclaim loudly to the world that it was ignorant
of the actions of the whole Government’s
military
or police agency. Is this in itself not enough justification for disqualifying South Africa even from membership of any international organization as lacking in the
capacity for self-government?

16. But because of Zambia’s geographical and geopolitical situation, and because of its enthusiasm in
the cause of the liberation of southern Africa, Zambia
has had to take upon itself, on behalf of all of us,
the responsibility of providing appropriate facilities,
through training and other means, for the liberation
movements of southern Africa to achieve the goals
which they have set for themselves and which we
support. Zambia has propelled itself into the forefront
of the battle of the black man in southern Africa,
and indeed in all of Africa, for freedom an? human
dignity. Zambia’s activities in this respect are on
behalf of the whole of Africa, not merely on its own
behalf. Thus, if by furthering the cause of Africa,
Zambia inevitably becomes a marked victim of acts of
aggression by South Africa, or indeed from any other
source, the black man throughout the continent cannot
but stand up and take notice and lend every means
at his disposal, both morally and materially, to stand
shoulder to shoulder with Zambia, to the bitter end
if need be.

19. The illegal presence of South Africa in Namibia
is, to my delegation, the root cause of the unfortunate
incident which occurred in Zambia on I1 July. When
I made my last statement here, some time in March,
the Council had adopted 81 resolutions against South
Africa and nothing had happened. In spite of the
number of those resolutions and decisions already
adopted not only by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, culminating
in Security Council
resolution 385 (1976), as well as the advisory opinion
of the International
Court of Justice of 1971’ on South
Africa’s illegal presence in Namibia, the South African
Government has doggedly ignored,the terms of those
resolutions and has stubbornly continued to govern
that Territory.
20. It has been rumoured that our inclusion of -the
subject of Namibia in this debate is outside our terms
of reference. Where does honesty and sincerity begin
and where does hypocrisy end? We have just come
through a bale of speeches and lectures, as I said
earlier, in commiserating
with the Council, on inteinational law, international
diplomacy and terrorism,
when the item on the agenda was a matter completely
different and remote from such matters.

17. That is my Government’s position on the matter
before the Council, and we here give notice of it for
the benefit of all and sundry. Zambia is not alone.
Zambia shall not stand alone. “Zambia must not stand
alone” was the essence of a message I received-not
from my Foreign Minister but from my President and
head of State himself directly-to
participate “fully
and without equivocation in the debate affecting our
sister State of Zambia”,
We therefore individually,
as African States, and collectively,
as a group
comprising the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
condemn this naked act of aggression, as we have
those of the past, from the one source: South Africa.

21. In our view, Namibia is being used as a springboard for attacks against Zambia and Angola. Instead
of withdrawing from the Territory, South Africa has
reinforced its military strength in Namibia.
South
Africa’s troops, as we know, are now stationed at a
newly created l,OOO-foot-wide buffer zone along the
Namibian-Angolan-Zambian
border in order to prevent
SWAPO, the legitimate freedom fighters, from entering
Namibia from Angola and Zambia. No doubt the
military hebcopters, as we suspect, took off from this
buffer zone and entered Zambia’s territory.

18. South Africa’s comical and shameless defence
put before the Council by its representative, I am told,
a couple of days ago could readily have been glossed
over by my delegation were it not for the fact that it
reeked with falsehood of the basest sort. “The South
African Government,”
said the representative, “had
no knowledge of an attack on a Zambian village at
Sialola on 11 July 1976” [ibid., para. 481. Either
the South African Government is by this statement
engaging yet again in its characteristic indulgence in
outrageous falsification and distortion of the truth
-an
exercise in which it is primus, not prima
inter paws for it has no equals in the telling of
falsehoods-or
South Africa was in a fit of absentmindedness when it announced to the Council and to
the world at large that it was unfit to govern itself
and the territory it has occupied for nearly two

22. When I addressed the Council on the question of
South Africa’s aggression against Angola on 30 March
[1903rcl meeting], I had occasion to observe that it
seemed to us that the Council was meeting 30 years
too late to brand South Africa an aggressor. I repeat
that observation today with even greater force. In the
course of that same statement, I went on to say
that, by the forced imposi.tion of its political will on
Namibia, South Africa had been and still was committing an act of aggression on yet another African
nation, an international
entity over which it had no
3

jurisdiction. Those sentiments
on this occasion.

are no less appropriate

one of the moulders of world public opinion. Under
the heading “Responsibility
and Rhodesia”, The Wrrll
Stseet Ju/r,n~/ this morning writes:

23. What in fact my delegation has been saying in
each of the debates in which I have had the honour to
participate during the first half of this year is that
despite our condemnation
of South Africa for committing acts of aggression and violating the territorial
integrity of States-on
this occasion, Zambia-we
are also at the same time making it clear that South
Africa’s continuous presence in Namibia is detrimental
to such contiguous States as Zambia which support the
cause of the liberation of southern Africa. Unless
desperate efforts are undertaken expeditiously by the
Council to force the illegal administration
of South
Africa out of Namibia, the whole of southern Africa
will continue to remain under the threat of South
African aggression against each and every adjacent
African State.

“It looks as if Mr. Kissinger’s ‘Lusaka Statement’ ” -and regrettably it had to be made from
Zambia-“
offering US aid in toppling whitedominated Rhodesia was not just rhetoric, The
Congress is now considering bills to put substance
to the promises of the Secretary of State.
“Mr. Kissinger proffered American economic aid
to the ‘front-line’ black African states to recompense
them for part of their losses ‘from boycotting
Rhodesia.”
And so on. It goes on to mention $20 million for this
State snd $25 million for the other State. But what
disturbs me is that in the midst of this editorial, i%
Wall Stseet Journal continues:

24. Yesterday in the Council we listened to a very
dignified and restrained statement by the Foreign
Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania [194&h
lntreting], in a vein characteristic of most of the
speeches made here by Foreign Ministers and some
representatives. An appeal was made to South Africa
similar to one which my own delegation has made on
two previous occasions this year-that
South Africa
should continue to recognize itself as an African State,
because we still do, but that time is running out for
it and perhaps the choice is being left to it and not
to us as to the eventualities.

“We ,wonder if the Administration’s
policy is
wise, regardless of one’s views of what will happen
in Rhodesia. If one believes that the Rhodesian
system is likely to hold and will be superior to any
candidate replacement, for the inhabitants and/or
for the West, then the US has no business trying
to destroy it.”
Meaning

Rhodesia-the

Smith r6gime. It continues:

“But if one agrees with the preponderance of
informed opinion that white supremacy in Rhodesia
is on the verge of overthrow, then it behoves the
United States to use its good offices to ease the
travail of transition and to try to promote a replacement regime friendly to US interests.

25. My last word is not in my text, but I shall take
a lesson from the representative of the United States,
who has caused a fresh wind to blow in this chamber.
I was shocked and horrified at his absence from these
meetings in the last two days, as I was at the absence
of the representative of France. I looked in vain to
see a gallery of persons from Westerh countries
interested enough in the aggression against another
African Stale within less than a month, It was paralysingly disappointing
to an African observer, but,
’ indeed, I trust this is only a sign of the fact that we are
moving into an era in which-a sentiment expressed
by the Foreign Ministers or Secretaries of State of
one or two of the leading permanent members of the
Council-recognition
of the rights of the people of
southern Africa in their liberation struggle has come
to be accepted as part also of the principles of belief
of some of the Western States. However, I am worried
at the kind of attitude which, in one breath, speaks of
a commitment to the support of liberation movements
and the announcement of finaicial aid from certain
permanent members of the Council and, in the next,
questions indeed whether or not those same States
ought to commit themselves fully to providing the kind
of support that is necessary to help those liberation
movements achieve their purposes and their goals.

“It is one thing, after all, to advise the whlite
Rhodesians to try to make a deal to remain as a
‘white tribe’ under a black government, but it is a
far different matter to give overt assistance to
attempts to overturn them. No one, no matter how
well advised, can have any credible scenario of
what happens to Rhodesia when the Smith rkgime
goes.”

26. I refer in particular to an editorial which has
appeared in this morning’s The Wall Street Jowncd,

It is important for my colleagues of the third world to
remember that, so I shall repeat it: “No one, nb

“It is difficult to see how Mr. Kissinger’s policy
fits into either view. The survival of the settler
regime”-and
this is crucial-“would
hardly be
affected by US policy, short of direct military
intervention on either side. Barring major power
intervention, the outcome will depend on the military
competence and national will of the Rhodesians.
What the US aid will do is lend American moral
support to the effort to settle the issue by force. Thus
it gives the US a certain responsibility for the outcome, without giving the US a means of influencing
it.

4

matter how well advised, can have any credible
scenario of what happens to Rhodesia when the Smith
regime goes”. The editorial continues:

sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity by South
Africa during this year. The most serious of these
violations,
as we know, took place on 11 July deep
inside Zambian territory, causing death and injury
to innocent persons and destruction to property.

“It could be a successful Katanga with a black
government relying on white support, or another
Kenya where a white community lives comfortably
under a stable black government, or another Congo
or Angola.

30. The Government and people of Guyana have long
admired the courage and fortitude of the Government
and people of Zambia, who, at enormous sacrifice,
have unflinchingly stood by the principles of freedom
and justice. And Zambia knows of our full support for
its efforts to work resolutely, untiringly and unsparingly for the genuine freedom of all peoples, black
and white, in southern Africa.

“No American pressures or promises can assure
a favourable outcome. Efforts to buy our way into
new nationalist governments... have rarely worked.
Nor should the United States pretend to act as
guarantor to a black government’s assurances about
the future of the white minority, since no one can be
sure any given government would be around long
enough to enforce such promises. The only direct
American interest in Rhodesia is that we prefer to
buy chromium
there rather than from Russia.
Whether we do or not will not affect the outcome,
nor need it necessarily prevent our buying chromium
from any successor regime which will want to
export.

31. We in Guyana applaud the commitment
and
dedication of Zambia and other front-line States in
southern Africa to liquidate colonialism in Zimbabwe
and Namibia and to dismantle the apparatus of npa~heid in South Africa. So, as soon as my Government
was acquainted with the latest act of aggression by
South Africa against Zambia,
my Prime Minister,
Comrade Forbes Burnham, sent the following message
to President Kaunda of Zambia:

“Trying to influence the complexion of the next
government may be a task appropriate for discreet
work by our diplomats and intelligence services; we
can offer mediation;
but we should beware of
assuming responsibility for the future of Rhodesia,
lest we find ourselves caterers to another bloodbath.”

“I am deeply distressed at the continuing and
unprovoked attacks on your people and territory.by
armed forces of the-racist regime of South Africa
and particularly at the’recent wanton attack on the
defenceless town of SiaIola in the Western Province
of Zambia.
“The Government of Guyana joins with all those
who raise their voices in condemnation
of those
attacks-attacks
whose only motivation appears to
be fear of your uncompromising
stand against trpclrfkcitl and racism in southern Africa. We in Guyana
are equally committed
in our opposition to the
continuing existence of these dehumanizing evils
and extend to you the assurance of our full support
in bringing to the attention of the Security Council
these acts of aggression by South Africa that
persistently
violate your territorial
integrity and
sovereignty”.

27. I need only add, before withdrawing from this
place at the Security Council table, that, although the
foregoing editorial pertains to Rhodesia, I have a
sneaking suspicion that this is the attitude of some of
our friends, permanent members of the Council, on
whom we have relied for many years, on the whole
question of southern Africa. We are beginning to have
doubts about the sincerity of our friends who claim
to be voting with us to put an end to the kind of
bestial aggression which African territories, because of
military weakness, are called upon to suffer.
28. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Once again the peaceloving, non-aligned State of Zambia has been constrained to bring before the Security Council a
complaint of acts of aggression committed against it
by South Africa. It was in 1971 that Zambia last
asked the Council to take appropriate action so that it
could be shielded once and for all from the wrath of
the racists in South Africa, perverted by consummate
bigotry,
sustained
by internal
repression, and
buttressed by powerful economic and other external
interests.

32. These most recent marifpstations
of South
Africa’s aggressive intent must oe seen as part of an
unfolding strategy by the Fascist regime in Pretoria to
make secure a white redoubt in southern Africa. There
was a time when the defence perimeter of that redoubt
was planned by South Africa on the twin bases of the
continuance of Portuguese colonialism
in Africa and
the involvement on its side of powerful and influential
countries desirous of mantaining their national interests
in the area and willing to subsume the freedom of the
oppressed peoples there to their own perceived
economic advantage and their own perceived global
military requirements. The victories of the people of
Mozambique,
and, more recently, of Angola, the
strengthening of the forces of liberation in Zimbabwe
and Namibia,
the heightened political resistance of
the black people of South Africa itself-all
these

29. In his clear and unequivocal statement to the
Council on Tuesday, 27 July [/94&h nteetin~], the
Foreign Minister
of Zambia, Mr. Siteke Mwale,
whose presence here testifies, to the seriousness of the
situation,
listed a series of violations of, Zambia’s
5

factors have in part upset the calculations
Pretoria game theorists.

Council by the representative
of South Africa,
Mr. Botha [ibid.], who, I notice, has been conspicuously absent from most of these debates? While
acknowledging that the regime he represents is fully
aware of what he called incidents on the border in the
past, Mr. Botha tells us that his regime has no
knowledge of the massive attack on the village of
Sialola on 11 July.

of the

33. It is abundantly evident that since the collapse of
Portuguese colonialism, there has been a tightening of
the noose around the “laagers of white repression”
remaining in Africa. An analysis of kr*e way in which
South Africa responds to the present correlation Of
liberating forces would, I suggest, be instructive for
our debate.

39. In the first place, the border in question is with
Namibia, where South African troops have no right
to be. Secondly, is Mr. Botha asking us to disbelieve
the considerable evidence which Zambia has placed
before the world and the Council? Finally, does
Mr. Botha wish us to conclude that the regime in
Pretoria has no control over the activities of those of
its forces which are stationed illegally in Namibia?
More generally, my delegation finds highly incongruous the pious asseverations which the representative of South Africa has made in the Council from
time to time of the good and honourable intentions of
the regime for which he speaks. They all have a hollow
and empty ring. We shall not be swayed by those who
preach peace while carrying on war.

34: Only a few months ago-in March to be specificthe Council had occasion to discuss the perfidy of the
racists in South Africa, when by massive armed
intervention they vainly sought to halt the march of
history in Angola. Quite correctly, South Africa’s
action was condemned by the Council.
35. The collaboration of the Pretoria racists with their
cousins’ in Salisbury is well known. The most recent
evidence is the continued assistance given by South
Africa to the Smith regime to violate mandatory
sanctions, more particularly in the light of our decisions
following the closure by Mozambique ofits borderwith
Rhodesia.

40. The deteriorating situation in southern Africa is
one of the dangerous problems facing the international
community today. Thus the cancer of racist domination
must be quickly extirpated from the body politic
of southern Africa. The foremost responsibility for
rectifying the situation clearly rests with the people
of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa. They have
often expressed a preference for a peaceful solution,
but this does not deter them from resorting to legitimate
armed struggle. Those oppressed people receive full
support from the front-line and other States and from
progressive forces throughout the world. Guyana, for
its part, remains committed to their cause in word and
in deed.

36. In Namibia, which is an international Territory
occupied illegally by South Africa, we have witnessed,
in defiance of the repeated decisions of the Council
that South Africa should vacate the Territory, a
strengthening of the apparatus of internal repression
and a reinforcement of the preparations for military
aggression against neighbouring Africari countries.
While all this is being done, the illegal regime seeks
to hoodwink the international community with sham
constitutional
talks at Windhoek, while at the same
time engaging in a policy of “search and destroy”
against SWAPO, the authentic representative of the
people of Namibia.
37. At home, within the walls of the prison that is
South Africa, the racists have recently demonstrated
by their callous and ruthless action against the blacks
of Soweto and other so-called townships the extent to
which they are resolved to maintain white supremacy.
But no one can fail to recognize the true outer limits
of South Africa’s aggressive intentions. For-and this
is ominous-by
the Defence Amendment Act assented
to on 2 March 1976 by the so-called Parliament of
South Africa, the rulers of that country seek to arrogate
to themselves the right, nay the licence, to intervene
militarily in any,country south of the Sahara. That is
the message that South Africa has signalled to African
countries
in particular, and to the international
community in general, and that message has been sent
at a time when South Africa is proclaiming more
frequently its adherence to the illegal concept of SOcalled hot pursuit, and when a spokesman for the
regime can assert that “in southern Africa, South
Africa is a military giant”.

41. But the entire international
community
has a
responsibility to contribute effectively to the establishment of freedom and justice in Namibia, Zimbabwe
and South Africa. No State Member of the United
Nations publicly defends racism and colonialism in
Zimbabwe; none supports publicly the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa; and all publicly
demand the eradication of trpwtheitl.
Some of these
States are, as I said earlier, powerful and influential
States. They have special responsibilities,
all the
more so since South Africa would like to count them
among its allies. We call on those States to join us in
fully exposing and totally isolating South Africa.
42. The Council bears its own special responsibi!ity,
For many States-Zambia
is one of them-the
United
Nations in general and the Security Council in
Parthhr
are institutions in which much faith has been
placed. Thus it is not surprising that, ever since their
first meeting in Belgrade in 1961, the non-aligned
countries have always reiterated their conviction that
the United Nations provides the most effective mealns

38. Against the background which I have just briefly
sketched, how is one to view the statement in the
6

for freedom and independence
and expresses the
conviction
that the continuance
in time of the
deteriorating
situation
in southern
Africa could
constitute a threat to international
peace and security.
It recalls a previous decision of the Council when
South Africa violated Zambia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in 1971, and it reminds South Africa
of its obligation under the Charter to refrain from the
threat or use of force in its international
relations.

to maintain and promote international
peace and
security, strengthen freedom and harmonize relations
between States. More specifically, at the Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Lusaka in 1970, the nonaligned countries asserted that “the United Nations has
a vital role to play in safeguarding the independence
and sovereignty of the non-aligned nations”. Notwithstanding the lack of a decision by the Council in the
recent violation of Uganda’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, the non-aligned countries maintain
their commitment
to ensure the effectiveness and
authority of the Security Council.

47. In the operative part of the draft resolution, the
Council strongly condemns the recent attack by South
Africa against Zambia and demands that South Africa
desist from such action in the future and From using
Namibia as a base for such attacks. Zambia and other
frontline States are commended
for their steadfast
support of the people of Namibia in its just struggle.

43. The case before us now involves the violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member
State, a non-aligned country, Zambia. Zambia is the
victim on this occasion; but there may be other
militarily
strong countries which are even now contemplating
illegal action against others. We should
therefore give a clear warning, through decisive action
on this issue, that the Security Council intends to
shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter.

48. The overall purpose of the draft resolution is to
convey to the authorities in Pretoria that the Security
Council is wise to their ways and to their intentions
and that it will not stand idly by while South Africa
threatens, intimidates and attacks African countries,
whether from Namibia or elsewhere.

44. The substance of the Zambian complaint has
already been fully dealt with by the Zambian Foreign
Minister and other speakers. My delegation would
therefore wish only to make a few observations.
Zambia, led by its President, Mr. Kenneth Kaunda,
has been a foremost advocate of just solutions to the
problems of southern Africa. It is because Zambia
has stood by the principles of freedom and human
dignity that it has been subjected to repeated threats
and attacks by the racist minority regimes in South
Africa and Rhodesia. As recently as 22 April this
year, no less a person than Vorster, speaking in the
South African Parliament said of President Kaunda:
“He should, in his statements please refrain... from
drawing the bow too taut. I must issue a serious
warning.”
We have seen the follow-up to that
warning. Clearly, the continuing aggression by South
Africa against Zambia must be brought to a halt.

49. Naturally, it is the hope of the co-sponsors that
South Africa will implement the provisions of the draft
resolutions and heed the calls and demands which the
provisions make on it. If South Africa chooses otherwise, and, by its actions taken together with other
developments
in southern Africa, the situation continues to deteriorate,
the Council,
by invoking
operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution,
will
meet again to consider the adoption of effective
measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter. If thgt situation should arise,
no doubt all the provisions of the Charter will be fully
examined to determine which are appropriate to the
.
then existing situation.
50. On behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution
-Benin,
the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama,
Romania, the United Republic of Tanzania and my own
country, Guyana-I
should like formally to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document S/12158.
I would merely wish to ask members to make two slight
alterations to the draft as printed. In operative paragraph 4 the word “also” should be deleted; and in
operative paragraph 6 the “s” should be taken off the
word “violations”.
Having said that, I have great
pleasure in commending the draft resolution to the
members of the Council,

45, In this connexion, several members have been
working patiently and assiduously over the last few
days on a draft resolution which the Council might
adopt. The draft resolution is contained in document
S/12158. We have held consultations on the terms of
the draft resolution with members of the Council and
we believe that the draft resolution can command
wide support in the Council. Indeed, its provisions
are so reasonable and so minimal that it should be
approved unanimously.

51. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique,
Joaquim
Albert0 Chissano, who is honouring
us with his
presence and participation in our work. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

46. The draft resolution is straightforward.
The
preambular paragraphs express grave concern at the
numerous hostile and unprovoked
acts by South
Africa violating the sovereignty, airspace and territorial integrity of Zambia and at’South Africa’s use of
Namibia,
which it occupies illegally, as a base for
attacking
neighbouring
countries. It reaffirms the
Iegitimacy of the struggle of the people of Namibia

52. Mr. CHISSANO
(Mozambique):
Mr. President,
while thanking you for welcoming me to participate in
7

the Council’s debate, may I take this opPortunitY
to convey to the representative of the People’s
Republic of China the condolences and sympathy of
the People’s Republic of Mozambique on the loss of
life in China as a result of the earthquake which
occurred there this week.
53. To reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person and of
nations, this meeting of the Security Council has been
called to consider once more a very grave problem
caused by systematic acts of aggression against the
Republic of Zambia ‘carried out by the South African
racist forces. The People’s Republic of Mozambique
salutes the initiative taken by the Republic of Zambia
in bringing the question under consideration to the
Council, for a State Member of the Organization has
just committed one more aggressiveact againstanother
State Member, in overt contempt for the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
54. Mr. President, I wish to salute you, as well as
all the members of the Council, on behalf of the
Government and people of Mozambique, and to
convey our warmest greetings and our confidence that
the members of the Council, under your wise leadership will handle the question under consideration
in such manner that the breach of the spirit of the
Charter will be brought to an end, and the frequent
violations of Zambia’s airspace, sovereignty and
territorial integrity by the South African racist rkgime
will be eliminated once and for all.
55. My delegation came here today to add its voice
to those of the noble nations throughout the world
which were promptly and resolutely raised against
the abhorrent and indiscriminate killings of innocent
people and againstthe premeditated constant provocations and violations of the airspace and territorial
integrity of a sovereign and independent nation. In so
doing, the People’s Republic of Mozambique intends
to remain consistent with the fundamental principles
of the Charter and, on the other hand, to reaffirm
unequivocally our solidarity with the Republic of
Zambia and its people.
56. 1 should like to repeat that this is not the first
time that the racist rkgime of South Africa has committed such barbaric acts of aggression against the
Republic of Zambia, a sovereign and independent
country. Several cases have been reported of South
African racist forces’ incursions into Zambian territory, in which they committed murder, destroyed
property and laid land-mines which killed many
Zambian villagers. This is not an isolated case, The
racist rkgime of South Africa has also on several
occasions violated Zambian territory in collusion
with the illegal minority rbgime of Ian Smith of
Rhodesia, and, as we have just learned, on 11 July
the South African racist forces violated ‘Zambian
territorial integrity and went deep into the territory of
Zambia to about 30 kilometres, ki!ling 24 and injuring
45 people.

57. At the outset, therefore, I must resolutely put on
record in the strongest possible terms my Government’s condemnation of these acts of aggressialn, for
they constitute a threat to international peace and
security, particularly in southern Africa. This naked
act of aggression shows how desperate the racist
rkgime is over,the struggle of the people it has trampled
underfoot and degraded in that part of Africa.
58. We still have fresh in our memories that dreadful massacre of Soweto, which caused hundreds of
injured and dead in a matter of hours. This massacre,
as well as all the others which are ,being perpetuated
in several parts of South Africa, was meant to frighten
the people of South Africa in their struggle. But to
date the people of South Africa are not deterred:
they are rising all over the country to fight for theil
right to freedom, equality and justice. That is why the
South African rCgime is desperate.
59. South Africa’s npcwtheitl rCgime no longer
restricts itself to its own boundaries, but is expanding
the crime of rrpurtheitl along the boundaries of independent African States. Our memories are also still
fresh with regard to the South African invasion of
Angola last year. Against this background, it is (easy
to see the phenomena: yesterday it was Angola; today
it is once more the Republic of Zambia. Tomorrow,
certainly, it will be another African country,
60. The question of Angola was a good example for
Africa and for the world, for it indicated that the
forces which fight for justice will always be successful,
while the racists and the imperialist, colonialist and
neo-colonialist forces are doomed to lose.
61. South Africa does not make a secret of its
criminal intentions. It was not long ago that it passed
a dangerous law which enables it to attack any African
country as it wishes. That law deserves the attention
of the Council because it is a threat to international
security. South Africa has now passed from theory
to practice.
62. It is not by chance that the military budget of
South Africa has been doubled in the year 1975-1976,
as compared to the previous year. The action of So:uth
Africa should be regarded as a well-calculated design
with the aim not only of impeding freedom in its
territory, but also of putting a barrier to the independence and freedom of other non-independent countries,
and of causing instability in independent countries,
particularly those which it ,regards as supporters of
the cause of freedom and independence. That is why
South Africa has been and still is the main supporter
of the Ian Smith rdgime. It is with .South Africa’s
support that Ian Smith’s assassins are able to mount
constant provocation and aggression against my
country.
63. Mozambique would like to drive home to South
Africa that neither Zambia nor my country will be

responsible for a deterioration of the situation in our
area. But unless South Africa stops its provocation
and acts of gangsterism, we will have no alternative
but to defend ourselves, and we are sure that the
African countries,
and the peace-loving States
Members of the United Nations will be with us. The
Mozambican people wish to reiterate their pledge to
stand side by side with their brother people of Zambia
in safeguarding their freedom, independence and
sovereignty.
64. We read with great interest and attention the
account given earlier by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambia on the question under consideration.
I believe that no one in the Council can have failed
to grasp the essence of the problem. The Republic of
Zambia is a victim of the fact that it stands or the
side of justice and of what all of us want: selfdetermination
and independence for peoples still
under foreign domination,
in this case the Namibian
people. The people of Namibia are entitled to independence and self-determination,
just as is any other
people under the yoke of colonialism
or foreign
domination.
I do not believe that the use of force
against Zambia will alter the right of the people of
Namibia to be independent. The people of Zambia
have a long tradition of struggle for national independence. The unity and courage of the Zambian people
have already passed the test, and for that reason we
are confident that Zambia will not withdraw its support
for the liberation struggle in southern Africa.
65. I do hope that the Council will not fail to pass
severe judgement against the minority regime of South
Africa for its persistent refusal to comply with the
pertinent resolutions of the Security Council and
General Assembly, and to adopt a resolution exposing,
denouncing and condemning the racist regime of
South Africa for its constant acts of aggression against
the Republic of Zambia. South Africa should be told
not to interfere in the internal affairs of Zambia, and
that any aggression against any African State will be
regarded as an attack against Africa as a whole, as
well as against peace-loving and democratic forces
the world over.
66. The Government of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique
supports the struggle of the people of
Namibia, led by its vanguard organization SWAPO,
against illegal occupation by the South African racist
regime.
67. I hope that the Council will realize the urgent
necessity to recognize SWAP0
as the legitimate
representative of the Namibian people. In so doing,
the Council will be combating actively South African
manoeuvres for the Bantustanization of Namibia, which
are part of its tactics for prolonging its illegal occupation of that Territory. Mozambique supports the just
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, led by the African
National Council, against the racist minority regime
of Ian Smith. We support likewise the struggle of the

South African people, led by’ the African National
Congress of’ South Africa, against the regime of
apartheid.

68. We support the struggling people of southern
Africa because we are sure that there is no solution
to the problems of this region other than that already
found by the United Nations. We all agree with that
solution, and South Africa alone refuses to apply it.
The international
community
should force South
Africa to apply it. Only when the npnrtlzeid regime
in South Africa, and its illegal occupation of Namibia,
are brought to an end once and for all, only when
there is majority rule in Zimbabwe, can peace and
security be guaranteed in that part of Africa. We
appeal to all Member States, to all peace-loving States,
to render maximum support to the struggling peoples
of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa.
69. I would be failing in my duty if I did not call
the attention of the Council to the fact that those
countries which are helping the oppressive regime
to build up its nuclear strength and increase its
armaments,. thus furthering its aggressive capacity,
also bear responsibility
for the dangerous situation
prevailing in southern Africa. I would like to appeal
to those countries to refrain from contributing
to
further bloodshed. Our country has just established
diplomatic relations with those countries, but we would
not like to see on the one hand a development
of
good relations between them and our country while
on the other hand they helped in the perpetration of
crimes against our people and the people of Zambia,
and indeed against Africa and mankind as a whole.
70. We want peace, we want co-operation
and
harmony, but above all, we want freedom, equality
and independence, so that there can be progress for
the whole of mankind.
7 1. Mr.

ILLUECA
(Panama) (intP/prctotion
,fi~~nl
The delegation of the Republic of Panama
associates itself with the expressions of grief and
solidarity addressed in this hall to the representative
of the great Chinese nation, on the occasion of the
devastating earthquake that has ravaged his country
and taken a terrible toll in loss of life and damage
to property.
Sptruish):

72. My delegation also wishes to extend its greetings
to the distinguished
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique,
the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zambia, who honour the Security Council by theit
presence.
73. The Council is considering the item relating to
the complaint
of Zambia against South Africa,
appearing in the letter dated I9 July addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Zambia to
the United Nations. In that docum,ent, reference is
made to the repeated acts of aggression committed

Rozas, and the then representative
of Panama,
Mr. Aquilino Boyd, who then occupied the place
assigned to Latin America in the Council.

by South Africa against the Republic of Zambia, the
last of which took place in the early morning hours of
11 July at the village of Sialola, leaving no less than
24 dead and 45 wounded.

77. The Zambian Minister has requested of thle Council concrete action which may be summed up as
follows:

74. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia,
Mr. Siteke Mwale [ihid.], produced reliable evidence
in support of the accusation brought by his country
against South Africa, giving a detailed account of the
14 attacks carried out by South Africa against Zambia
in the presence year of 1976. The grave charges made
by the Foreign Minister of Zambia have found support
and corroboration in the statements made before
the Council by the Group of African States, through
the Chairman of the Group for the month of JuIy,
Mr. El Hassen of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
[ihitl.]; by Mr. Jaipal of India, the Acting Chairman of
the United Nations Council for Namibia [i&/.1; by
the Special Committee against Apa&eid,
a represented by its Chairman, Mr. Hussen of Somalia
[1945th nr~~ti/zg]; and by the SWAPO, recognized by
the United Nations as the most legitimate representative of the people of Namibia, and on behalf of which
Mr. 0. T. Emvula spoke as its deputy chief representative [i/7id.].

(1) Total isolation
of southern Africa;

of the white racist regimes

(2) Respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Zambia, as well as of the other frontline States of southern Africa;
(3) Effective support for SWAP0 and other
liberation movements of southern Africa;
(4) South African compliance with its obligations in order to put an end to the illegal appropriation of Namibia;
(5) Categorical condemnation
of the unjustified
aggression of South Africa against Zambia in viola.
tion of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
that country.

75. The statements made by those organizations
through their representatives have the concurrence
of the peoples of Latin America, which have in various
eloquent forms expressed their support for the resolutions on Namibia in particular General Assembly
resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967 and 3399 (XXX) of 26 Noxembet
1975 and Security Council resolutions 269 (1969), 276
(1970), 283 (1970), 301 (1971) and 385 (1976) and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971,’ which, inter trlicl, put an end to South
Africa’s Mandate for Namibia and placed the Territory
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations.
In establishing the United Nations Council
for
Namibia, the Organization determined the illegality of
the presence of South Africa in the Territory and
demanded its withdrawal, at the same time affirming
the legitimacy of the struggle of the people of Namibia
for self-determination
and independence under the
leadership of SWAPO.

Minister Mwale also requested the Council to make
efforts to speed up the liberation of Namibia and
Zimbabwe and the elimination of the shameful policy
of apartheid practised so implacably by the minority
regime in South Africa.
78. The discriminatory
colonialist policy practised
by the Governments of South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia poisons the social climate in Africa just as
the colonial situation in the Panama Canal Zone
poisons relations between the United States and the
peoples of Latin America.
79. The discriminatory
practices manifested in the
administration
of the Canal as regards employment,
salaries, pensions, education and housing, and some
manifestations of racial segregation, are a constant
source of conflict, tension and difficulties which
periodically lead to indignation among our people, just
as the African peoples react indignantly, as do other
humanitarian peoples, when their dignity is offended.
It suffices to mention that discrimination
in the field
of labour can be appreciated from the levels of
remuneration of North American employees of the
Canal as compared to those of non-North American
employees, who are mostly Panamanians, This discrimination arises from the system of “US rates”
and “local rates”.

76. This Latin American solidarity has found its most
eloquent expression in the meeting held at Brasilia
between the Government of Brazil and the Mission of
the United Nations Council for Namibia presided over
by the representative of Mexico, Mr. Roberto de
Rozensweig Diaz, which culminated in the joint communique of 23 July-that
is, five days ago.2 The
position expressed in the communique is fully shared
by the Latin American countries, which from the very
inception of the United Nations have been fighting for
decolonization and have tangibly shown their support
for the African peoples, as was stated at the series
of meetings of the Security Council held at Addis
Ababa in 1972 [lh27th to 1639th ntcctings] by the
representative of Argentina, Mr. Carlos Grtiz de

80. During fiscal 1975 the labour force used in the
Panama Canal Zone amounted
to approximately
14,000 employees,
of which, in round figures,
3,500 were North American and 10,500 non-North
Americans, mostly Panamanians.
Total salaries f0l
that year amounted to $154.5 million. The 3,500 North
10

Americans-that
is, 25 per cent of the labour forcerectived salaries amounting to $80.8 million, whereas
the other 75 per cent, non-North American workers,
received salaries amounting to $73.7 million. In short,
these figures show that the discriminatory
criterion
results in one fourth of the employees in the Panama
Canal Zone receiving a total of three quarters of total
salaries. Three quarters of the total salaries go to
North American employees simply because of theil
nationality and race. That means that, on an average,
the North
American
worker receives a salary
equivalent to the salaries of three Panamanian workers.
In other words, the concept of an egalitarian society
of a democratic kind advocated by the politicians of
the United States does not apply to the Panamanians
in their own country.

that we hope will be adopted by the Security Council.
I am referring to the Dakar Declaration on Namibia
and Human Rights [S///Y39, IIIIIICX]. That Declaration
was adopted, tog&her with a programme of action
designed to ensure the exercise of the right of selfdetermination
by the people of Namibia, by the International Conference on Namibia and Human Rights
held at Dakar from 5 to 8 January 1976, upon the
invitation of the Government of Senegal and with the
sponsorship of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia,
Mr. Sean MacBride.
It was organized by
the International
Institute
of Human Rights in
Strasbourg, in conjunction with the International Commission of Jurists and the Association of Democratic
Jurists.
86. More recently, on 21 July, the Policy and,Programme Co-ordination
Committee
of the Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC) adopted by consensus,
at its Geneva session, a draft resolution,3 sponsored
by 28 delegations,
on the implementation
of the
Declaration
on the Granting
of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by United Nations
bodies and specialized agencies.

XI I It is therefore easy to understand that like the
situation in Namibia, the question ofzimbabwe, clpal’thid and the decolonization
of Africa are matters of
common interest to States members of OAU, so the
question of the Panama Canal is of common interest
to the countries of Latin America, which unanimously
support the will of the Panamanian people to put an
end to this colonial situation as soon as possible.

87. That draft resolution, which is to be considered
by ECOSOC, is designed-as
is stated in its preamble-to
assist the national liberation movements
struggling for decolonization.
Under its operative part,
ECOSOC would reaffirm that the recognition by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and other
United Nations organs of the legitimacy of the struggle
by colonial peoples to exercise their right to selfdetermination
and independence is linked to the duty
of the United Nations system to render all necessary
moral and material assistance to the peoples of the
colonial Territories
and to their national liberation
movements.

82. The considerations presented to members of the
Council in the course of this debate have led the
Panamanian
delegation to conclude that the action
requested of the Council by the Government ofzambia,
with the full support of the African Group, the United
Nations Special Committee against Apartheid and of
SWAPO, and many countries, is fully justified.
83. As for the statement of the representative of
South Africa [194&h sheeting] concerning the situation
prevailing
in South West Africa and the Constitutional Conference, we believe he spoke in the wrong
forum, since the United Nations Council for Namibia,
the legitimate
Administering
Authority of the Territory, has repudiated the convening of that so-called
Constitutional
Conference without the participation of
SWAPO, which it regards as the authentic representative of the Namibian people, and it has similarly
condemned the intensification of repression by South
Africa in the Territory illustrated by recent unlawful
trials of Namibian nationalists as well as the increased
military presence of South Africa in Namibia and the
establishment
of a no man’s land along the border
with Angola and the persistent reluctance of South
Africa to leave the Territory despite the unanimous
request to that effect made by several United Nations
bodies.

88. Under that same draft resolution ECOSOC would
express appreciation to those specialized agencies and
organizations that have continued to co-operate with
the United Nations and OAU in the implementation
of the Declaration on decolonization.
Those agencies
and organizations would be requested to continue to
take every necessary measure to withhold any
financial, economic, technical or other assistance to
the Government of South Africa and the illegal rCgime
in Southern Rhodesia and to discontinue all support
to those rkgimes until they restored to the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe their inalienable right to selfdetermination
and independence.
89. The denunciation
made here by Zambia, which
of course deserves the most careful attention of the
international
community,
places us before a new
chapter in the matter of the liberation of Namibia
and Zimbabwe, as well as the claims of the 21 million
coloured South African indigenous inhabitants, subjected to the oppressive rCgime of the white minority
now governing South Africa, to be allowed to exercise
their rights.

84. Therefore,
my delegation, together with the
delegations
of the non-aligned countries and other
States, is in favour of the adoption of a draft resolution
that will specifically meet the best interests of the
peoples of southern Africa, as expressed by their
authoritative
spokesmen in this chamber.
85. Recently, some statements have been made that
have given greater validity to the decision on those lines
11

,

90. We trust, therefore, that the Council
will
unanimously adopt the draft resolution submitted by
the non-aligned and other countries [S/12/58], as a
contribution to the solution of the burning problems
of southern Africa, having in mind the authentic and
permanent interests of the indigenous peoples of that
region, which are taking root in a constructive
nationalism
that goes far beyond any ideological
confrontation. If that unanimity
is achieved today,
international
public opinion will view the decision
of the Council as as effective expression of the fact
that dCtente has broken out of the limits of Europe
and has begun to project itself towards the African
continent.

96.

First, we strongly welcqme the presencle here of
of three of the front-line countries. I had the opportunity
to listen to the Foreign
Minister of Zambia on Tuesday [/944rk /~?~er’i/~] and
to the Foreign Minister of Mozambique a short while
ago. Unfortunately,
I was not able to be here IO
listen to the statement of the Foreign Minister of the
United Republic of Tanzania, but I have reald it very
carefully and found it to be an extremely forceful
statement.
the Foreign Ministers

97. Secondly, a number of us have just received a
piece of very sad news: the Pripe Minister of the
‘Republic of Madagascar was killed yesterdlay in a
helicopter accident. I suggest that it would be in order
if you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Security Council as a whole, sent a message expressing the Council’s
deep regrets and sorrow at this great tragedy to the
Government and people of the Malagasy Republic
and to the family of the late Prime Minister. I sincerely
hope that the Council will unanimously
a.gree to
respond, to this tragedy in at least that way, .by
expressing our sorrow and sympathy to the rGovernment and people of the Malagasy Republic and to the
family of their distinguished late Prime Minister.

91, The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
the United States, who wishes to speak in exercise
of his right of reply.
92. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
It had been my intention at this time to reply briefly
to the remarks by the representative of Sierra Leone
in which he chided me because of my absence, and to
his comments about the editorial in Tl7e Wall Street
Jo1wnd.
I have decided, however, to do that in
personal contacts with him.

90. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
the United States for having given us the news of the
death of the Prime Minister of Madagascar in a
helicopter accident. I am sure that all the members of
the Council will agree that we should follow the
suggestion made by the representative of the United
States and send a message expressing our grie.f to the
Government and people of Madagascar and to the late
Prime Minister’s family on their loss.

93. I have been in Washington discussing with our
State Department matters relevant to the debate here.
Despite my efforts, both past and present, to rninimize
Washington’s influence on our positions here, I must
confess that I think it is a worthwhile endeavour
for me to engage in deliberations with the people at
the State Department, including
the Secretary of
State-who does, frankly, have some slight influence
on where we stand on these issues.

The meeting sose nt I p.m.
94. With regard to Ti7e WuIl Street JOLIU~LI~, I think
that most people are aware that this is a country which
prides itself on the guarantee of freedom.of the press,
and Thr Wull Street Journal editors themselves would
be the first to admit that they do not necessarily
take the positions of our Government.
95. There are two far more important
which I should like to refer, however.

matters

Notes
’ Lend Conseauences
for Slates of the Conrinued
Ptwctrce
01
South ~Afiicn
in . NcmIb-‘.
, South
West Africa)
norwirhsfrrtrdin~
Seowiry Cow~cil R-,o!rrtion
276 (1970), Advisory Opiniotl, 1.c.J.
Reports 1971, p, 16.
2 Official Records of rhe Genernl
Assembly,
Thirlylfirsl
Scssim.
Suppktnenr
No. 24, vol. I, Part Three, chap. III, para. 271.

to

3 See Economic and Social Council resolutibn 2015 (LX).

12

HOW TO OBTAIN UMTED

NATIONS PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstorcs and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS IJNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en ventedam les librairies et les agcncesdepositaircs du
monde entier. Informcz-vous auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vousa : Nations Units, Section
des ventes,New York ou Gcneve.

COMO CONSEGUIR PIJBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerlas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-60801-April

198%2,200
