S/PV.7825

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7825th meeting

Monday, 5 December 2016, 2.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-41331 (E)
*1641331*

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 2.25 p.m.

be postponed until Wednesday, 7 December, to which
we agreed.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/1026, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Egypt, New Zealand and
Spain.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The vote you have called today, Sir, on a
draft resolution (S/2016/1026) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria violates the Security Council’s rules
of procedure, since the draft resolution was put into
blue only at 11.20 a.m. this morning and cannot be
voted on before tomorrow morning, in accordance with
the 24-hour rule. There is no consensus among Council
members to waive that rule. This case is of significant
importance because the additional time would
have allowed Council members to take certain new
circumstances into account and to reach consensus on a
draft resolution that could contribute on a practical level
to improving the humanitarian situation in Syria, and
in particular in eastern Aleppo. Those circumstances
are as follows.
On 2 December, Russian Foreign Minister Srgey
Lavrov and United States Secretary of State John
Kerry held negotiations in Rome. At the proposal of
the American side, the outcome of those talks was an
agreement to convene a meeting of experts in Geneva
to resolve the issue of eastern Aleppo. We expressed
our readiness to begin those discussions immediately
and to hold an initial meeting on Sunday, 4 December.
However, our United States partners suggested that it
2/16

05/12/2016

The proposed arrangement anticipates a
full withdrawal of all fighters from the eastern
neighbourhoods of the city, which conforms to the
well-known initiative put forward by Staffan de
Mistura. Initially, it is expected that we would agree on
itineraries and timetables for their withdrawal; as soon
as that takes place, a cessation of hostilities regime
would enter force, allowing the fighters to be evacuated.
In that way, the problem of eastern Aleppo would be
effectively resolved while ensuring the security of
civilians, the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the normalization of the situation as a
whole.
The draft resolution before us refers not to a
withdrawal of fighters from eastern Aleppo but to
an immediate cessation of hostilities, while fighters
would have 10 days to indicate whether or not they
would remain a party to the cessation of hostilities. As
we know, such pauses have been exploited by fighters
every time to replenish their supplies and ranks. Is
strengthening their control over certain quarters of
the city really be worth the suffering of thousands of
people?
The Russian Federation cannot support the draft
resolution submitted by the humanitarian troika. We
shall vote against it against it, as we honestly informed
the Council in advance. Perhaps we should offer our
sympathies to the humanitarian troika, which as know
has been shamelessly pressured by the three Western
permanent members of the Security Council yet again
to put a doomed draft resolution to the vote. We believe
such efforts to be provocations, undermining the efforts
of the International Syria Support Group, especially in
and around Aleppo.
Provocations are taking place not only here in the
Security Council Chamber in New York, but also on
the ground in Syria. Today, fighters shelled a medical
unit of the Russian field hospital in Aleppo. A Russian
nurse was killed as a result of a direct hit and a Russian
pediatric doctor is fighting for his life. These people
were genuinely helping Syrians, while some false
guardians of humanitarian principles have all along
been destroying the country, generously sponsoring
terrorists and continuing to worry about their fate at
any cost in order to implement their plans in the region.
We caution once again that this policy is doomed.
16-41331

05/12/2016

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Sison (United States of America): We have heard
the representative of Russia talk about conversations
with the United States. Russia says that it was on the
cusp of reaching a deal with the United States to allow
for some resolution of the situation in eastern Aleppo,
and that the draft resolution (S/2016/1026) before us
undermines the negotiation. That is a made-up alibi.
The United States, including Secretary Kerry, has
continued our bilateral conversations with Russia to try
to find some way to relieve the suffering around eastern
Aleppo. However, we have not reached a breakthrough
because Russia has been more focused on preserving
its military gains than on helping Aleppo’s civilians.
Russia has many times before held out the vague
prospect of some diplomatic deal to argue for delaying
action at the Security Council. Each time Russia has
followed up its promises with yet another relentless
round of bombing, with horrific human consequences.

The United States must shoulder its responsibility,
which it is trying impose on others, especially in
connection with resolving the problem in Syria. As
co-Chair of the International Syria Support Group,
the United States should show coherence in its
actions, but that is not the case. We are witnessing
the dramatic consequences of that lack of coherence
today. Unfortunately, the United States delegation,
as the members of the Security Council know, has
shamelessly put pressure on the three co-sponsors of
the draft resolution (S/2016/1026) to put it to the vote,
knowing that it would not be adopted. That undermines
the unity of the Council. There is no longer any unity
between the two co-Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group. That represents a dangerous strategy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now put
the draft resolution to a vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

We remain directly engaged with key countries,
including Russia, to address the horrific situation on
the ground, but we will not let Russia string along the
Security Council while waiting for a compromise from
the Russians that never seems to come.

In favour:
Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Senegal, Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America and Uruguay

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.

Against:
China, Russian Federation
(Bolivarian Republic of)

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This is not the first time we have seen this.
Secretary of State John Kerry has been working with
our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey Lavrov, to
reach a concrete result. But whenever they near an
agreement, somebody undermines it. Sometimes
that effort originates in Washington, D.C., from the
Department of Defense or from some other American
agency. Now, unfortunately, this tactic has been
employed by the delegation of the United States in New
York. It is most unfortunate that serious agreements
are reached, and then we are told that nothing of the
kind exists. There was a meeting and an agreement
on new elements submitted by John Kerry, not the
Russian side. Subsequently, we were told that the
American representatives needed three additional days
to discuss the issue, following which we were told that
no agreement had been reached. I recall that, had the
agreement of 12 September been implemented, it would
have allowed us to address the problem in eastern
Aleppo. Once again we are faced with same situation
today, and we strongly deplore it.

Abstaining:
Angola

and

Venezuela

The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 11
votes in favour, 3 votes against and 1 abstention. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make a statement following
the voting.
Mr. Aboulatta: (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Nearly
two months ago, we met in the Security Council to
debate the Syrian crisis, in particular the situation in
Aleppo (see S/PV.7785). We left the Security Council
Chamber carrying only messages of our continued
failure with regard to the Syrian people and indications
that can be explained only as lack of care with regard
to Syrians and the fact that some prefer their narrow
political interests over all else.
I recall now when we declared before the Council
that, despite the strong polarization following the

16-413313/16

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

suspension of coordination between the co-Chairs
of the International Syrian Support Group and the
escalation of the political and military strife among
the various influential parties, we would continue to
work with other members of the Council on the basis of
elements that we believe reflect strong principles that
take into account only Syria’s interests. Indeed, we did
so, over one month of difficult negotiations, based on
those principles, working with Council members and in
cooperation with our partners on this draft resolution
(S/2016/1026), Spain and New Zealand. I am dutybound to express to those delegations, their Permanent
Representatives and their experts on Syria our sincerest
thanks and appreciation. They showned a level of trust
and sincerity throughout difficult negotiations.
We believed that we would be able to reach a very
balanced view reflecting the principles that must not
be affected by political positions. Our approach in that
regard was comprehensive and took up all the issues
on the ground. In our approach, we clearly called on
all parties to the conflict to cease all attacks, starting
in 24 hours, against Aleppo for seven consecutive days
in order to allow humanitarian assistance to reach
the city to save civilians, recalling that assistance
had ceased in July. We also called for an immediate
implementation of the components of the cessation
of hostilities agreements on all Syrian territory in
accordance with resolution 2268 (2016), which also
calls for humanitarian assistance to be delivered to all
Syrian people, in particular in besieged and not easily
accessible areas.
Furthermore, we have publicly called for cessation
of any cooperation between any parties and terrorist
organizations that control large swathes of Syrian
territory, particularly Da’esh and Jabhat Al-Nusra, now
known as Jabhat Fatah Al-Sham. Cooperation by some
parties with Jabhat Fatah Al-Sham/Al-Nusra began
more than a year and a half ago, without any deterrent.
Some groups have reached an unprecedented level
of cooperation that cannot be met with silence. It is
perhaps appropriate that I recall some of the sanctions
that are in accordance with the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Da’esh, Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. It is the only Committee qualified to classify
terrorists, and it continues to closely monitor those
developments in order to adopt future draft resolutions
on a firm basis.
4/16

05/12/2016

I would also like to call on the International Syria
Support Group to resume its work, which was initiated
by our brothers in Jordan a year ago. We thank them
that and for participating in the ongoing efforts.
We also call for a resumption of the political
process and negotiations on the transitional period, in
accordance with the communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015) as soon as possible. Let
me also clearly state that it is unacceptable for those
negotiations to remain suspended. It is also unacceptable
for us to remain silent with respect to those who hamper
those negotiations, whoever they may be.
We were determined to put this draft resolution
to a vote today even though we were fully aware of
the complications surrounding the positions of some
Member States regarding any movement by the Security
Council on the issue. That determination was not
based on political interests. Rather, it is born out of the
strength of our conviction that we are right. Therefore,
Egypt will continue in its approach. It will continue
to use its political capital with all parties, including
major Powers and friendly Powers, whether they are
allies or foes on the Syrian battlefield, to respond to
the pleas of Syrians, regardless of their affiliations or
political positions.
We are not directly party to the crisis. That does
not mean that we do not care. On the contrary, we are
focusing on settling the crisis, not on fuelling it or
benefiting from it. I would like to call on the conscience
of the parties to the conflict — those in the country
and those with regional or international connections.
What you are fighting for in Syria — does it really
justify having to see mothers and fathers holding their
dying children? What is the victory you seek? What is
the aspiration that requires millions of Syrians to seek
refuge and mercy from strangers? What religion, what
sect can still justify this level of bloodshed?
I would also like to address the Syrian people in all
of their communities and faiths — whether Arab, Kurd,
Druze, Yazidi, Muslims, Christians, Sunni, Shia or
Alawi. Yes, we have been unable to impose a settlement
or quick change of the situation on the ground that
would immediately erase their tragedy. However, we
have intent and perseverance. More important, we
have goodwill and good intentions. What we want is
to stand with Syrians, shoulder to shoulder, with every
political tool at our disposal until a final settlement
is reached and the aspirations of Syrians to freedom
16-41331

05/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

and democracy in a united, sovereign State, safe from
extremism and terrorism, are achieved. We make a
promise to Syrians that we shall continue on a straight
path that is dictated only by our humane conscience
towards a brotherly people. We promise to fight any
attempts to fuel the conflict.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand is
bitterly disappointed that the Security Council was not
able to come together today to adopt the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/1026.
The draft resolution, put forward by Egypt, Spain
and New Zealand, represented only a small step. In our
view, it was the minimum required for a credible response
from the Security Council to address the situation in
Aleppo and in the rest of Syria. It was a humanitarian
draft resolution designed to reduce fighting and get aid
to those civilians who most desperately need it. As is
well known, New Zealand has been working towards
such an outcome for many months. The Council’s
failure to act in spite of the graphic monthly briefings
and increasingly urgent pleas from Staffan de Mistura,
Stephen O’Brien and others is deeply damaging to the
Council’s reputation, and catastrophic for the people
of Syria.
As I said last week (see S/PV.7822), our objectives
in presenting this draft resolution are those that have
guided our engagement on Syria since joining the
Council, and that led my Prime Minister to convene
a high-level meeting in September (see S/PV.7775).
Those objectives were and are to reduce the violence, to
restore the ceasefire, to allow humanitarian assistance
to reach those in need and to create space for the
resumption of political talks.
Egypt, Spain and New Zealand had been working
on this draft resolution for over a month. We consulted
extensively and took on board as many views as would
allow us, or so we understood, to achieve consensus
while still making a practical difference for Syrian
civilians on the ground. I would note that the delegation
with which we engaged most intensively and from
which we took the greatest number of changes was the
delegation of the Russian Federation. We circulated
the latest draft text to all Council members and
requested the Secretariat to put it in blue at 8 p.m. on
Friday, 2 December. That request was circulated to
all Council members. It is deeply disappointing that a
trivial procedural point should be advanced as a serious

S/PV.7825

argument for delaying such a draft resolution as this,
against that practical background.
Today’s veto is another indictment on Russia,
on those that supported Russia and on the Council.
Today’s veto demonstrates to the world that for Moscow
and Damascus our common refrain — that there is no
military solution to this conflict — is a hollow fiction.
For those countries it is clear that a military victory
is precisely what they want and are actively pursuing,
even if its cost is continued carnage inflicted on the
Syrian people.
Putting aside the devastating outcome of today’s
vote for the Council’s credibility, we must not lose sight
of the fact that the biggest losers today are those on
the ground who, instead of having a chance to restore
small parts of their lives, will continue to be subjected
to the bombing and blasting that have blighted their
lives for so many years. However, we will not let
today’s great disappointment deter us. New Zealand
will continue to work in the Security Council, in the
General Assembly and elsewhere to continue trying to
protect Syrian civilians.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We
deeply regret that the draft resolution (S/2016/1026)
submitted by Egypt, Spain and New Zealand could
not be adopted. Given the extremely grave situation in
Syria, it was and is the responsibility of the members of
the Security Council to give their unreserved support
to everything that would enable us to save lives. That is
what France did today, alongside the large majority of
the members of the Council, aware of the overwhelming
responsibility that we have to maintain international
peace and security.
The draft text submitted to us was not, by definition,
perfect. It was the result of compromise. However, had
it been adopted, it would have reconstituted a fragile
ray of hope, admittedly partial and late in arrival, that
would have allowed us to work, and work together, to
save lives, put an end to the tragedy of Aleppo and seek
the conditions for a political solution.
In demanding a total halt to attacks for a renewable
seven-day period so as to allow humanitarian actors to
meet the urgent needs in eastern Aleppo, we were not
asking for a concession. It was the minimal response
to the repeated demands from the United Nations
and humanitarian actors, which for months have
been relayed by members of the Council, beginning
with France. It was the minimal delay necessary to

16-413315/16

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

allow access for humanitarian assistance and medical
evacuations under the responsibility of the United
Nations, in accordance — it should be recalled — with
obligations under international humanitarian law. We
were only demanding that the regime and those who
support it finally conform to the obligations that they
have under international humanitarian law.
By delaying the negotiations as long as possible,
and then opposing a very moderate draft text, Russia
chose to remain deaf to the appeals of the international
community and to continue its support, with that of
Iran, for the efforts of the Syrian regime seeking to
take Aleppo regardless of the human cost. That is the
meaning of those successive vetoes.
Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis, France
has defended an unchanging position, that is, the
primacy of a negotiated solution, given that a military
solution is impossible, as only a political solution will
allow us to meet the aspirations of the Syrian people,
ensure lasting peace and combat terrorism. France
is convinced that the headlong military rush by the
regime and its supporters is not simply a moral fault but
also a strategic error — a strategic error that, beyond
Syria, endangers the international community as a
whole. Without a political solution, Syria will remain
what it is today: a devastated and divided country,
prey to incessant fighting and the foremost bastion of
international terrorism.
However, France is not resigned to the deadlock
that we see here again today. As I have said, the only
solution to the Syrian conflict is political. Nothing will
cause France to deviate from that conviction. Nothing
will make us deviate from the road map that was agreed
to by the international community — a political solution
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015), with the establishment of a
transition authority having full executive power. That
is not an ideological position; it is the only possible
solution imposed by the reality in Syria.
We have noted that the limited-format discussions
in Lausanne and Geneva have not made it possible
to halt the current offensive. For that reason, France
calls for the immediate relaunching of a credible and
inclusive international dialogue that brings together
all actors involved in the Syrian conflict to save the
martyred population of Aleppo from destruction.
France hopes that the initiative brought by Canada to
6/16

05/12/2016

the General Assembly demanding the stopping of all
attacks can be carried out.
In such dark hours for Aleppo and Syria, which,
if we are not mistaken, challenge the credibility of the
Council, we have no right to give up. We have the moral
and political obligation to take action, and therefore to
come together to put an end to the tragedy in Aleppo and
seek the conditions for a political solution, which, once
again, is the only possible solution to the Syrian tragedy.
That will be the essence behind all of France’s efforts.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Just five days ago
I sat in this Chamber (see S/PV.7822) and asked what it
would take to stop the horror in Aleppo. Today Russia
and its small number of followers have shown that they
have no interest — none whatsoever — in answering
that question. Instead, for the sixth time in five years,
they have chosen to block meaningful action and hold
the Security Council to ransom. In doing so, and much
more tragically, they have also held to ransom the lives
of hundreds of thousands of innocent men, women and
children currently enduring hell in Aleppo.
They will claim that we made them veto, that there
was not enough time for proper consultations, that we
forced them to a vote for political reasons. Those are
hackneyed excuses. The draft resolution (S/2016/1026)
was first circulated over a month ago. And yet for
most of that time Russia simply refused to engage,
more content to support Al-Assad’s onslaught against
Aleppo than to negotiate with fellow members of the
Security Council.
Let me pay tribute to the work of Egypt, New
Zealand and Spain in seeking consensus on such a
sensitive issue. They left no stone unturned, reaching
out in particular to the Russian delegation. They put
their first draft into blue a week ago.They amended it
to take into account Russian views, and they put their
final version into blue on Friday. And that is the version
in blue that we have in front of us, dated 2 December.
I therefore urge all delegations to avoid hiding behind
hypocritical, bogus procedural arguments.
China’s veto is particularly surprising. Despite
repeated pronouncements against politicization and
in favour of dialogue, China has chosen to side with
Russia — a party to the conflict. Put simply, they have
chosen to veto not because of a lack of consultation,
but because of their long-standing, misplaced faith in a
despot who has killed nearly half a million of his own
people, who has sanctioned the murder of civilians as
16-41331

05/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

they flee the bombed-out ruins of Aleppo — a despot
who would rather reduce Syria to rubble than to
negotiate an overdue peace.
I could go on, but instead let me ask Russia another
question. What did it seek to achieve today? For the
past 71 years, the Council has been responsible for
maintaining international peace and security. Each
and every one of us in the Chamber has committed
to upholding that responsibility. And yet, through its
veto today, Russia has once again blocked meaningful,
credible action — action that could have fulfilled our
collective responsibility. How does that veto serve
international peace and security? How is it in keeping
with the principles that we are all here to uphold?
Russia claims it is fighting terrorism and that its
veto today is in pursuit of ridding Syria of extremists.
That is pure fantasy. Blocking a seven-day ceasefire — a
ceasefire that would have let aid in, that would have
fed starving children — is not fighting terrorism.
Continuing the indiscriminate bombing of civilians and
attacking medical facilities is not fighting terrorism.
Supporting a regime that uses chemical weapons and
carries out war crimes is not fighting terrorism. Russia
will claim that its intent is decent — humanitarian,
even. But that misses the point. Many Council members
have pledged generous amounts — the United Kingdom
has allocated $900 million. But we all know that that
money counts for so little when humanitarian aid
cannot even get in. And we all know who is obstructing
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners. We
all know who is using starve-or-surrender tactics, and
who is bombing civilians into submission.
Even if Russia will not use its influence to stop the
bombing or permit humanitarian aid to be delivered,
it is not too late for Russia and the regime to prevent
even worse atrocities. Russia can still ensure the
protection of civilians leaving eastern Aleppo. Russia
can still enable the United Nations to protect those
fleeing and allow the United Nations to have a role in
planning evacuations.
The world and the Syrian people will not forget
Russia’s role in carrying out, and supporting the regime
in carrying out, such heinous crimes in Syria. Look
again at the faces of those left starving, bleeding and
dying in Aleppo. They are not terrorists. Look again
and change course. We had a chance today to help those
people, to stop the bombing and let aid in. We have once
again failed, but we must keep trying until we succeed.

S/PV.7825

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I will
be very brief. My delegation voted in favour of a draft
resolution (S/2016/1026) that we thought was highly
inadequate. Uruguay understands that the solution to the
crisis in Syria requires an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire throughout the country. The draft resolution
was very far from what we would have liked to have
seen. Nevertheless, we could not vote against it because
at least it could achieve a pause in the massacre. As for
abstaining, there is no option between saving lives and
continuing with the massacre. Therefore, we voted with
full conviction for a draft resolution that I must say it
is inadequate.
I have no doubt that currently in Syria very few
people are worried about what time the text was put in
blue and, for that matter, most certainly they will not
understand how we could be worried about something
to that effect. But in any case, what is very serious is
that the Security Council continues to be unable to
fulfil its role. We can ask ourselves what was the use
of this meeting. Somehow, it might remind us of the
Gabriel García Márquez novel Chronicle of a Death
Foretold, in which everyone knew that Santiago Nasar
would be killed that day by the Vicario brothers but no
one did anything to prevent it.
I believe that the difference here is that many
have been working in search of consensus, although
that continues to escape us. But I think that we
must be persistent in our efforts to ensure that the
solution to the crisis in Syria be a political one and
not military — a solution that includes Syrians and is
led by them. Certainly, it must be a solution in which
the numerous terrorist groups that are constantly
obstructing the pursuit of a solution are excluded from
the political landscape.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Recently,
the conflict in Syria has continued to escalate, causing
a serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
some areas and plunging the Syrian people into deep
suffering. China expresses its deep concern about
the situation in Syria and feels for the Syrian people
in their suffering in the conflict. Under the current
circumstances, it is all the more necessary for the
international community to remain committed to the
political settlement of the question of Syria. It must
work together to push the Syrian issue back on the track
of seeking a solution through peaceful negotiations
and dialogue and to find a fundamental way out of the
conflict as soon as possible.

16-413317/16

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council action on the question of Syria
should be conducive to the work on the four tracks,
namely, a resumption of the ceasefire, political
peace talks, cooperation on counter-terrorism, and
humanitarian relief. The situation in Syria is complex,
sensitive and grave. The parties concerned, such as the
Russian Federation and the United States, are making
diplomatic efforts to ease of the situation in Syria.
The Security Council’s actions should support and
cooperate with the those diplomatic initiatives.
The draft resolution (S/2016/1026) that the Security
Council just voted on includes concrete measures for
easing the humanitarian situation in Syria. Council
members, including the co-penholders, made great
efforts to seek consensus. Those efforts could have
continued so that the Council could speak with one voice
to the outside world and avoid the politicization of the
humanitarian issue. Action on the draft resolution while
there were still serious differences was not conducive to
the diplomatic efforts by the countries concerned, nor
is it helpful for improving the situation in Syria. The
situation in Syria is the result of multiple overlapping
factors. The only way is take an integrated approach to
seek a comprehensive, fair and appropriate settlement.
The international community needs to work
together to ease the humanitarian situation in Syria. It
equally needs to set its sight on the overall situation
and continue to support the United Nations role as the
main channel of mediation and push the Syrian parties
to find an agreement that is acceptable to everyone
through peaceful negotiations, under the principle
of being Syrian-owned and Syrian-led. The Security
Council should maintain unity on the question of Syria
and speak with one voice. It must work together to play
a constructive role for an early political settlement of
the question of Syria.
Finally, I would like to ask the representative of
the United Kingdom what right he has to distort the
position of other countries. The Security Council is
a solemn forum; it is not a place where groundless
attacks can be made against the serious positions of
other countries. Taking a responsible approach and
abiding by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are the minimum requirements for
each and every Member State when participating in the
Council’s work. I would like to request that the United
Kingdom representative put an end to such a practice of
poisoning the atmosphere of the Security Council and
abusing the solemn forum of the Council. Today is not
8/16

05/12/2016

the first time he has done that, and I hope that such
abuse will not be repeated in the future.
Mr. Ramirez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela once again expresses its concern about
the horrendous armed conflict that has caused a blood
bath in Syria, and in particular about the suffering
among civilians. We condemn the indiscriminate
attacks, irrespective of who carries them out, against
the civilian population and humanitarian actors, such
as the bombing of hospitals and health centres and
the practice of besieging civilians. In that connection,
we condemn the recent attacks perpetrated by armed
groups of the so-called moderate opposition against a
Russian field hospital and its humanitarian personnel,
killing two Russian health professionals.
Our country voted against the draft resolution
(S/2012/1026) on the situation in eastern Aleppo because
we believe that the text does not appropriately reflect
the situation on the ground, in particular the threat
represented by the Al-Nusra Front and its associated
groups in the eastern part of Aleppo. We regret that
since the beginning of the armed conflict, five years
ago, some members of the Security Council, which are
directly involved in the gruelling war, have continued
to impose their own particular geopolitical agenda to
the detriment of the people of Syria and the objective
treatment of the humanitarian situation.
Unfortunately, the humanitarian dimension has
been politicized anew, and the justifications and
ingredients that triggered and fuelled the tragedy
are again being ignored. In Syria, a terrible war has
been imposed, and some countries have unflaggingly
supported terrorist groups, the executioners of the
Syrian people. The perpetrators of this horror even
speak out against and offend those countries in the
Security Council that do not give the green light to
their continued aggression against Syria. I therefore
fully support the views expressed by the Permanent
Representative of China.
As we said on 8 October (see S/PV.7785), the
fight against terrorism being conducted jointly by the
Governments of Syria and Russia is the most effective
way to protect the Syrian population from the terror
and death that the terrorists are carrying out in the
territories under their control in eastern Aleppo. A
genuine threat exists in that region and is reflected by
the thousands of fighters of the Al-Nusra Front and other
16-41331

05/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

terrorist groups that are holding hostage the thousands
of civilians living there and using them as human
shields — all in breach of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. This type of
fighting by terrorist groups can be seen on all fronts in
the battle, including currently in Mosul. This terrorist
tactic cannot be used to inhibit a frontal attack on the
scourge of terrorism.
The purpose of today’s draft resolution was not
to assist the people of Aleppo who are suffering the
onslaught of war. Rather, it gave propaganda treatment to
the humanitarian issue in order to frustrate the Russian
Federation in its efforts to combat terrorism. Today, by
voting on the draft, the Security Council, despite the
views of several of its members, demonstrated its lack
of unity on this issue, which is detrimental to finding
a political solution to the conflict. Had there been a
genuine interest in coming up with a compromise draft
resolution, as was done in resolution 2319 (2016) on
the renewal of the mandate of the Joint Investigation
Mechanism, the Security Council would have been in a
position to adopt a draft resolution that might have dealt
with the complex situation on the ground. Today’s vote
is unfortunate, particularly when diplomatic efforts are
being made in Geneva between the co-Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group. We demand that the
diplomatic path be followed.
It is also necessary to bear in mind that the Syrian
Government has the full right to defend its sovereignty
and territorial integrity when threatened with terrorism
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
Al-Nusra Front. Further, we should also keep in mind
that the military operations under way in coordination
with Russia are aimed at retaking the territory occupied
by these terrorist groups. It is therefore a matter of
maintaining territorial unity and political independence
of the nation, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
In the fight against these terrorist groups, it is
clear that the full commitment and efforts of the Syrian
Government to protect its own people from terrorist
barbarism have been handicapped by external forces
that have pledged to defeat the legitimate authorities of
the country. For us, it is remarkable how the civilians
of eastern Aleppo are fleeing terrorists who are trying
to use them as human shields, and trying to reach
Government-controlled territory where they find safety
and humanitarian assistance.

S/PV.7825

In eastern Aleppo, terrorist groups are using these
people as human shields, as the Islamic State has done
in areas that it controls. It is using humanitarian aid for
its own purposes rather than the undoing the tragedy
that it represents for the Syrian people. We have insisted
that the so-called moderate opposition be separated
from Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front in order to
show its true intentions with regard to achieving peace
through political negotiations. The opposition needs to
join the fight against terrorism and cease to be part of
the scourge as it has unfortunately been until now.
Of course, the solution to the conflict is not military
one but political. That does not mean, however, that the
Syrian Government relinquishes its responsibility to
protect the people from terrorism and defend its own
territory. We once again support the Special Envoy for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, with a view to achieving
a peaceful and political solution to the conflict. We
call on the parties to commit themselves decisively to
advancing the shared goal of peace and stability in this
country, beginning with an effective withdrawal of all
fighters in eastern Aleppo.
Finally, we support a negotiated and political
settlement of this terrible crisis. Foreign interference in
Syria must cease. The Syrian people are paying a very
high price in defending its integrity and sovereignty and
in defeating terrorism. The international community,
and particularly the Security Council, must reach
consensus and take constructive steps in order to stop
the violence and re-establish peace.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia has repeatedly
called for the Security Council to act more decisively
on Syria. We therefore view this latest effort by Egypt,
New Zealand and Spain as an attempt to assert the
Council’s authority and discharge its responsibility to
effectively address the deteriorating situation in Syria,
particularly in Aleppo.
The fulfilment of the draft resolution’s (S/2016/1026)
main objective, which was to achieve a ceasefire in
Aleppo to allow for the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian assistance, is absolutely critical for
reducing death and destruction and for saving thousands
of lives in the besieged city, especially women and
children. Also of utmost importance to my delegation
is the fate of thousands who are facing the great risk
of mass starvation. An urgent need for the activation
of the United Nations four-point humanitarian plan to
resupply medical and food assistance needs no further

16-413319/16

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

elaboration, and the presence of medical personnel to
treat the many sick and wounded is urgently needed.
Given the compelling humanitarian reasons
behind it, my delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution. We have consistently pressed for alleviating
the appalling humanitarian situation being faced by
innocent civilians in Syria. We are therefore gravely
disappointed that this draft humanitarian resolution
failed to be adopted. It is a betrayal of all hopes pinned
on the Council to alleviate the dreadful suffering
caused by a brutal conflict.
We have spent hours listening to the heartwrenching accounts of a humanitarian catastrophe, and
with the Security Council’s inability to act, do we have
the heart to listen to more graphic briefings? What is
required is actions to halt the fighting in order to pave
the way for the delivery of the humanitarian assistance
that the people of Syria are so desperately missing.
For the sake of these innocent lives we will not
give up hope. We cannot despair. We will continue to
support any initiative, be it in the Security Council or
outside the Council, to see an end to the brutal conflict
and destruction in eastern Aleppo.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine commends
the dedicated efforts of the delegations of Spain, New
Zealand and Egypt. Ukraine voted in favour of the
draft resolution (S/2016/1026), since we wholeheartedly
hoped that it would have served the purpose of breaking
the dangerous pattern of escalation in Syria and
contribute to easing the continued intense suffering
inflicted on the Syrian people. The draft resolution
presented a rare if pale glimmer of hope in the otherwise
gloomy environment around the Syrian issue in the
Security Council.
It is exactly for that reason that we are extremely
dismayed, but not surprised, by the fact that all these
efforts were, in the end, derailed once again by the
Russian Federation. It is a terrible shame to talk about
procedures as if they are more important than the
principles of the Organization and the Security Council,
let alone the wasted lives of increasing numbers of
innocent people in Aleppo.
If the draft resolution had seen the light of day and
were adopted, it would have been a small yet meaningful
step towards exercising the collective responsibility
of the Council. It would have helped to prevent what
has already become one of the gravest humanitarian
10/16

05/12/2016

tragedies of modern times. It is utterly frustrating that
the counter-terrorism narrative will continue to be used
by Russia as an alibi for bombardments of opposition
forces and civilians in Aleppo and elsewhere. History
will hold accountable those who did not let the Council
discharge its duties.
We once again stress the urgent need for the
United Nations to look into the alarming reports of
the extensive use of incendiary weapons as well as of
other indiscriminate weapons, including bunker-buster
bombs. We firmly insist that those responsible for
committing crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other grave violations of international humanitarian law
should be brought to account. I am sure that they will.
Let us also convey once again a clear message
to those planning a retake of eastern Aleppo. The
idea that a regime victory would lead to an enforced
stability in Syria is a dangerous fantasy. What we are
witnessing is turning Aleppo into another Grozny, and
a Grozny scenario in Syria is possible but will never be
sustainable; there is no military solution to this conflict.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): Abu Jaafar,
a coroner in eastern Aleppo, recently told a reporter,
“You know, it is not our job to bury people, but if
we do not, no one else will. Where we used to bury
one man, we now lay down entire families. We dig
and we dig; it never ends”.
We dig and we dig; it never ends. Today we had
a chance not to end but to briefly stop the ongoing
butchery in eastern Aleppo. We have failed because
of a cynical act. With a wave of their hands, Russia,
China and Venezuela showed that they do not want the
suffering of eastern Aleppo to end. They have heard the
cries of people who are pleading for their lives, people
cowering in the basements of their ruined homes, people
who are picking through trash to find a morsel to eat,
and they said, “No, the Security Council cannot help
you”. Russia, together with its ally, Bashar Al-Assad,
will keep bombing these people instead.
Today we will hear a lot of words from Russia; we
have heard a lot already. But it is Russia’s action using
its veto to block a brief humanitarian pause that speaks
volumes today. The raised hands that blocked today’s
draft resolution (S/2016/1026) to aid suffering civilians
shows us everything we need to know about Russia’s
intentions in Syria, and Russia has no one to blame for
its veto today except itself.
16-41331

05/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

If it had been adopted and implemented, the draft
resolution that Russia and China vetoed today would
have established a seven-day pause in the fighting
in eastern Aleppo. That pause would have allowed
life-saving humanitarian aid to get into eastern Aleppo
and allowed civilians who wished to escape to leave.
This was no political draft resolution. Its purpose was,
in fact, quite simple: stop the bombing, stop the shelling
and get people help.
It probably should not even have been necessary to
propose this draft resolution. After all, the Council has
long demanded that the regime enable immediate and
unhindered humanitarian assistance, and, of course,
international humanitarian law requires that civilians
not be targeted. The situation in eastern Aleppo is so
dire that the Council has to demand that the parties
respect the norms that all of us know should apply. Let
me tell the Council what Russia and China have vetoed
today in blocking this draft resolution and allowing the
bombardment of eastern Aleppo to continue. They have
vetoed the delivery of basic medicine to people who
will die without it. They have vetoed the evacuation
of sick and dying people who have no chance of
surviving in the bombed-out hospitals and clinics of
eastern Aleppo. The have vetoed the delivery of food to
civilians who could starve to death and, in the case of
vulnerable children, suffer lifelong effects from severe
malnutrition. They have vetoed the lives of innocent
Syrians. This action is a death sentence for innocent
men, women and children.

S/PV.7825

reportedly by an artillery strike. Modar’s father then
went out to search for a place to bury his son. As the
father searched, he, too, was killed, hit by an airstrike.
So Modar lost his brother and his father. Think about
that: parents being killed as they look for places to
bury their children. And finding places to bury the
dead in eastern Aleppo is getting harder and harder.
Cemeteries are full; they have been full for a long time
now. People have started to dig shallow graves in public
parks, rushing to dig so as to avoid the fate of Modar’s
father. They have even stopped burying loved ones in
the daytime; it is simply too dangerous.
Russia and China’s vetoes mean that we on the
Council have failed to stop this destruction. History
will remember that Russia once again, together with
China and Venezuela, thwarted the Council’s efforts to
act to help the Syrian people for the second time in as
many months.
The United States recognizes New Zealand and
Spain for their tireless efforts to find a way here in
the Security Council to stop the fighting in eastern
Aleppo. We also greatly appreciate Egypt’s leadership
in preparing and advocating for this draft resolution
for weeks and for speaking on behalf of the countries
in the region most directly affected by the conflict to
demand a halt to Russia and the Al-Assad’s regime’s
brutal campaign, calls that Russia has blatantly defied
in vetoing this draft resolution.

So Syrians trapped in eastern Aleppo will continue
to have to choose between two hells: stay put and be
barrel-bombed, starved and mortared to death, or
try to escape and risk being bombed or picked off by
snipers on the journey or tortured or disappeared by
regime forces.

But in the face of this callous act, we must not
give up. The civilians of eastern Aleppo cannot stop
the bombs from falling on them or get their hands on
the food and medicine they need to survive; but we
who are not trapped there do have that power. So while
Russia has taken advantage of its permanent seat on the
Council to block today’s draft resolution, the rest of us
have an obligation to continue to search for other ways
to pressure Russia and the Al-Assad regime to stop this
devastating assault. And each time an approach comes
up short, we must be willing to try another strategy to
end the carnage. We can all fight harder and dig deeper
to make sure that Russia never evades scrutiny for its
actions in Syria, to make sure that we are never silent
in the face of these atrocities and to make sure that we
apply maximum pressure to bring this barbaric military
campaign to a halt.

Let me share what just one resident of Eastern
Aleppo faced this past week. Modar Shekho is an
emergency nurse. His brother was killed last Sunday,

Mr. Okamura (Japan): Japan supported the
draft resolution (S/2016/1026) proposed by the
three co-penholders — Egypt, New Zealand and

We had no illusions about today’s draft resolution
offering a lasting solution to the fighting in Aleppo,
much less in all of Syria. But if implemented, it
unquestionably would have saved the lives of Syrian
civilians. It would have eased their suffering, if only for
a week, and it just might have created space for other,
more durable solutions to emerge beyond a brief pause
in the killing. Because of today’s vetoes, now we have
none of that.

16-4133111/16

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

Spain — because we believe that it could have served
as a tool to meet the pressing humanitarian needs in
Aleppo and elsewhere in Syria. As Japan has often
emphasized, our most important priority is to take
action that improves the situation on the ground,
regardless of the ongoing political impasse.
It is deeply regrettable that the Security Council
has once again failed to overcome its differences. The
Council is ultimately responsible for addressing the
devastating humanitarian situation in Syria. We have
worked hard, and we are close to reaching an agreement
on how to alleviate the protracted suffering of the
Syrian people. I sincerely urge all Council members
not to abandon our collective and individual efforts,
and to resume our discussions immediately after
today’s meeting.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Regrettably, we
felt compelled to abstain in the voting on today’s draft
resolution (S/2016/1026), which, if it had been negotiated
with the sole objective of saving Syrian lives in mind,
would have been adopted by consensus. A resolution
designed to stop the bombing for 24 or 48 hours, or
even seven days, only for it to be resumed immediately
afterwards, is not what is required of the Council. Our
consultations clearly pointed to the outcome we have
just reached — a draft resolution that could not be
adopted, since we did not reach a consensus. Angola
has worked consistently to try to enable the Council
to reach a consensus and will continue to do so. We
should stand united in the face of a situation such as the
one in Syria. I would like to make it clear that Angola
will continue to be engaged in the search for a solution
that can save lives in Syria by stopping the bombing
and ending the war that continues to make victims of
so many.
We need a lasting peace in Syria, not just in Aleppo,
and I am sure that if the Council continues to act as it
should — in unity, and with a clear goal — we should
be able to reach that goal, as we have done in adopting
previous resolutions on Syria.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): In deciding
to vote in favour of the draft resolution (S/2016/1026)
on the humanitarian situation in Syria introduced by
its three co-authors, Egypt, New Zealand and Spain,
the delegation of Senegal wanted to echo the numerous
appeals and warnings made to the Council, including
in this Chamber itself, to act without delay in order
to prevent the city of Aleppo, and its eastern districts
12/16

05/12/2016

in particular, from becoming an unprecedentedly
terrible tragedy before the helpless gaze of the
international community.
Beyond the issue of Aleppo, what we are really
talking about is breathing new life into the ceasefire
throughout Syria by implementing resolution
2268 (2016) effectively, so as to ensure access for
humanitarian assistance and the evacuation of those
who are injured or vulnerable. We are also talking
about finding the means to combat terrorism more
effectively within the framework of a comprehensive
strategy that respects international humanitarian law
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
For all those reasons, my delegation reiterates its call
on the International Syria Support Group, particularly
its two co-Chairs, to make every effort to arrive at an
effective, lasting truce that can give every chance to
a credible political process under the auspices of the
United Nations on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 and resolution 2254 (2015).
It is by coming together around the goal of peace
and stability in Syria that we will succeed in effectively
combating terrorist organizations such as the Islamic
State and Jabhat Fatah Al-Sham, formerly the Al-Nusra
Front, which are unquestionably our common enemies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We deeply regret the vetos of today’s draft
resolution (S/2016/1026), introduced by Spain, Egypt
and New Zealand. Spain believes that its text, which
is not perfect and undoubtedly comes too late for the
thousands of lives that have been lost already, would
have made it possible to protect the civilian population
of Aleppo from the worst consequences of the war in
Syria and to re-establish the cessation of hostilities
throughout the country.
As divided as the Council is with respect to how
to respond to the conflict, it has continued to shoulder
the responsibility conferred on it by the Charter of
the United Nations. If peace cannot be maintained,
we should at least be able to maintain respect for
international humanitarian law, which prohibits attacks
on civilians and requires the regular provision of
humanitarian aid. Spain, Egypt and New Zealand share
duties as rapporteurs on the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Over the past two years, we have often been
tempted to urge a response to the problems in Syria
in the Security Council, but have refrained in order to
16-41331

05/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7825

avoid divisiveness and interference in the negotiations
being conducted in other forums. We have crafted more
than one draft resolution that has not seen the light of
the day and have also participated in initiatives that
ran the risk of creating conflict within the Security
Council. This time, however, we could no longer stay
silent, considering that the General Assembly will be
holding a meeting in three days in order to debate a
draft resolution demanding that the Council take action
on the grave situation in Syria.

today? Where did they begin, and why? What has been
the role played by the various countries concerned? The
historical record is very clear. Every member of the
Council is very well aware of that. It cannot be changed
by distorting the positions of some countries on the
Council. I have already explained China’s position and
do not want to repeat myself.

As my colleagues from Egypt and New Zealand have
recalled, we convened an initial round of negotiations
on today’s draft resolution on 3 November. Despite
the desperate situation of Syria’s civilian population,
we set aside enough time to help us work to reach a
consensus. We have striven to find language that
could bring together positions that were very different,
included some that were fully opposed. We have
incorporated suggestions from every delegation that
wanted to contribute to drafting the text. We have done
everything possible — indeed, perhaps, sometimes the
impossible — to reach an agreement. We are sorry that
our efforts have not produced results, but we do believe
it was our duty to try.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As far as I am concerned, the discussion
ended somewhat unexpectedly for me when you took
the floor in your national capacity, Sir. I wanted to say
a few words after the voting as well. I will be brief,
since we have discussed the situation in Syria many
times, including just recently. We have already stated
our position.

The year 2016 is the four hundredth anniversary of
the death of Cervantes, the author of Don Quixote, who
will always be remembered for his impossible dream
of becoming a knight errant. With today’s veto of our
draft resolution, the Spanish delegation has awoken
from its dream, but we will not give up. I would like to
conclude by expressing our gratitude to the delegations
of Egypt and New Zealand, which have shared with us
our frustrated attempt to tackle the conflict in Syria. It
has been an honour to work with both of them.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked for
the floor to make a further statement.

Some rhetorical, perhaps even polemical, questions
were asked with regard to what Russia is trying to achieve.
I will tell the Council what Russia is trying to achieve:
Russia is attempting to find a solution — including
through the Security Council — that would have a
chance at success.
The initiative that Mr. Sergey Lavrov and Secretary
of State John Kerry discussed two days ago has a
chance to succeed because it would lead to an effective
end to the tragedy in Aleppo, which has lasted for many
years — both in eastern and western Aleppo, which is
actually one huge area with ongoing military activities.

The representative of China has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.

I regret that the representative of the United States
was so aggressive in her statement. Once again, it
was clear from her statement that the delegation of
the United States is somehow trying to disavow the
initiative of Secretary of Statey Kerry. I hope that the
Secretary of State will find the strenght to pursue this
initiative, because it could lead to an effective and
lasting solution.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has very important work to do, and
I do not want to take up any more of members’ time.
However, with regard to the statement made by the
United States representative, I would like to emphasize
one point.

I would like to say just a few words on the statement
made by the representative of Ukraine. I thought it
quite curious that the criticism that the representative
of Ukraine tried to direct at Damascus could also be
levelled at Kyiv, word for word, with its anti-terrorist
operation in the Donbas region.

How did the situation in Syria come about, and
how did the problems that other countries in the Middle
East are dealing with reach the point where they are

The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
has asked for the floor to make a further statement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

16-4133113/16

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I apologize for taking
the floor again but I must make a few comments on the
illusion under which the delegation of the United States
is operating with regard to my country’s vote.
First of all, as the Ambassador of China stated
so eloquently, I would like to recall the high level of
responsibility that the United States shoulders in the
origin and subsequent developments of a conflict whose
consequences we are seeing in Syria. Interventionist
policies in the Middle East — in Iraq, Libya and
Syria — are among the main causes of the emergence
of terrorism and the destabilization of institutions and
States in North Africa.
No institution has been able to address terrorism
because armies and other State institutions have been
destroyed. In that regard, for a State to invoke the
humanitarian situation that it has caused itself is an
act of political cynicism. As a country elected by the
General Assembly to be a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, Venezuela is responsible
for superimposing the elements of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations on any national
or geopolitical interest. For that reason, in all of our
resolutions and actions, we have firmly supported the
principles of the United Nations to counter foreign
interference, defend sovereignty and support peace.
We do so without employing double standards or
preconditions and we do so in all circumstances.
President Obama has acknowledged his mistakes.
He announced them publicly when referring to the
intervention in Libya. North American domestic
political debate makes many references to the mistakes
made in Iraq and Syria. What is regrettable about the
entire situation is that in spite of this ongoing debate
on Syria here in the Security Council, it is the Syrian
people who are dying and the victims of a brutal conflict
that has been thrust on them, in which terrorist groups
have destroyed and devastated the entire country.
That means that we have shared but differentiated
responsibilities within the Security Council. Some
countries have been directly involved in this conflict
and could do a little more to achieve a political solution.
That is why we believe in and support the efforts of
the International Syria Support Group, whose two
co-Chairs are members of the Security Council.
In addition, we cannot allow the political discussion
and division in the Council on this type of vote to distract
14/16

05/12/2016

us from the main goal of the Security Council, which is
to defeat terrorism. As a body, our responsibility should
be to support a political solution. As stated openly,
there are no military solutions. Of course, as human
beings we would like to see a radical change in the
humanitarian situation for the peoples of Syria, Iraq,
Yemen and Libya, on whom great suffering has been
inflicted as a result of the war. That can be achieved
only through political agreement, the cessation of
hostilities and an agreement to be reached by all parties
involved to ensure that Syrians decide their own future
without interference and interventionism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United States of America has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): As the origin
of the Syrian crisis has been raised by others who just
took the floor, in March 2011 protests against Bashar
Al-Assad began in Syria. He responded with brutal
violence, which dramatically escalated the situation,
and then relied upon others to support him. The United
Nations responded with numerous resolutions and
communiqués, which all start with a ceasefire, and
that is what we tried to do today. Any allegations to
the contrary about the United States on this matter
are absurd.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Ukraine has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): For the first time in the
Security Council, I was very glad to hear the Russian
Federation make a comparison between Syria and
Ukraine because that is the issue that we have tried to
raise here in the Council since we joined. The methods
used by the Russian Federation and its proxies in Donbas
are exactly the same as those being used in Syria. First
they intervene and then play the role of mediator.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The sponsors of terrorism are the ones
daydreaming about Syria’s downfall, just as they
dreamed of burying Iraq, Libya and Yemen. However,
I am sure that when they fall asleep they will have
nightmares about and be haunted by Syrian, Libyan,
Yemeni and Palestinian curses.
16-41331

05/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

From the very first days of the terrorist war imposed
on my country, Syria, the United States, France and
Britain, which have been calling for action, became
worthy of the title of the three musketeers who defend
terrorism. If only they modelled themselves after
Don Quixote, whom you mentioned, Mr. President,
as he was a noble person fighting for human justice.
Those three States, in addition to other States outside
the Council — such as Turkey, Qatar and Saudi
Arabia — call for convening formal and informal
meetings and informal-informal consultations, in
various formats, and submit one draft resolution after
another, in such a way that has pushed the United
Nations to abandon its most important purposes and
principles in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Through the erroneous practices of some, the
Organization has now become a platform and a tool
to defend, protect and promote terrorism in Syria and
undermine international consensus on combating it. If
that continues to be the case, we would not be surprised
if the Governments of those States were to nominate
terrorists — such as the Briton Jihadi John, the French
Abu Murrah, the American Abu Huraira, the Turkish
Abu Mekdad, the Saudi Abdullah Al-Muhaysini or
the Canadian Abu Abdul Rahman, in addition to Abu
Jaafar from Aleppo, who was just mentioned by the
representative of the United States — for a Nobel Peace
Prize. Or indeed, if the United Kingdom and French
Governments were to name a couple of streets in Paris
and London after Abu Mohammad Al-Julani, leader of
Jabhat Al-Nusra, or Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, leader of
Da’esh, in eternal commemoration of their contribution
to humanitarian action in Aleppo, the promotion of
democracy and the protection of civilians.
We would call on the three musketeers today and
ask them where they have been. Why were they silent?
Why this shameful posture vis-à-vis the bombing of
the Russian field hospital today, with the killing of two
Russian doctors and the wounding of staff and patients
alike by the self-styled moderate terrorists who are
being defended by those States in act, deed and word
inside and outside of the Security Council? That field
hospital was set up to treat innocent civilians liberated
by the Syrian army and its allies from the terrorists of
Jabhat Al-Nusra, who had used them as human shields.
It is a well-established fact that terrorists entered
Aleppo in the summer of 2012, as two United Nations
officials, Mr. De Mistura and before him Mr. Stephen

S/PV.7825

O’Brien, finally recognized in their latest briefing (see
S/PV.7822) to the Security Council.
The liberation of some 100,000 civilians in Aleppo,
from the area members refer to as eastern Aleppo,
including tens of thousands of children, was never a
part of the plans of the three musketeers’ Governments
and their proxies. Otherwise, those Governments would
have welcomed the achievements of the Syrian army
and its allies, who are combating terrorism in Syria on
behalf of the entire membership of the international
community — now that the threat of terrorism is
present in every corner of the world because of the
reckless policies and the cheap political blackmail of
those Governments.
I will not recount the suffering of our people in
Aleppo under the practices of terrorist groups — nor,
indeed, the horrific stories being told by those freed
from the crime and barbarity of those groups. But
I would confirm that the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, supported by its allies, will not give in
to the attempts of those three States and their proxies
to exploit the Security Council to support terrorists
in Syria. We will not let our people in Aleppo down.
We will not hesitate in our constitutional and legal
duty to expel terrorists from Aleppo and from all
Syrian territory. We will not hesitate to save Syrians
from the scourge and practices of those groups, in
conformity with the principles of international law and
in implementation of Security Council resolutions on
combating terrorism — just like any State Member
of this international Organization that cherishes
its sovereignty.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
its allies have abided by all previous periods of calm
because we value the lives of Syrian civilians. However,
those periods were simply used as an opportunity
for terrorist groups, supported and directed by their
handlers — some States members of the Security
Council and some not — to regroup their forces and
reconstitute their terrorist fighters and to obtain more
weapons and military, human and logistical supplies
in order to carry out their crimes against the Syrian
people. In that context, the question being asked by the
Syrian people and the free international public opinion
is this: Has the Security Council ever adopted a draft
resolution to impose a truce on terrorists merely to
allow them to take a breath and rearm?

16-4133115/16

S/PV.7825

The situation in the Middle East

In the face of such cheap political blackmail by the
three musketeers, the Syrian Government, supported
by its allies, will continue to spare no effort — as it
has done since the very first days of the war against
terrorism — in upholding international humanitarian
law, protecting civilians and fulfilling its duty to
assist all Syrians in need, including by recently
putting in place safe passage for civilians in Aleppo
to facilitate their exit. Armed persons were also given
the opportunity to lay down their weapons in order
to restore peace and stability to the city. In return,
international humanitarian organizations and their
officials — including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs — who have cried tears before
the Security Council, have to date done nothing to help
the people liberated by the Syrian Army from terrorism
in Aleppo.
It is now the duty of Member States of this
international Organization not to fall victim to the
attempts of some States members of the Security
Council and outside to force through draft resolutions

16/16

05/12/2016

that only strengthen terrorism and promote it in Syria.
No Member State is safe from terrorism. For those who
hold high the interests of the Syrian people, either to
alleviate their suffering or to reach a Syrian-led political
solution, I emphasise that they must knock at the door
of the Syrian Government. The address is known to all.
In conclusion, a permanent Member State of the
Council, whose Foreign Secretary justifies the killing
by the Saudi air force of thousands of civilians in
Yemen, destroying that country, surely is in no position
to make false accusations against others. Today the
Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom said that Saudi
Arabia had crossed no red lines in Yemen and that the
United Kingdom would continue to provide weapons
and advice to Saudi Arabia in its war against Yemen.
That was the statement, word for word, from the United
Kingdom Foreign Minister, in exact contradiction
to what the world is witnessing: the bombing of
hospitals, the killing of civilians and the destruction of
infrastructure in Yemen.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

16-41331
