S/PV.8241

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8241st meeting

Monday, 23 April 2018, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra/Mr. Tenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Dah
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Czaputowicz
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Youth, peace and security
Identical letters dated 2 March 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/86)
Letter dated 6 April 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/324)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-11894 (E)
*1811894*

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Youth, peace and security
Identical letters dated 2 March 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the General Assembly and the President of
the Security Council (see S/2018/86)
Letter dated 6 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/324)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh,
Belgium,
Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal, Qatar,
Slovakia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan and Yemen to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth; Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author of the
progress study on youth, peace and security; Ms. Sophia
Pierre-Antoine, Member of the Advisory Council of
the World Young Women Christian Association; and
Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet, Executive Director of the
Organisation URU, Central African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Dan Neculăescu, State Secretary for Regional
Affairs and Multilateral Global Affairs in the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Romania, in his capacity as Chair
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission; His
Excellency Mr. Christian Leffler, Deputy Secretary
2/86

23/04/2018

General for Economic and Social Issues, European
External Action Service of the European Union; Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and His Excellency Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser,
High Representative for the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/86, which contains the text of identical
letters dated 2 March 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and
the President of the Security Council.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2018/324, which contains the
text of a letter dated 6 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wickramanayake.
Ms. Wickramanayake: “One day I will become
President and I will bring a law that will stop people
from fighting and stop using guns and bombs”, my best
friend told me when we were in sixth grade. Unlike most
sixth graders around the world, we were not having that
conversation in a classroom or a playground. Instead,
we were whispering into each other’s ears in a safety
bunker in the corner of our school grounds. There
were bombings and suicide attacks in the capital of Sri
Lanka, Colombo, and running to the safety bunker was
a regular activity during our school days.
Many years later, as the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, I had an opportunity to meet and
hold hands with hundreds of young people in conflictaffected areas around the world and share their
heart-wrenching stories. But the difference was that
some of them — without waiting to be President and
without resources or institutional support — were
already leading exceptional peacebuilding initiatives
in their communities, schools, townships and even
refugee camps. Today we celebrate those fearless
young peacebuilders.
Allow me to thank the Government of Peru for
its leadership in convening this historic open debate.
Around this table today, in addition to Government
representatives, we are three young people — young
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

women — about to brief the Security Council, which
I believe is a first in the history of the Council and a
fair reflection of how young people, especially young
women, are turning tables and leading change on
the ground.
I would like to thank Mr. Graeme Simpson,
independent lead author of the progress study on
youth, peace and security, appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the Expert Advisory Group for its
support extended to guide Mr. Simpson’s work. I would
also like to acknowledge the work of the United Nations
Population Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
which acted as secretariat for that independent report,
as well as the United Nations Development Programme
and other United Nations agencies for co-convening
regional consultations with young people and the
numerous partners from civil society and others.
It is not every day that the Security Council has
an opportunity to gather around an independent report
carrying the voices of over 4,000 young people from all
regions of the world, who represented the aspirations
of millions more. It was one of the most participatory
processes ever undertaken with the United Nations
support. Those young people entrusted us to carry
to the Security Council their hopes and unfiltered
perspectives for a more peaceful world. Today we
will hear directly from two of them: Kessy EkomoSoignet from the Central African Republic and Sophia
Pierre-Antoine from Haiti.
The date of 23 April marks exactly three years since
the Security Council convened its second-ever meeting
(see S/PV.7432) on the role of youth in promoting peace,
which was presided over by the youngest-ever Council
President, the then-21-year-old Crown Prince of Jordan.
The meeting recognized that young people drive change
but they are not in the driver’s seat and called for giving
them the license to help steer our common future.
Thousands of young people rallied behind that call by
using their exceptional communication and networking
skills to mobilize behind a common cause. They
challenged and rejected the false narratives labelling
them as a threat to peace and stability in society. The
Security Council responded by adopting resolution
2250 (2015). That resolution offers a beacon of hope
to countless young women and men risking their lives
to address conflict, violent extremism and the need for
peace. From Cameroon to Myanmar, from Kyrgyzstan
to Guatemala, young people use the resolution to engage
their Governments and support their work.

S/PV. 8241

A little more than two years after the adoption of
resolution 2250 (2015), much has happened already.
Coalitions on youth, peace and security have been formed
in a number of countries. Dedicated programmes, with
young people at their heart, are being designed. Civil
society partners have mobilized to support the work led
by young people. United Nations country teams have
experimented with ambitious programmes. Donors are
rethinking their funding streams. Now we have the
progress study, which gives us unique insights on how
young people see and experience the world we live in,
their hopes for peace and security and their demands
of Governments and the multilateral system. It echoes
what I have heard from young people around the world.
This all points to two key issues that need
immediate attention: the growing mistrust among
young generations towards formal political institutions
and the exclusion of young people from political, civic
and economic life. Allow me to highlight a number of
key takeaways.
The progress study is a critical contribution to
the discussions on building and sustaining peace.
This debate, on the eve of the high-level meeting on
sustaining peace to be convened by the President of
the General Assembly, shows that we are starting
to see young people as the missing peace. That is
directly related to the Secretary-General’s priority of
preventing conflict and violence. The youth, peace
and security agenda is at the intersection of Agenda
2030 and its ambitious Goals. It is at the very nexus
of peace and security, development and human rights.
It also is a critical complement to the women and
peace and security agenda and the children and armed
conflict agenda.
The progress study give us pointers that can inform
Member States’ ongoing thinking about the reform of
the United Nations and points towards new systems
of accountability, the engagement of civil society and
young people. The study offers us a new narrative on
the role of young people. It recognizes that only a small
minority of young people ever engages in violence, and
it warns against policy panic triggered by unfounded
assumptions that youth are violent.
This agenda is about transforming systems that
lead to the exclusion of young people, shifting how
they are engaged and protecting their human rights.
The complex nature of peacebuilding and conflict
prevention requires us to tap into the potential and

18-118943/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2018

creativity of young people. As Secretary-General
Guterres said,

Countries must remove all age restrictions that limit
young people’s political participation.

“If we are serious about prevention, and
particularly about preventing conflict, we need to
be serious about engaging with and investing in
young women and men.”

Lastly, we can partner. Today’s open debate
should be an important building block to continue our
collective efforts to promote young peacebuilders.
I have personally met young people in Iraq, Somalia
and Colombia who spoke about how resolution 2250
(2015) is helping to close the trust deficit between
young people and the international community. We
need to build on that momentum. In that connection,
I welcome the efforts of Peru and Sweden to further
strengthen the youth, peace and security agenda by way
of a follow-up draft resolution to this debate. I sincerely
hope the members of the Council will offer support that
opens a path for regular Council discussions on this
critical issue.

I believe we all can agree that my generation represents
promise, not peril. We should be seen as an asset,
not a problem. The Security Council has a unique
opportunity to redress the mistrust between young
people, their Governments and the multilateral system
by opening new paths for meaningful participation and
contribution. The study offers many concrete, tangible
recommendations that I hope the Council will take
forward. As I see it, there are three main ways to do this.
The first is by supporting the peacebuilding
work of young people: recognize it, fund it, scale it
up, protect it. I will not ask delegations to let young
people lead, because they are already leading, but they
need inclusive, safe spaces and enabling environments
to succeed. Countless young people are building and
sustaining peace in their countries. We see this in the
United Network of Young Peacebuilders and many other
organizations. Their numbers are much bigger than that
of their peers who have fallen prey to extremist groups.
Yet those young peacebuilders rarely make the
headlines of local and international news, and they
definitely do not boast of the same level of financial
resources and freedom of mobility as those on the
other extreme. Many had difficulties in obtaining
travel permits to be with us in the Chamber today and
used innovative means, such as crowdfunding and
space-sharing to get here. Those young people deserve
more investments and more news headlines. I invite all
young people in the Chamber to raise their hands so that
we can recognize their presence and show solidarity to
those who could not be with us today in person.
Secondly, we can prioritize political participation
for young people to be fully engaged. That includes
ensuring that young people have a space at the peace
table, that their voices are heard as peace is negotiated
for Syria, South Sudan, Colombia, Yemen, Myanmar
and beyond. On peacebuilding strategies and action
plans, young people must be key stakeholders, not
mere recipients of directions. Young people should
feel that their vote counts and should be engaged in
electoral processes and political party structures, and
not be considered too young to run for public office.
4/86

The diversity in the Chamber today is a testament
to how multiple partners from different organizational
standpoints can come together to advance progress.
That is what the courageous and important work of
young people engaged in peacebuilding demands
and deserves. What history books will write about
representatives here today, and what their children and
grandchildren will read about them, will depend upon
what decisions they make today. I sincerely hope that
they decide that youth is no longer a subsidiary agenda,
but the most important agenda for the Council and for
the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Wickramanayake for her very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Simpson.
Mr. Simpson: It is an extraordinary honour to be
able to address the Security Council today. I am very
grateful to the Ambassador of Peru for hosting this
open debate. I am especially privileged to brief the
Council alongside three remarkable young women from
three continents. The Council has set an important
precedent today: young women acting, leading and
speaking truth to power to help shape a more peaceful
and secure future.
Being appointed by the Secretary-General has
been a once-in-a-lifetime privilege, especially with a
mandate to document the positive contributions that
young people around the world are making to building
and sustaining peace, resolving conflict and preventing
violence. I must also thank the 21 expert advisers
appointed by the Secretary-General to support my study,
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and make the point that at least half of them are young
themselves, as well as the institutional members of the
Steering Committee that have overseen the process.
From the very outset, it was evident that addressing
the exclusion and marginalization of 1.8 billion young
people globally was at the heart of the progress study
on youth, peace and security. Nearly a quarter of those
young people — at least 408 million — are living in
situations where they are exposed to violence. In
undertaking this study, it was clear that we could not
afford to make the mistake of reproducing the very
problem of exclusion that we were attempting to solve. We
therefore designed an inclusive, participatory approach,
which was indispensable to the legitimacy of the study
and its findings. We conducted seven regional youth
consultations and supplemented those with national
and online consultations, country-specific research in
27 countries, numerous thematic studies and surveys of
youth-led peacebuilding organizations, Member States
and United Nations entities. To ensure that we heard
from young people who would not normally have a voice
in this type of global policy process, we also facilitated
281 focus groups in 44 countries around the world. We
listened to over 4,200 young people around the globe.
A core message they conveyed is that there is a growing
trust gap between young people and their Governments,
multilateral organizations and even international civil
society organizations. That is a challenge that must be
embraced, not fended off. It reflects a trust deficit that
we have to bridge.
The young people whom we consulted also
understood that they are not trusted by their
Governments and leaders. Instead, they are treated as a
problem to be solved, or worse still, as a threat. As one
young man said to us, “Society gives you an eternal
tattoo, a label of an offender, a failure, or a source
of problems”. The stereotypical youth is represented
as a young man with a gun, while young women are
inevitably consigned to the status of passive victims.
Those gendered stereotypes associate all young people
with the risks of violence. In so doing, they deprive
them of their voice, agency and leadership as the drivers
of change and innovators for peace.
Those stereotypes have led to some misleading
policy assumptions. The first among them is that bulging
youth populations necessarily produce an increased
risk of violent conflict. The second assumes that
young refugees or youth migration present new threats
of terrorist infiltration and violent crime. The third

S/PV. 8241

assumption is that most young people are susceptible
to recruitment into violent extremist groups. There is
little to no evidence to support such policy panic, but
the result has still been disproportionate investment
in hard-fisted security measures that address the
consequences and not the causes of violent conflict.
The impact or the cost-effectiveness of those measures
is seldom if ever properly evaluated.
The reality is that the vast majority of young
people are not involved in violence. We should not
romanticize that. Most young people are just getting on
with their lives, but many others are exercising great
courage, creativity and resilience in working for peace
and security — usually voluntarily, and often under
hazardous conditions. Yet that resourcefulness remains
largely unappreciated as a universal social asset, and is
consequently severely undersupported.
But the study paints a picture of how young
people are undertaking peace work in virtually every
society across the globe. They are working across
all the phases of peace and conflict cycles, including
early interventions to prevent the outbreak of violence
in relatively peaceful societies, as well as working to
prevent the continuation or the escalation of violence
in situations of ongoing conflict. They have a key role
to play at the table in formal peace processes and also
in consolidating peace and preventing the recurrence of
conflict through dialogue, post-conflict reconstruction
and reconciliation.
Young men and women contribute to social cohesion
by building peace from the most local level, in their
families and communities, to national, regional and
international levels. They are working across different
kinds of conflict and with different types of violence,
including violent crime, gender-based violence,
political violence and terrorism. They are expanding
their reach through innovative partnerships with local
Government, civil society and civic and women’s
organizations, and building regional and global
networks. Furthermore, they are forging new pathways
and spaces through art, culture, sports and especially
through the creative occupation of cyberspace, social
media and the development of new technologies for
peace. Finally, young people continue to contribute
to meaningful change through their peaceful dissent
and protest, seeking justice, challenging corruption,
demanding freedom of movement and expression and
protesting gun violence.

18-118945/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

Through that work on peace and security, there
is an alternative opportunity for Member States and
international actors to invest in the upside: young
people’s resilient commitment to peace. To do that
effectively, it is necessary to move from exclusion to the
meaningful inclusion of young people. It is ultimately
only through countering the violence of exclusion
that we can prevent the violence of extremism in all
its forms.
For the inclusion of youth to be meaningful, it
must be comprehensive. That requires that politics
be genuinely inclusive of young women and men in
representative political and policy forums that shape
their lives and define their interactions with the State,
as well as having youth at the table when peace is
being negotiated or reconciliation and reconstruction
are being planned. It demands the full economic
inclusion of youth, beyond just jobs, in the development
of their communities and societies, through all of the
Sustainable Development Goals. It is imperative that we
fully protect young people from direct violence and its
traumatic effects, but we also must protect the spaces,
human rights and the enabling environment necessary
for their peace work, including their peaceful dissent
and protest.
It is essential to recognize the unique experiences
of young women, and also the importance of cultivating
positive versions of masculine identity that do not
depend on control and power over women or violence.
It means not only investing in education for peace and
prioritizing the protection of places of learning as safe
spaces and hubs of social cohesion, but also responding
to young people’s demands for peace education as
a crucial tool in building and sustaining peace and
preventing violence. It necessitates the leadership and
facilitation of young people in the disengagement and
reintegration of former fighters and those who have
been drawn into violent underworlds.
The interests of young people and the work they
do naturally traverse the pillars of peace, development
and human rights, and they make it clear that protection
and prevention are inseparable. The comprehensive
inclusion of young people, coupled with the necessary
investment in their ownership and leadership, is
indispensable to building and sustaining peace. That is
what it takes to translate the demographic dividend of
youthful populations into an effective peace dividend
for the entire globe — for all societies, and not just
those riven by violent conflict.
6/86

23/04/2018

Seizing that opportunity will require some
major shifts and a bold reorientation. It demands that
Member States and the multilateral system move from
remedial responses to genuine prevention approaches.
That reorientation requires a significant shift from
investing in hard security based on risk to investing in
youth-led peace work based on resilience. It requires
a commitment to new partnerships, particularly with
civil society organizations and especially those that
are youth-led and youth-focused. It also necessitates a
new culture and societal norms that do not demonize,
romanticize or, worse still, patronize youth, but rather
demand accountability and provide the preventive
incentive required for the implementation of resolution
2250 (2015).
The study provides a series of recommendations
that offer stepping stones towards those changes. It
does so in three broad areas.
First, there is a set of proposals for investing in the
capacities, agency and leadership of youth, including
funding mechanisms, facilitating and protecting an
enabling environment for youth peace work, and
producing age- and gender-disaggregated data so that
we can properly assess progress. Secondly, it includes
concrete proposals for how to expand the meaningful
inclusion in each of the political, economic and
sociocultural spheres that I outlined earlier. Thirdly and
finally, it offers recommendations for building national,
regional and global partnerships and collaborations
through youth, peace and security coalitions at the
national level; developing dialogue and consultation
platforms for young people inside and outside the
United Nations; establishing advisory boards and youth
advisory councils at the country and regional levels;
and utilizing regular reporting mechanisms on progress
to the Council.
In conclusion, I must finally express my
appreciation for the commitment of the young people
around the globe who suspended their disbelief, trusted
that we would listen and spoke candidly. I promised
them that in what I wrote and presented here, they
would be able to see themselves and hear their voices.
That is “the missing peace” in our world. The question
is not whether we address that, it is only about how.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Simpson
for his very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pierre-Antoine.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Pierre-Antoine: I am deeply thankful to His
Excellency Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra of Peru
for inviting me to speak before the Security Council
today during this important debate on youth, peace,
and security.
My name is Sophia Pierre-Antoine. I was born in
Haiti in 1991, as a coup d’état was unfolding. I was a
teenager when the next coup took place, in 2004. Like
many young women and men of my generation, my
childhood and adolescence were marked by periods of
violence and political instability. Many might be quick
to think that such challenging circumstances made my
fellow young Haitians frustrated, exasperated, violent
or helpless victims. Yet we are the ones leading a daily
struggle to ensure security in our streets, peace in our
homes and justice in our communities.
Following the 2010 earthquake, which killed
hundreds of thousands of people and displaced
over 1 million others, the World Young Women
Christian Association of Haiti, a locally led feminist
non-governmental organization for and by young
women, was quick to offer psychosocial support in
internally displaced persons (IDP) camps. During one
of the group therapy sessions in an area prone to conflict
among rival gangs, a young girl shared the fact that she
was not afraid of another earthquake, but afraid of older
men coming into her tent at night. Those girls were also
afraid of the ones who were supposed to provide aid but
in the end contributed to more abuse.
For years, young women organized discussion
groups and workshops to change attitudes and gender
norms that contribute to the high rates of violence
and impunity within IDP camps and neighbouring
communities. In the process, they became community
leaders and role models for younger girls to look up
to. That is a testament to the importance of adapting
peacebuilding work to a feminist and age-appropriate
framework. Effectively addressing the concerns of
young women and girls, including trauma healing,
empowers and fosters leadership skills. The narrative
of young women as powerless victims must be changed.
The rule of law was often not present in communities
with which I worked. Local Government and police
were either absent, overwhelmed or complicit. Young
men organized themselves and formed patrol groups
to block gangs from entering their communities.
Because of gender stereotypes, it would be easy to see
those young men as loitering or violent youth, when

S/PV. 8241

in fact they were only trying to protect their loved
ones. Cultures that do not allow men to express their
feelings and that offer only violent role models foster
an atmosphere in which unhealthy and oppressive
behaviours are normalized and rewarded. That type of
toxic masculinity creates situations that fuel insecurity
in the home and streets and, ultimately, for the entire
community. The narrative of young men as perpetrators
of violence must be changed.
I am here before the Council today to talk about
the gender aspect of youth, peace, and security. I urge
everyone to recognize that transforming cities, public
spaces and homes into safe spaces for young women
and transgender youth is a human right. That is what
we are striving to achieve with the progress study. I
was privileged to be part of the consultations organized
within the framework of the progress study for the Latin
American and Caribbean region and at the global level. I
witnessed the passion and drive of young peacebuilders
globally. Discussing the topic of peace and security is
not easy and has led to deeply challenging, but also
profoundly honest, conversations. Although we shared
our experiences, failures and setbacks, we mainly shared
our lessons learned and victories. We were provided
with an appropriate platform and a caring ear, and were
therefore able to discuss openly. As a result, behind
each of the recommendations of the progress study are
multiple testimonies of pain, loss and disillusion, but
also stories of courage, hope and success.
Such inclusive platforms enabling young women
and men to take part in peace and security discussions
are rare. I hope that Member States can replicate
that inclusive participatory methodology so as to
further support the work of young peacebuilders in
their countries. All of us — the young people who
participated in the progress study — are very clear
that we do not want more weaponized forces that
terrorize the poor, the indigenous, the racial and ethnic
minorities, those with disabilities and illnesses and
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning
youth. Much money is spent on military action globally,
when it could be spent on advancing the Sustainable
Development Goals. Instead, young people called for
investment in positive, peaceful and practical solutions.
On behalf of all of us, in particular on behalf of my
fellow young women peacebuilders, we expect the
following of the Security Council.
First, we ask for investment in and support for
young women, men and transgender youth fighting

18-118947/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

racism, xenophobia, religious intolerance, homophobia,
transphobia, sexism and discrimination directed against
people with disabilities. That is indispensable to rethink
the power relations that are breaking down our societies
and contributing to extremism and terrorism.
Secondly, we ask for advocating for meaningful
inclusion by recognizing the strength in the multiple
identities of young people. The participation of diverse
youth at all levels will ensure that our race, gender,
sexual orientation, religion, ethnic background and
ability are not a systematic source of exclusion,
discrimination or being made invisible.
Thirdly, we ask that the Council work to ensure
that age and gender are always an integral part of peace
and security discussions. Almost 20 years ago, women
and men came together around resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. Now people of all
ages are coming together around resolution 2250 (2015)
to ensure the inclusion of younger generations. That
is crucial to incorporating young women in all formal
conflict assessments, peacebuilding programming and
security processes, as well as recognizing, supporting
and ensuring the protection and safety of young
peacebuilders and human rights defenders.
Globally, we young people have achieved incredible
milestones and contributed to peace and security efforts
with very limited support and resources. Imagine what
we could do if we had access to additional data and
flexible funding and how we could contribute to policies
and projects if we held more positions in Governments
and United Nations agencies and leadership roles in
the public and private sectors. It is by supporting our
initiatives and movements, fostering partnerships,
strengthening meaningful, diverse and inclusive
participation, and ensuring the protection of young
women and men and transgender youth that sustainable
peace can become a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Pierre-Antoine for her very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ekomo-Soignet.
Ms. Ekomo-Soignet (spoke in French): I thank His
Excellency Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra of Peru
for having invited me to participate in this debate on
youth, peace and security.
Beyond this debate, I believe now is a key moment
for reaffirming the place and role of youth in building a
better world. I am from the Central African Republic — a
8/86

23/04/2018

country in which 72 per cent of the population is under
the age of 35 and which, sadly, is known as one of the
poorest and most dangerous nations in the world, and
one of the worst in which to be young. As we all know,
our position in such international rankings is not a death
sentence. Currently, together with many other young
people from other countries with whom we share last
place in those rankings, we are aware that this is merely
part of the story. In that widely disseminated version of
the story, we often wear the label of persecutor, victim
or of the mere recipient of aid.
The other part of the story concerning us — the
youth of the Central African Republic — lies elsewhere,
and we are vividly writing it today. It is the story of our
acknowledged role as women and men in peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, our families, communities, countries,
continents and the world. Many of us are working
tirelessly to prevent and end violence, silence the
weapons, promote dialogue and social cohesion and
foster our own blossoming through actions we are
taking within our organizations and in other meeting
places. It was my honour and fortune to work every day
with my peers in the Central African Republic, and I
had an opportunity to work with many young people
from various countries in the context of the study on
youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86) carried out
after the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015).
I wish to stress that, for many young people,
the resolution and the study are much more than
documents. They are key strategic tools that allow us
to forge new relations with our authorities and with the
United Nations system. It is true that there has been
a shift in recent years on the representation of young
people in forums on peace and security at the local,
national, regional and global levels. But does that signal
their true participation at all levels? Can we be sure
that our contributions, our needs, our aspirations will
be effectively taken into account in the final decisions
and recommendations?
Our representation must not be merely symbolic.
It must not be limited to public launchings and
demonstrations. Unfortunately, in many of our countries,
there are still attempts to validate the representation of
our youth as a favour to them. The consequences of that
favour, without real vision or collaboration with young
people, are not generally felt immediately, but rather in
the long term, widening the gap between the youth and
the State.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

For a long time, youth in the Central African
Republic have not been taken into account in the various
attempts at conflict resolution. It is only recently that
the work carried out by our youth, alongside their peers,
to prevent violence, combat rumours and strengthen
social cohesion has started to be highlighted. We see
new willingness among Government partners, the
United Nations Mission and United Nations agencies to
commit to working with us. And we are proud of that.
We move forward with the feeling that we are helping
our country. We are making our contribution.
I come before the Security Council today to launch
an appeal to partnership. The Council is no longer alone.
We are here, at its side, to build the peace we all strive
for. That partnership will not be possible unless we
agree to move beyond our prejudices and stereotypes,
unless we agree to work together constructively and
effectively and move past our eloquent speeches. We
must take action now.
The partnership will take various forms and will
require strategic choices and substantial, crucial
financing. We are counting on the Security Council
and all Member States to adopt and implement quotas
in order to ensure the direct participation of young
people, with equal representation of the sexes at all
stages of the formal processes for peaceful political
transition. That must start with the negotiations
preceding the implementation stage, in the framework
of a national dialogue. in the drafting of a constitution
and of a transitional justice mechanism, or in any
other political process related to peace and security.
Those mechanisms should enable enhanced exchanges
among young people from all walks of life, focusing
more specifically on ensuring the participation of
young women, and should guarantee that the necessary
financing and security measures are in place.
We also call on our Governments to institutionalize
measures to bridge the gap between young people and
local and national representatives in institutions and
mechanisms for governance by creating youth advisory
committees and by facilitating the participation of
young people in elective tenures by aligning the age
of eligibility with the voting age. We call upon States
to invest in the establishment of protected local
spaces where civic dialogue can take place and where
young people identify together priority actions for
their communities in the areas of peacebuilding and
development, and participate in decisions regarding
the allocation of financial resources. We call for the

S/PV. 8241

integration of young people with local representatives
in order to evaluate their economic needs before
any measures are drafted, and in the planning,
implementation and monitoring of youth employment
programmes. Such programmes must target the most
disenfranchised young people in order to ensure that
they are the primary beneficiaries of such employment
initiatives and to avoid exclusive access by the elite,
which would only accentuate inequality.
Finally, we call for the preservation of the rule
of law, particularly by protecting young people from
being arrested and arbitrarily detained, putting an
end to impunity and ensuring that the principles of
access to justice and accountability are enforced evenhandedly. Young men and women must be the preferred
discussion partners in the context of the creation and
implementation of security and criminal justice reforms.
The year 2025 will mark the tenth anniversary of
resolution 2250 (2015). We expect an investment of
$1 per young person by then — that is, $1.8 billion
to support the commitment to youth and peace and
security. Let us meet that challenge to make those
aspirations a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Ekomo-Soignet for her very informative briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the Republic of Peru for
convening today’s meeting, as well as to congratulate
you on your presidency. I also thank the briefers for
their excellent presentations and commendable work in
preparation for today’s meeting.
Poland welcomes the progress study on youth, peace
and security (see S/2018/86), which will help shape
a forward-looking strategy for the implementation
of the resolution 2250 (2015). We appreciate this allencompassing document, which touches upon the
most crucial issues affecting the young generation. We
would favour an annual implementation report by the
Secretary-General on youth, peace and security, as well
as yearly Security Council open debates on this issue.
Youth empowerment and participation are
indispensable to enhancing the inclusivity and equality
of our societies. Young people are the cornerstone of

18-118949/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2018

sustainable development and lasting peace. They need
not only quality education, vocational training, skills
development and access to digital technologies and
services, but also employment and entrepreneurial
opportunities. The most constructive way to empower
young people and ensure that they will not be
radicalized is to offer them credible and constructive
ways to positively contribute to their communities. If
youth remain excluded from national and international
peacebuilding efforts, then instability and extremism
will continue to pose serious threats to our societies.

that youth can play in enhancing sustainability and
inclusiveness, as well as in the success of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts.

First of all, we should provide youth around the
world with a wide range of educational opportunities
as a key element of development and life improvement.
The international community must mobilize resources
to improve the learning prospects of young people
and to support inclusive labour policies. Those goals
are also an important part of Poland’s foreign policy.
We believe that, in order to make lasting change in the
world, we need to act at the source of the problems.

In the 1980s, the Solidarity movement contributed
greatly to the peaceful transition to democracy in
Poland and in countries of the whole region. As a
phenomenon that combined a trade union, a social
movement and an aspiration for freedom and respect
for human rights, Solidarity was a non-violent struggle
against the authoritarian Communist regime. Youth
played a prominent role in that struggle.

I recently visited Rwanda, on the occasion of
granting the Raphael Lemkin International Award in
Kigali. I was also in Kibeho, a town in the southern part
of the country, where I visited the Educational Institute
for Blind Children, led by the Polish Franciscan
Sisters Servants of the Cross and funded by the Polish
Ministry for Foreign Affairs. The Institute, which is the
only educational facility for blind children in Rwanda,
provides its students not only with basic education, but
also with vocational training, thereby preparing them
to enter the labour market. It contributes to a change
in attitude on the part of the Rwandan society towards
blind children. That unique project is an excellent
example of an inclusive and comprehensive approach
to development, which we promote as part of our
foreign policy.
There are examples of such an approach in other
countries as well. In Lebanon, for instance, together
with our German partners, we implemented a project to
rehabilitate public schools for children of both refugees
and the local community. In Jordan and Lebanon, we
are providing informal education to young Syrian
refugees, who are often excluded from the national
educational system.
Resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and
security, was a valuable step in recognizing the
needs and the potential of youth in the prevention and
resolution of conflict. It reaffirmed the important role
10/86

We need to acknowledge the different prospects
of young people worldwide in the employment,
education, health-care, civic and political spheres.
Based on Poland’s experience, young people are deeply
committed to engaging in non-governmental activities,
and they contribute significantly to the culture of peace
at various levels in various areas.

Pope John Paul II strongly supported Polish society
in its uphill struggle for democracy. His close ties with
young people are also well known. On the celebration
of World Day of Peace in 1985, Pope John Paul II stated
in his message that young people must not be satisfied
with an instinctive desire for peace, and that desire
must be transformed into a firm moral conviction that
encompasses the full range of human problems and
builds on deeply treasured values.
Poland strongly supports the engagement of young
people in democratic processes, as it increases their
visibility and political participation. At the same time,
young people remain highly vulnerable. Therefore,
all efforts are needed to strengthen their protection
and to address their particular needs. Young people
are recognized as agents of change, entrusted to
fulfil their own potential and to build a world fit for
future generations.
Poland supports strategies and programmes that
promote youth-led initiatives fostering intergenerational
dialogue, tolerance and reconciliation. In 2016, young
people from all over the world came to the city of Kraków
in Poland to meet Pope Francis and to celebrate World
Youth Day. Those 1.6 million young people brought
with them a spirit of peace, solidarity and friendliness.
We should act together in a similar way to address all
symptoms of violence and to ensure that there is less
and less racial, ethnic and religious prejudice.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The youth of any region of the world need a
positive environment so as to develop their potential.
Poland welcomes the proposals included in the progress
study on youth, peace and security. We agree that it
is indispensable to make more efforts to allow young
people to fully benefit from their rights and to provide
them with a voice, helping them to become active and
responsible citizens. We also agree that increasing the
economic and educational opportunities for all young
people is pivotal, as that in turn helps to build more
peaceful and equal societies.
I shall conclude by underlining the primary
role and responsibility of national Governments in
the process of youth empowerment as part of efforts
to maintain peace and security. If we are serious
about ensuring a better life for our families and for
future generations, there is simply no alternative to
investing in young people, giving them a voice in all
relevant decision-making processes and building solid
partnerships with youth as a bridge to a more peaceful,
sustainable and prosperous world.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I commend the
delegation of Peru for highlighting the important and
positive role of youth in maintaining international
peace and security. I also thank Ms. Wickramanayake,
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth; Mr. Simpson,
lead author of the progress study on youth, peace
and security; and civil society representatives
Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-Soignet for their
comprehensive briefings on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth,
peace and security.
Today’s youth comprise 1.8 billion people, nearly
500 million of whom live in conflict-affected areas.
Resolution 2250 (2015) is the first effort of its kind
and the only global policy instrument to go beyond the
traditional approaches defined by the involvement of
youth in peace and security as a securitization measure
and to recognize and promote the potential of youth
inclusion in issues of peace and security.
The resolution serves as a critical step forward.
However, in itself it cannot ensure that youth are
continuously and meaningfully engaged in issues of
peace and security. While there are many youth-led
initiatives operating around the world to bring about
sustainable peace, there is a lack of support from the
national authorities. It is the responsibility of Member
States to implement resolution 2250 (2015) and to

S/PV. 8241

set up mechanisms that would ensure the inclusion
and meaningful participation of youth in meeting
today’s challenges.
We therefore endorse the findings and recommendations
of the progress study, which outlines a three-fold
strategy to shift to a new paradigm of youth, peace
and security. We also support the initiative of Peru and
Sweden to adopt a new draft resolution on youth, peace
and security that will contribute to the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015) across the world, as well
as broadening youth participation in the work of the
United Nations.
Youth do not play one, single role in conflict
situations. As a vulnerable sector of society, they
require mechanisms that are able to protect them from
violent conflict and to prevent their radicalization.
Beyond that, young people are positive agents of change,
building sustainable peace in their societies. We believe
that they should play an important role in fulfilling the
new agenda for peace, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and other global processes.
To utilize the tremendous potential of youth in
creating and maintaining peaceful environments, they
must be provided the opportunities to be involved in
decision-making at all levels, in mechanisms for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflict
and in peace negotiations. It is particularly important
to engage youth in constructive activities to assist
processes of democratization, elections, building
State institutions, enforcing the rule of law, fighting
corruption, and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Of equal importance are sustainable and
predictable investments in youth-centred development.
We therefore support the recommendation of the
progress study to allocate $1.8 billion by 2025 for the
tenth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015).
We believe that the international community needs
to work together in order to develop a comprehensive
global framework related to youth with a whole-of-pillar
approach, which above all will ensure the securitydevelopment nexus and promote the vision of a more
effective, transparent and accountable United Nations,
at Headquarters and on the ground, delivering as One
United Nations. We therefore call for coordinated
and comprehensive efforts at the grassroots, national,
regional and global levels.
I wish to share the experience of my country.
Kazakhstan has made considerable progress across

18-1189411/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

all five main components of resolution 2250 (2015),
with a focus on participation, partnership and
prevention measures. First of all, we are constantly
increasing inclusive representation for youth at all
levels of decision-making. We also support our youth
by creating an atmosphere conducive to inclusion
and social cohesion, including through establishing
and strengthening partnerships with relevant youth
organizations. As far back as 2002, we created the Youth
Congress, which is made up of active youth movements
and organizations that shape youth policy directives.
Kazakhstan also strongly focuses on prevention
by eradicating poverty, creating employment and
educating youth — women in particular — as well as by
supporting their dynamic ideas and aspirations. That is
perhaps the kind of support that young men and women
need the most. Our country has adopted a comprehensive
set of policies to provide free education, vocational
training, intensive job creation and entrepreneurship.
Kazakhstan’s Bolashak Scholarship — meaning Future
Generation Scholarship — was launched in 1993 and
gives more than 4,000 Kazakh young men and women
an opportunity annually to study in leading foreign
higher education institutions. It has been recognized
among the best academic mobility programmes in the
world. Those who finished the scholarship programme
today occupy ministerial and other influential positions
in society.
We also dissuade youth from using violence that
serves extremist causes by implementing comprehensive
development programmes. In particular, we have
successfully completed the national programme on
countering religious extremism and terrorism for the
period 2013-2017, having allocated approximately
$600 million for preventive measures for the entire
youth population. As a nation of 130 ethnic groups
and 16 major religions, Kazakhstan enjoys peace and
stability since our thrust has been to make tolerance
and respect our guiding principles. Youth vulnerability
and their strengths will be the focus of the sixth
triennial Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions, to be held in Astana in October.
Last month, the President of Kazakhstan addressed
the nation with his message of the Five Social Initiatives.
They include a significant increase in educational grants
and teachers’ salaries, a reduction of tax to 1 per cent
for low-paid workers, new opportunities to purchase
housing and the construction of student hostels. Those
visionary measures are aimed at implementing our
12/86

23/04/2018

Kazakhstan 2050 national strategy, by which we strive
to be ranked among the top 30 developed countries
of the world, and wherein youth will be our richest
national resource.
We are focusing on prevention measures in
Afghanistan as part of our efforts to advance a
revamped regional approach. Since 2010, we have been
implementing a $50 million scholarship programme
with a view to educating 1,000 Afghan students in
Kazakhstan’s educational institutions.
Of course, we could do more, and we need to
do more. Today’s briefers made a very passionate
and convincing case for all of us to act swiftly and
meaningfully to empower youth. In conclusion, I would
like to assure the Council of Kazakhstan’s readiness
to join the multilateral action to transform the lives
of our youth globally with a view to their becoming
responsible leaders in the promotion of peace, stability
and prosperity.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. I would also like to thank all of the briefers
for their important contributions at the beginning of
this meeting.
The topic of our debate today is of special importance
for two main reasons. First, it is because this is the
first time this item has been included on the agenda of
the Security Council since the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security. Secondly,
it is because we firmly believe that participation in the
development of young people in any society is closely
related to the development, progress and prosperity
of peoples and countries. The Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2250 (2015) on 9 December 2015.
It was the first resolution to directly highlight the
important and positive role played by young women and
men in maintaining international peace and security.
Over the past two years, many of the parties concerned,
including the United Nations, Member States and
civil society organizations and, most important,
young people themselves, have translated this historic
resolution into specific steps and actions.
I would like to commend the recently published
progress study on youth, peace and security (see
S/2018/86), as well as the recommendations included
therein, which refer to the participation of young
women and men in peacebuilding and which include
practical guidelines for working together with young
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

people in new and innovative ways. I want to highlight
three aspects in today’s debate. The first covers the
challenges hampering the implementation of the youth,
peace and security agenda. The second pertains to
positive examples of the implementation of this agenda.
And the third relates to steps that should be undertaken
in order to guarantee the implementation of the agenda.
With respect to the first aspect, many young people
around the world, especially those living in developing
countries or in countries affected by conflict, are
struggling for access to the most basic needs, including
education, jobs and health services, as well as to exercise
their civil liberties and political participation. Without
those essential needs being met, young people cannot
prosper, grow or participate fully in the development of
their societies.
In the Arab world, for example, the unemployment
rate among youth has reached 30 per cent. It is the
highest rate of unemployment in the world as a result
of being unable to translate progress in education
into decent jobs for young people, beside the fast
demographic growth which limits the benefits of
demographic dividends and fuels more social and
economic tensions in the region. There are also the
negative stereotypes associated with young people
that hamper their participation in and contribution to
security and peacebuilding, especially the stereotypes
that associate them with violent phenomena.
Conflicts are spreading throughout the world.
That is another obstacle to the participation and
the contribution of young people to safeguard and
strengthen peace and security. The Arab region has
regrettably experienced the most terrible conflicts, and
many of its young people face an enormous number of
obstacles and have no way of seeing their ambitions
fulfilled. Those conflicts have destroyed their dreams
and future. Unemployment has increased their despair
and insecurity. Poverty has stolen their legitimate right
to a decent life. Terrorism and extremism have taken
their innocence hostage. Those are serious threats to
the future and sustained development of countries. We
must therefore tackle the root causes of conflict.
Concerning the second aspect, the study points out
many positive examples of contributions to peace made
by young people around the world. We in the State of
Kuwait are aware of the importance of youth and their
central role in building the Kuwait of the future. We
therefore established a State ministry for youth affairs

S/PV. 8241

in 2013, which enables young people to improve and
develop their skills so they can contribute effectively
to society, while disseminating the concepts of peace
and tolerance. The State of Kuwait was named the
capital for Arab youth 2017, with the slogan “The Youth
Are Here”.
The third aspect pertains to the steps that need
to be taken in order to implement the youth, peace
and security agenda. We fully agree with what
was mentioned in the progress study prepared by
Mr. Simpson, namely, that young people are the
central pillar of developing and building societies, and
a key element in achieving security and peace. Any
Government that ignores the development of youth in
its society is losing the fundamental missing piece, and
disabling security and peace.
Moreover, we would like to stress the importance
of implementing the Sustainable Development Goals
and perceiving its principles as fundamental factors
for the sustainability of peace and security. That
cannot be achieved without supporting young people
and civil society institutions and organizations that
focus on them. We underscore the need to invest in
young people in order to help them build their abilities
according to principles and values that make them
avoid the scourge of crime and networks of corruption
and ideological extremism. That is done by supporting
and strengthening national, regional and international
peace networks that deal with youth and by providing
them with protection and education, particularly in
conflict-affected areas.
In conclusion, I would like to quote His Highness
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of
the State of Kuwait, who spoke about today’s debate
as follows:
“Young people are our greatest fortune and our best
investment. We must develop their skills, polish
their talents and exhort them to use education
and knowledge so that they can be more mature
and responsible and so they can be immune to
perverse ideologies”.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Jayathma, Sophia and Kessy for their briefings
this morning. These amazing young women inspire and
humble us all with their poise, power and energy.
It is such a great relief to be here today. Whereas
we usually spend our time discussing some of the

18-1189413/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

most challenging and dispiriting events in the world,
today, instead, we get to discuss a topic that is positive,
motivating and encouraging for all of us: youth, peace
and security.
The United States supported resolution 2250 (2015)
because we believe it is imperative for the Security
Council to encourage youth to contribute to peace and
security. We strongly welcome the Secretary-General’s
progress study on youth and peace and security (see
S/2018/86), which says very clearly just how crucial and
overdue this conversation is, and we thank Mr. Simpson
for his work on the report.
When we say youth, it is important to put the
numbers into perspective. The progress study notes that
there are 1.8 billion young people in the world, which
is a huge number but it only represents young people
between the ages of 10 and 24, the former United
Nations definition before resolution 2250 (2015). Within
the United States, we often define youth more broadly,
as anyone under the age of 35. If that definition is used,
we are talking about more than 4.5 billion people, or
60 per cent of the world’s population. This is both an
incredible opportunity and a huge challenge.
If empowered with meaningful opportunities and
treated in a fair, just and inclusive manner, global
youth can be a catalyst for economic growth and lasting
peace the world over, but if ignored, marginalized
or disempowered, if treated in an unjust or unfair
manner, they risk becoming vulnerable to the forces of
instability and conflict. The stakes could therefore not
be higher for all of us. We cannot afford to marginalize
or ignore 4.5 billion people, especially when we have
the ability to influence their choices in a positive
way. As evidenced by our incredible speakers today,
many young people have the drive, tenacity and ability
necessary to help bring sustainable peace and stability
to countries around the world, and we should waste no
time in tapping into that talent. Young people today
demand a seat at the table, and we should not hesitate to
make room for them.
The United States has long recognized that young
people have the ability to help drive their communities,
economies and countries forward, and we proudly invest
in exchanges and programmes aimed at empowering
youth to achieve greater peace and prosperity. Next
week, on 2 May, we will hold the third Emerging
Young Leaders Awards and Exchange Programme
in Washington, D.C., where we will recognize 10
14/86

23/04/2018

outstanding global youth leaders who have made a real
impact as peacebuilders.
One of those outstanding leaders is 24-year-old
Tanzil Ferdous of Bangladesh, who promotes youth and
community development and women’s rights in that
country. As the President of Volunteer for Bangladesh,
Chittagong, the largest platform for youth volunteerism
in Bangladesh, in 2015 Tanzil organized numerous
successful events for community development, engaged
hundreds of young people in volunteerism simply
because she believes that if young people are engaged
and motivated to do community service, they will be
deterred from violent extremist activities. She is now
working with Rohingya refugees, helping to support a
safe space for 500 children in the Rohingya camps.
We will also recognize Omar Dahman, Executive
Director of the Hebron Youth Development Resource
Centre, in the West Bank. He has created a unique
safe space for over 2,000 Palestinian young people
to learn, interact and lead, including using youth-toyouth entrepreneurship, peacebuilding training and
civic engagement.
The knowledge that young people are the
primary targets for potential recruitment by extremist
organizations should prompt us to build upon current
efforts to engage this generation by supporting their
voices, ideas and youth-led local solutions. Push
factors such as poverty, unemployment, illiteracy,
discrimination, boredom and marginalization can lead
people down paths of violent extremism. Pull factors
such as ideology, a sense of belonging, the prospects
of fame or glory and other benefits can draw people
towards violent extremist groups. We are in a race
against terrorists and violent extremists. We must
do more to address the push and pull factors driving
young people to violent extremism and provide
better alternatives.
We can start by providing greater educational
opportunities to youth across the globe, to both young
men and women. Education is also a critical preventive
tool that can help deter youth from the enticement of
global extremists or global criminal networks. We
can also address some of the underlying feelings in
relation to a lack of fairness and justice that many
young people feel when rule-of-law issues are ignored.
Important factors such as equal treatment under the
law, protecting the freedom of expression and public
avenues to voice discontent and ensuring access to
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

political and economic opportunities help to thwart the
attraction of violent extremist ideologies.
The United States is committed to developing
programmes that promote leadership and prosperity.
One example of a programme we undertake that aims
to prevent violent extremism is the Peer-To-Peer:
Challenging Extremism programme, which is a publicprivate partnership with over 40 universities worldwide,
in which university students compete to develop the
best anti-terrorist narratives. In Tunisia, we support
young leaders through the Sharekna project, working
with their communities to strengthen resilience in the
face of economic, political and social stresses. Young
leaders are mapping their communities and facilitating
community dialogues to identify issues, then working
with stakeholders to respond to these challenges.
The Secretary-General’s progress study shows
that in 2016 there were more than 408 million young
people residing in settings affected by armed conflict
or organized violence. How can we empower them to
define their futures and overcome life’s obstacles? This
is done, first of all, by protecting them. In fiscal year
2017, the United States provided more than $8 billion in
emergency humanitarian assistance worldwide, and we
will continue to provide life-saving protection for the
world’s most vulnerable populations.
The United States, through our more than 300
Embassies, Consulates and Diplomatic Missions all
over the world, maintains strong partnerships with
host Governments, non-governmental organizations
and youth-focused organizations on the ground. We
strongly support programmes that address drivers of
conflict and violence, by engaging young people as
partners and key actors in fostering social cohesion
and tolerance. We must focus on those and other efforts
aimed at ensuring that young people are engaged on
issues of conflict and security, that they are empowered
to take action to prevent and mitigate violence affecting
their communities and that their voices are elevated
above the fray of conflicting geopolitical interests.
We have come a long way and made strides in
firmly establishing young people as partners for peace,
but we need to continue building upon resolution 2250
(2015) and turn the ink into action. More than half of the
global population will be affected by the commitments
made in the Security Council today, and we therefore
urge Council members to redouble their efforts aimed at
amplifying the voices of young peacebuilders and youth

S/PV. 8241

leaders in the fight against violent extremism and its
drivers, address the push and pull factors that open the
door to violent extremism for so many disenfranchised
youth, allow space for young leaders to bring forward
political solutions to some of today’s most intractable
problems, provide more positive alternative pathways
for our young people and continue to find creative
ways to strengthen partnerships between Government
and youth, because the young people with us in the
Chamber today are not just our future, they are also our
present — right now, today.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s open debate on a topic
that the Council should indeed address and for inviting
Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth, and Mr. Graeme Simpson,
Director of Interpeace USA. I thank them for their very
insightful briefings.
I would also like to welcome in particular Ms. Sophia
Pierre-Antoine of Haiti and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet
of the Central African Republic. France welcomes the
youth representative who is here in the Security Council
for the first time.
First, I would like to echo and underscore that
it is important to combat preconceived notions and
stereotypes about young people, embrace their true
potential and give them the trust and support they
deserve. Although, youth is synonymous with vitality
and energy, young people are paradoxically often
viewed as a burden and, as it pertains to security, even
a threat. They are puppets of the violence deemed to be
intrinsic or easily manipulated by armed or criminal
groups. Stereotypes about young people serve to
justify the use of repressive force against them and
violations of their most basic rights, in particular their
right to peaceful protest and to be heard, including in
armed conflict.
Young people are too often the victims of
discrimination and are by and large excluded from
the decision-making processes of political institutions
and from the labour market. The majority of young
people demonstrate a genuine ability to work together
to propose innovative solutions to problems they
encounter or to the ills of the societies in which they
live. It is therefore essential to reflect on how to provide
young people with greater holistic support.
That can be achieved by improving the likelihood
of their inclusionin political, social and economic

18-1189415/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

endeavours and developing psychosocial and
reintegration support mechanisms. It can also be done
by acknowledging that the key to ending the exclusion
of young people and their recruitment by armed groups
lies in their access to quality education, in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 4. Studies on five
decades of armed conflict reveal that education is a
key factor in reducing the risk of conflict. Lastly, it
can be achieved by supporting their role as agents of
sociopolitical change and as partners of the development
and peace process. In that regard, I would like to cite
by way of example the Youth Forum that France has
organized with Tunisia in recent years, held in Tunisia.
Like Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-Soignet,
young women should be seated at the negotiating table
and recognized as partners for peace. The Council
should ensure that occurs within the framework of the
women and peace and security agenda and beyond.
Young people play an increasingly important role in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security. The independent progress study on youth
and peace and security conducted by Mr. Simpson
highlights several instances in which organizations
led by young people have had a positive influence on
political, humanitarian and human rights situations
before, during and after conflicts.
Because such organizations often have modest
resources, results are conclusive, in particular because
they are innovative and use social and increasingly
participative media to advance their goals. The Council
cannot ignore the dynamics already at work and must
engage young people in building peace by encouraging
effective and lasting partnerships among youth
organizations, Governments, agencies of the United
Nations, civil society and the private sector. Symbolic
measures are not enough.
Secondly, we must strengthen the implementation
of the youth and peace and security agenda, in particular
by building on the foundation provided by resolution
2250 (2015). In that regard, I would like to thank Peru
for proposing a new draft resolution. France fully
supports that initiative and stands ready to work with
Peru and Sweden to make it as operational as possible.
It is vital that the new text be relevant to the women
and peace and security agenda and the issue of children
and armed conflict by seeking genuine value added.
France supports the idea of the publication of a regular
report of the Secretary-General on the issue. The report
16/86

23/04/2018

should follow the United Nations For Youth calendar
by taking the various youth forums into consideration.
Without duplicating the efforts of other forums, we
hope that the Council can closely monitor the agenda
and perhaps establish an informal panel of experts
and a tripartite ad hoc group, as recommended by the
independent study. With regard to measures taken, we
welcome the efforts made by the Peacebuilding Fund
and by the United Nations Development Programme,
which already helps to support young people and youth
organizations in several countries. Such actions could
be strengthened.
Above and beyond the efforts of the Council, the
United Nations must seek to better support sustainable
development projects that assist young people, ensure
respect for their basic rights and support their political
participation. I would like to underscore the fact that
action should be taken in the area of education, which
is a priority for President Emmanuel Macron, who
has announced an increase in France’s contribution to
the Global Partnership for Education to €200 million.
Nationally, France helps promote the positive role played
by young people. France will host a global forum for
peace from 11 to 13 November in Paris. The forum will
seek to bring together individuals, institutions and civil
society organizations, including youth organizations,
that reflect global diversity and are committed to
promoting multilateralism and collective action in an
effort to meet the challenges of our people 100 years
after the end of the First World War.
Projects, such as the Youth in the Sahel, are carried
out by the French Development Agency and we provide
support to United Nations funds and programmes on
the ground. A young diplomats’ association, within
the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs, was
established by young people themselves and its first
international meeting, at which the issue of migration
was discussed, was held this year in Marseilles.
Young people are a dynamic force and reflect
a promise of rebirth. The Council must engage them
instead of ignoring them. They are not a problem; they
are a vital part of the solution. The United Nations as
a whole must work to acknowledge them and grant
them more power and a greater role in the area of peace
and security.
Victor Hugo wrote that young people are the
smiling face of the future. If the future is to smile on
us, we cannot ignore it. Let us work together to impart
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the wisdom, the meaning and the confidence they
need for talent development so that they can make an
active contribution to the quest for international peace
and security. France will continue to work to promote
the youth, peace and security agenda and to make it
effective and fully operational.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for taking the initiative to organize today’s
first open debate on the follow-up to the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015). We thank the briefers for
their respective remarks. I would also like to commend
Mr. Simpson on the independent progress study on
youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86) and note
with appreciation the extensive consultations he has
undertaken in the process leading to the preparation of
the study.
It should indeed be a matter of great concern
to note from the study that in 2016 an estimated
408 million young people between the ages of 15
and 29 resided in areas affected by armed conflict or
organized violence, meaning that at least one in four is
affected by it. With regard to the protection dimension,
we continue to note with great concern the precarious
situation in which young people find themselves in
conflict and post-conflict situations in different parts
of the world. They are at a heightened risk of violence,
threats to their physical safety or exposure to various
human rights violations. As they are part of the civilian
population, ensuring their protection from the impact
of conflicts, consistent with international humanitarian
law, is critical. In our view, such protection should also
extend to young people who have participated in an
armed conflict.
As the study points out, it is also worrying to see
that young people are excluded from various policy
frameworks as agents for change, particularly with
regard to the prevention of conflict and post-conflict
situations, besides the fact that the engagement
and integration of their concerns into development
efforts can be limited. In our view, the broader
findings of the independent progress study, as well
as its recommendations, could serve as the basis
for a comprehensive response in the context of the
three pillars of the United Nations — peace and
security, human rights and development at national,
regional and international levels. In that regard,
we should envisage comprehensive implementation
of the recommendations primarily at the national

S/PV. 8241

level, including through enhanced and meaningful
engagement with young people.
High levels of youth unemployment and poverty
continue to be among the root causes of many conflicts
and outbreaks of violence, and are increasingly
providing opportunities for extremist groups to expand
their activities. Progress in our national development
efforts, particularly by creating jobs and decent work
opportunities for young people, are therefore vital
to promoting peace, preventing crises arising from
conflicts as well as lapses and relapses into conflict,
enabling recovery and building resilience. In that regard,
ensuring sustainable development for all at the national
level in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development should be the primary focus of our efforts
to prevent conflict and achieve sustaining peace. For
that, it is critical to provide access to education, basic
services and decent work opportunities for young
people. That means recognizing that young people can
be active agents for sustainable development, peace and
security. It also means ensuring that they are consulted
and encouraged to participate actively in planning,
implementing and following up various measures at
the national level. It is our considered opinion that such
a policy shift would enable us to ensure that young
people are less likely to be drawn into violent extremist
or other armed groups. And beyond the immediate
essential humanitarian responses in post-conflict
situations, finding durable solutions for young people
who have been affected by armed conflict is crucial.
In that regard, in addition to measures that the
study identifies in the area of disengagement from
violent groups and reintegration, it is critical to provide
support for sustainably integrating young people into
their societies, including by ensuring access to services
and to opportunities to generate income and earn a
livelihood. The problem of the large numbers of young
people who are now refugees in various parts of the
world without prospects for the future, and the search
for solutions to that problem, should also form part of
the discussion. Work in this area at the national level
could be complemented by efforts at the regional and
international levels as well. In that regard, the role of
regional organizations such as the African Union will
be critical. Internationally, the United Nations and
its various agencies and programmes, as well as the
Security Council, can be instrumental in advancing the
youth, peace and security agenda within their mandate
and ensuring follow-up to resolution 2250 (2015). For

18-1189417/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

instance, the Council could follow up, as appropriate,
on relevant recommendations in the independent
progress study in the context of existing thematic issues
or country-specific situations on its agenda, including
in the context of existing reporting frameworks,
and taking into account the particular concerns of
youth populations — including those who have been
forcibly displaced — that conflict situations have left
particularly vulnerable.
I would like to conclude by affirming our
commitment to advancing the youth and peace and
security agenda within the existing frameworks,
the Council and the broader United Nations system,
including by negotiating a possible Council decision
following the independent progress report in the next
few weeks.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank today’s briefers for
their very interesting opinions. We are also grateful
to Mr. Simpson for his preparation and presentation
of the independent expert group’s study on the role of
young people in processes related to ensuring peace
and security. Its content and recommendations will
definitely enrich the discussions of Member States
in the United Nations forums to which this subject is
directly relevant.
The study was requested by resolution 2250 (2015),
adopted on 9 December 2015, which emphasized the
important role that young people can and should play
in building modern societies free of terrorism and
extremism, including through constructive participation
in the processes of building and maintaining peace.
There is no question that young people’s problems,
however heartily we wish it were not so, cannot be
viewed in isolation from the context of the fight against
the threats of extremism and terrorism, to which young
people, unfortunately, are likely to be more exposed
than almost anyone.
A willingness on the part of some to look the
other way where the activities of terrorist groups are
concerned has already enabled them to threaten the
future of entire countries whose societies have been
plunged into social, political and economic chaos,
something that is particularly evident in Iraq, Syria and
Libya. And it is not just States in the Middle East that
are under threat. Young people, with their unformed
world views, their quest for an identity, their lack of
broad life experience and sometimes lack of education,
18/86

23/04/2018

are a highly vulnerable sector of society. Young people
are among the first to feel the negative consequences
of economic crises, social instability and armed
clashes, factors that malefactors often exploit in order
to involve them in illegal activity, including through
social networks and other Internet channels. This is not
just about terrorism and the extremism that can lead to
terrorism, but also about political processes dressed up
with slogans about democracy, directed from outside
and aimed at overthrowing legitimate authorities.
Today’s much vaunted and trendy support for
young leaders should not be used by outside actors to
encourage anti-State and anti-Government movements
in countries that they do not like. It is immoral to try
to achieve these ends by exploiting young people’s
inexperience, desire for quick self-actualization and
inclination to express themselves through protest.
Young people are shamelessly deceived and used in
dirty political games under plausible pretexts. The
connivance or indifference that various States have
shown to the growth of nationalism, xenophobia and
radicalism — which, unfortunately, are very successful
at pulling young people into their orbit — should not
be tolerated.
What is needed in order to combat all these issues is
thorough preventive, systematic effort, above all at the
national level. It is the States’ job to prevent terrorists,
radicals and political malefactors from influencing
young people by nipping extremist propaganda in the
bud and increasing young people’s resilience in the face
of it. At the same time, it is crucial to use the Internet,
and traditional media as well, to promote a positive
agenda. It is important to actively disseminate among
young people — and with their help — notions of mutual
respect and intercultural and interreligious dialogue,
taking local traditions and specifics into account.
This should not be politicized. Young people should
be protected from political pressures until they reach
legal age. Secondly, we must to create the conditions
that can enable young people to realize their potential
and become socially and economically integrated into
society, including by providing them with a quality
education and employment opportunities. Creative
pursuits, culture and sports are also effective tools to
that end. They enable young people to participate in
socially meaningful activities, help them improve their
skills and talents, increase their self-confidence and
self-esteem and inculcate them with the concept of
peaceful coexistence. Lastly, we should not the forget
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the importance of strengthening the family and family
values. Many of the problems we have heard about today
are the result of a neglect of those values, an excessive
enthusiasm for individualism and the destruction of
long-standing social foundations.
Young people’s involvement in any political activity
should be a natural process based primarily on acquiring
professional knowledge and skills. There should be
genuine equality in this area, which means that not only
should society’s most vulnerable sectors be supported
but that no artificial quotas or privileges, including with
regard to age or gender, should be tolerated. We believe
it is important to tap constructively into young people’s
potential — particularly their energy, versatility and
ability to navigate cyberspace easily — by fostering,
among other things, an atmosphere that does not tolerate
violence and that rejects extremist and terrorist ideas.
States affected by conflicts, where establishing the
necessary youth policy programmes and strategies is
very hard and sometimes impossible, for understandable
reasons, are in a much more difficult position, needless
to say. The most urgent issue in such countries is
protecting civilians, including young people, a task
that is the responsibility of national Governments. In
that regard, I want to point out that the international
community’s efforts should be aimed at supporting
national efforts in that area. It should undertake no
response measures, especially any involving the use of
force, without authorization from the Security Council
and in strict adherence to the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is also important to ensure
that all parties to an armed conflict comply with their
obligations under the norms of international law on the
protection of civilians, including young people, as well
as the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1977. Thorough, objective investigations,
based on reliable information, should be conducted for
crimes involving deliberate attacks or the excessive use
of force, and those responsible must be punished.
Russia knows first-hand the importance of
interactive cooperation with young people. Indeed,
it is difficult to overestimate the value of the fresh
ideas that young people can share in exchange for the
knowledge we provide them with. In 2014, the Russian
Government adopted the foundational principles for
the State’s youth policy for the next decade. The key
principle of the concept is relying on young people as
drivers of innovative development of the State, which in
turn should create all the conditions for developing their

S/PV. 8241

human potential. We must ensure comprehensive and
continuous support to the younger generation in order
to guarantee our society’s long-term development.
International forums and events also play an
important role in bringing young people together.
In Sochi in October 2017 we were pleased to be able
to host the nineteenth World Festival of Youth and
Students, in which more than 20,000 people from more
than 180 countries participated. Many interesting ideas
were expressed during that event in the same spirit as
those that we heard today from our young speakers. We
will definitely and actively take them into account in
our efforts to support young people.
I would like to conclude with a few important
points. First, despite the importance of the subject of
young people, our quest to identify the youth-related
aspects of the acute problems that we have heard about
today should not overshadow the importance of the
work that adults are doing to solve some of them. This
should not be merely a formal approach or a competition
to see who can find and propose the largest number of
ways to involve young people. Not all the problems that
we are facing can be solved that way, and no one is
going to relieve us adults of the main responsibility for
solving them.
I would also like to point out that despite the great
importance of today’s discussion, it is also important
to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations
and adhere to the division of powers of the organs of
the Organization. In accordance with the Charter, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Issues
of war and peace, requiring urgent and sometimes
immediate decisions, are discussed around this table
every day. Needless to say, the Council does not act in
isolation. In every discussion we rely on the experience
and expertise of specialists who are also working
every day to develop crucial documents pertaining to
their specializations.
It would be much more effective to have an in-depth
discussion in specialized United Nations platforms on
such aspects of youth issues as education, employment,
sustainable development and human rights. We must
not create the illusion that bringing such youthrelated topics to the Security Council will lead to a
breakthrough and enable us to resolve them more
effectively. We believe that the Council has neither
the right nor sufficient expertise to usurp the right of

18-1189419/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

the professionals to such discussion, and that general
issues and topics that are not directly related to threats
to international peace and security should be discussed
substantively in international forums especially created
for the purpose. Whether we do or do not address a
particular topic in the Security Council should not be a
factor in determining its importance or urgency for the
international community. Let us be more responsible in
adhering to the existing division of labour.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate today. It is
clear that there is a lot of interest in the Chamber, and
that a lot of us are wrestling with common challenges,
while we all have very similar hopes and aspirations
for what might be done in this area. While I therefore
take Mr. Polyanskiy’s point about how different parts
of the United Nations should remain in their own lane,
so to speak, I think that, as a number of speakers have
said, if we do not factor in as a long-term trend the
growing numbers of young people, and particularly
unemployed young people, in certain parts of the world,
we will find ourselves facing many more peace and
security challenges. I thank him for having raised that
point today. I also thank the briefers and wish to say
well done to the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth,
who I had the pleasure of meeting recently.
From our perspective, it is good to do this in
the Security Council because it touches on a very
important angle of future peace and security. Speaking
for myself, I would be very interested to have a youth
and economic development discussion in the Economic
and Social Council or the General Assembly as a
complement to what we are talking about today. If
anyone else is interested in that, I would be very keen to
have a discussion. It is very good to be able to evaluate
the impact of resolution 2250 (2015). It is fantastic that
we can hear directly from youth and civil society.
For our part, the United Kingdom welcomes
the independent progress study on youth, peace and
security (see S/2018/86), and we congratulate its authors
on its participatory and consultative methodology.
It is striking, as it has brought together more than
4,000 youth voices from all over the globe. I think
that this is not just important in itself, but it sets an
important model and high standard for future United
Nations reports. If there is any way of embedding that
consultative approach more widely, we, for one, would
definitely welcome that.
20/86

23/04/2018

As a number of speakers have noted, more than
half the world’s population is below the age of 30. That
means that young people are not just key stakeholders in
every sphere of life — from driving political change to
defending and promoting human rights to peacebuilding
and contributing to economic development — but they
also represent a key risk factor. If we do not get right
the development and encouragement of the aspirations
of young people, then it will be very difficult to keep
countries on an upward trajectory. I think, therefore,
that we should reflect on that point.
As we have also heard today, the failure to include
youth can often actually exacerbate a conflict. Too often,
conflicts emerge when people do not feel represented
by their political leaders. We have seen that in Syria,
and not only there. At the same time, in countries like
Afghanistan, and perhaps even Iran, what youth think
can often be an important indication of the potential for
reform in those societies.
In the United Kingdom we believe that enabling
young people to speak for themselves in political
processes can be the first step to taking real action. The
British Youth Council, which has 600 democratically
elected members, sits annually in the House of
Commons to debate a subject chosen by a youth ballot.
Last year, almost 1 million people participated. Many of
our countries are familiar with Model United Nations,
which does something very similar here as well as in
Geneva. Last week, London hosted the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting, and the eleventh
Commonwealth Youth Forum met. They pledged their
ongoing commitment to countries’ efforts to build a
more prosperous, secure and sustainable future.
A number of speakers have mentioned preventing
violent extremism. It is very important that strategies
to that end — sometimes called countering violent
extremism — include youth. Young people often
understand, much more than my generation, the
dynamics and impacts of terrorist narratives on
radicalization and recruitment, and they can be involved
in promoting an alternative narrative of tolerance and
inclusion. If anyone doubts that, I invite them to get hold
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams equivalent
to Vogue, which targets a very particular segment of
young women. In its propaganda it is incredibly skilful
about getting out certain messages. Countering that,
dealing with that and putting out a positive narrative is
something to which we all need to give attention.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Supporting youth advocates goes beyond just
giving them a platform; it is about building capacity
and it means providing education to ensure that all
young people have such a chance. There is a clear case
for education, particularly girls’ education. We know
that it contributes to a safer, more prosperous world.
We know it reduces conflict and increases stability.
Today 131 million girls across the world are deprived
of an education, and of the 774 million illiterate adults
in the world, two thirds are women. That is why girls’
education is one of the United Kingdom’s priorities
and one of my Foreign Secretary’s priorities. We will
be working with other partners to try to deliver a
minimum of 12 years of quality schooling to every girl.
That commitment to education is also why the United
Kingdom endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration last
Thursday. It is vital that our schools remain places of
safety and that they be protected from conflict.
Resolution 2250 (2015) outlined the need for young
people’s voices to be heard in Government, civil society
and industry, and this open debate is a key opportunity
to reflect on our implementation of the strategy it set
out. We look forward to sharing experiences with
others to that end. I thank you again, Mr. President, for
calling this open debate.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, for her briefing.
Our thanks also go to Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author
of the progress study on youth, peace and security (see
S/2018/86); Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine, member of
the Advisory Council of the World Young Women’s
Christian Association; and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet,
Executive Director of the Organisation URU in the
Central African Republic.
My country welcomes the Security Council’s
consideration of the this agenda item, which gives
perspective to the consideration of young people and
their manifold contribution to the problems of peace
and security in the world. If we accept that the world
today has the largest-ever proportion of young people, it
is important to involve them in efforts to transform our
societies, particularly in protecting them, as advocated
by the Secretary-General through his commitment to
place prevention at the heart of his agenda.
To that end, in accordance with its authority, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2250 (2015), which
formally recognizes the positive role and rights of

S/PV. 8241

young people to work towards lasting peace, including
inviting Governments, international organizations and
other actors to support them in such a role. The main
goal remains, as Mr. Simpson clearly underlined in his
study on the issue, to prevent violence and promote the
integration of young people in an effort to put their
inherent energy at the service of peace and security in
the world.
As the Secretary-General said, “We must not
only think about projects for young people, but with
them.” Therefore, instead of seeing them through
the prism of negative stereotypes, it is important
to consider young people, in accordance with the
approach of resolution 2250 (2015), as peacemakers
whose efforts and contributions must be recognized
and supported with a view to encouraging them to
become involved as agents of change in our societies.
One of the key lessons to be learned from Mr. Simpson’s
study concerns the ability to fully trust young
people to demonstrate their capacity for action and
initiative. Young people are a dynamic entity, capable
of strengthening the abilities to react and adapt and
demonstrate resilience in their communities.
The
comprehensive
implementation
of
Mr. Simpson’s study, which favoured a participatory
approach, is based on a number of case studies in
various countries around the world, including Côte
d’Ivoire. Taking into account my country’s recent
past, the progress study on youth, peace and security
highlights the demographic weight of youth, where the
most striking statistic shows that three out of every four
people are under 35 years of age.
The changing impact of young people in
the promotion and consolidation of peace and
security in Côte d’Ivoire requires clear initiatives,
namely,
understanding
youth
diversity
and
strengthening the capacity of young people to
better understand their contribution to peace, bolstering
their legitimacy as peace stakeholders and promoting a
model of youth commitment to peace. The lessons of
the study show the importance of the effective inclusion
of young people at all levels, as part of an approach
centred on national ownership.
Imbued with that reality and inspired by a forwardlooking vision, His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara,
President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, has made
the issue of young people one of the main pillars of
his Government’s policy with a view to strengthening

18-1189421/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security in Côte d’Ivoire. Accordingly, the
establishment of a ministry exclusively dedicated to
promoting youth and youth employment and the civil
service aims, inter alia, to develop and implement
comprehensive policies concerning youth, to establish
strategies to inculcate civic values, to encourage youth
forums, to counter violent extremism, to bolster the
empowerment of young people and to strengthen their
role in promoting peace and security.
In that connection, the Ivoirian Government
has created a one-stop shop for employment, the
Youth Employment Agency, to support Government
initiatives promoting youth employment. Moreover,
in collaboration with the African Development Bank,
the Ministry of Youth has joined the ENABLE Youth
programme, which aims at strengthening capacities
of young graduates wishing to launch businesses
in the agricultural sector. Within the framework of
community life and the empowerment of youth, Côte
d’Ivoire has established the National Youth Council, a
forum that makes it possible to better address young
people’s concerns.
My delegation welcomes the timeliness of the report
requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2250
(2015), as well as the recommendations of the excellent
study by Mr. Simpson (see S/2018/86), which will
be a source of inspiration for Member States in their
approach to youth, peace and security.
Lastly, it is hardly necessary to recall that the
participation of young people in peace and security
processes at the local, national, regional and
international levels requires the establishment of viable
and appropriate structures in the decision-making
process at every level so that the skills of young people in
matters of peace and security can be taken into account.
Investment in young people is essential to ensure that
peace is sustained for successive generations.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Peru for
convening today’s open debate on youth, peace and
security, which provides a valuable opportunity to
recognize the important role that youth can play in
building peace and preventing conflicts. I would also
like to thank Ms. Wickramanayake, Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, and Mr. Simpson for their passionate
and inspiring briefings. I add a special welcome and
thanks to Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Kessy
Ekomo-Soignet, who have ably shown us this morning
that youth are a force to be reckoned with.
22/86

23/04/2018

Let me begin by sharing some additional inspiration
with a quote from Nelson Mandela, the centenary of
whose birth we celebrate this year. He said:
“To the youth of today, I also have a wish to make:
be the scriptwriters of your destiny and feature
yourselves as stars that showed the way towards a
brighter future”.
I think that, after hearing from our briefers this
morning, we can be confident that today’s youth are
responding to Mandela’s call. Our role is to listen to
them and include them, as well as to support and enable
them in any way we can.
We have a long tradition of youth engagement in
Sweden, and we welcome the independent progress
study on youth and peace and security, “The missing
peace” (see S/2018/86). We are heartened by the
renewed international and multilateral focus on youth.
The concrete recommendations in the study represent
important steps for moving the agenda forward.
Through the adoption of the peacebuilding and
sustaining peace agenda, as well as the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Climate
Agreement, we have created an ambitious and
absolutely necessary plan for the world in which we
live — a vision of a peaceful and sustainable world.
Youth, peace and security constitute a crucial part of
the implementation of that broad framework and of the
advancement of peaceful, just and inclusive societies.
It is therefore high time that we broke with the
destructive narrative of young people as drivers of
conflict or as victims. Instead, we must harness their
full potential and leadership as effective peacebuilders
in all aspects of sustaining peace. We need to build upon
young people’s knowledge, strengths and enthusiasm to
contribute to peace and a better future, and enable their
meaningful civic and political participation. The World
Programme of Action for Youth underlines that young
people can be dynamic agents of peace and help guide
national action and international support.
A prerequisite for youth engagement is the
political, social, cultural and economic empowerment
of youth and the protection and fulfilment of their
universal human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Ensuring the political and social rights of young people
promotes trust in the system at an early age, thereby
laying the foundation for a strong and long-standing
social contract. The progress study presented today
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

by Mr. Simpson demonstrates how young peoples’
leadership is crucial in promoting peace, inclusion and
dialogue. Ensuring the full and effective participation
of youth is therefore essential for the advancement
of national peacebuilding processes. I would like to
highlight the following four points on how we can best
move this agenda forward.
First, we must all engage and invest in youth. That
means enhancing the quality of dialogue with youth.
Increased financing for youth, peace and security is
needed, including through more aid in fragile settings,
in conflict and post-conflict situations, and for youth
participation and empowerment. The Peacebuilding
Commission can play an important role by including
ways to engage youth meaningfully, during and in
the aftermath of armed conflict, in its advice and
recommendations for peacebuilding strategies.
Secondly, youth should be heard and seen. We need
to recognize the diversity of youth in our analysis and
engagement, while ensuring that we systematically
disaggregate data by age, gender, socioeconomic
background and geographical location.
Thirdly, we must leave no youth behind. It is
important to recognize that the exclusion of, and
discrimination against, youth based on age, gender,
disability, socioeconomic circumstances, religion,
sexual orientation or gender identity have a detrimental
effect on peace and security. We need to recognize
the specific challenges faced by young women
and men, including acknowledging that persistent
gender inequalities put young women at particular
risk. As highlighted by the study, we need to ensure
that educational institutions are protected, free from
violence and accessible for all.
Fourthly, we must keep pushing to ensure that this
issue remains on our agenda. We welcome continuous
reporting to the Security Council from the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the youth and peace
and security agenda.
As the old saying goes, we do not inherit the Earth
from our ancestors, we borrow it from our children. This
generation of youth is not content to wait. Our children
are coming for their inheritance. They are demanding
that they play their part in shaping the world they will
inherit from us. They are demanding — as Mandela
called on them to do — that they be the scriptwriters
of their own destiny. Our job is to ensure that they can
do so.

S/PV. 8241

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I join
others in thanking the three inspiring and courageous
young women who briefed us today: Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth; and the youth representatives, Ms. Sophia
Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet. I was
very inspired by what they shared with us. I believe
that, if the future depends on them, everything will
be alright. We congratulate Mr. Graeme Simpson,
the lead author of the independent progress study (see
S/2018/86), and the United Nations entities involved in
it for their valuable work.
Today we recommit ourselves to resolution 2250
(2015), on youth, peace and security. In that connection,
allow me to focus on three issues for this debate: first, the
importance of youth participation; secondly, involving
youth in the work of the United Nations; and, thirdly,
translating the resolution into contextualized actions.
First, concerning the importance of youth
participation, the progress study makes clear how young
people often feel unrepresented or excluded by the very
institutions that are supposed to serve them. Young
people are indeed “the missing peace”. We believe
young women and men to be enormously important
contributors to conflict prevention and resolution and
to sustaining peace. They have a legitimate desire to
participate in decision-making on their own future.
Youth have the potential to act as a transformative force
in peacefully bringing about change. This is not a threat
but provides an opportunity to strengthen a diverse
and inclusive society. History has demonstrated that
in places such as Prague, Indonesia or, more recently,
Tunisia and Egypt. It is no coincidence that human
rights defenders are often young people, underscoring
the need for their protection, particularly in times when
the space for civil society is increasingly under pressure.
That brings me to my second point, on involving
youth in the work of the United Nations. It is imperative
that we integrate the thoughts and views of young
people more structurally in the practice of the Council,
as part of the wider United Nations. Young people are
a major force when it comes to preventing violence
and sustaining peace. As a whole-of-United Nations
approach is needed, the Security Council should not
be excluded. Therefore, we welcome the contributions
of today’s young briefers and encourage the Security
Council to be open to hearing youth speak on the regular
items on its agenda as well. We appreciate the attention
that youth have received from the Peacebuilding

18-1189423/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

Commission and would welcome a structural inclusion
in its future work.
We also welcome the active participation of youth
in this week’s high-level event on sustaining peace.
As the progress study recommends, the role of youth
should be more strongly referenced in the mandates
and reporting of peacekeeping and political missions.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia is
a recent example of the inclusion of relevant language
on the meaningful inclusion of youth, which deserves
more systematic following. I am proud to say that
my statement today integrates the valuable input of
our youth representatives to the United Nations. We
strongly encourage those members that have not done
so yet to appoint youth representatives as well.
My final point concerns translating the resolution
into contextualized actions. For 1.8 billion young people
across the world, there is no one size fits all. Resolution
2250 (2015) therefore needs to be translated into the
different contexts and needs of young people, grounded
in a thorough analysis of root causes. These joined-up
analyses should be part of our comprehensive response
in implementing the agenda for sustaining peace and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our
implementation efforts should be made more explicit in
order to make resolution 2250 (2015) operational. The
European Union is currently devising its own agenda in
support of youth, peace and security, and we encourage
other regions to follow suit.
As the Kingdom of the Netherlands, we are
contributing as well, for example by assisting
programmes in support of youth participation in
northern Mali, supporting training on democracy and
human rights in different countries or, closer to home,
establishing community-level programmes in cities
such as The Hague to provide opportunities for youth
and prevent radicalization.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that the
issue of youth, peace and security merits structural
debate and the attention of the Council. We therefore join
Peru and Sweden in supporting the recommendation to
request an annual report by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth for her briefing.
China listened carefully to the statement delivered by
Mr. Simpson, Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. EkomoSoignet.
24/86

23/04/2018

Young people show us the world’s future and
hope. The international community should strengthen
the protection of youth groups in conflict areas and
help them to play a greater role in promoting world
peace and stability. We should continue to implement
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security.
The Security Council should continue to fulfil
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and strive on the basis
of its mandates and international cooperation.
First, we must resolutely crack down on terrorists
and extremists in response to the harm they cause to
young people. Terrorism and violent extremism are the
common enemies of all humankind. The international
community should abide by the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, unify
its standards and, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, resolutely fight all forms
of terrorist and violent extremist activities. The United
Nations anti-terrorism mechanisms should push the
international community to strengthen its cooperation,
in particular by taking measures to prevent the corrosive
influence of terrorist and extremist ideologies on young
people; cutting off the channels through which terrorist
and extremist forces influence and incite young people;
effectively combating the activities of terrorists and
extremist forces in using the Internet to recruit, make
master plans and raise funds; and cutting off the black
hands of terrorists and extremists reaching out to
young people.
Secondly, we must increase our efforts to resolve
flash-point and regional issues by finding political
solutions and attaching importance to the role of
young people in resolving conflicts. The international
community and the Security Council should heighten
their sense of urgency, strengthen the search for
political solutions to relevant flash-point issues and,
in accordance with the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations, assist countries in
conflict to advance their peace process and national
reconciliation; resolve disputes through the peaceful
means of dialogue and consultation; help conflict areas
to achieve peace and stability at an early date; and
create a peaceful and serene environment for the growth
and development of young people. We must ensure the
constructive participation of young people in political
processes, taking fully into account their views and
giving full play to their advantages in peace processes.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, we must fully consider the special needs
of youth and focus on addressing the root causes of
conflict. There are many deep-rooted reasons for
conflict, including extreme poverty, unbalanced
development and the scarcity of resources. All countries
should firmly engage in joint efforts to implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
strengthen youth education and employment security.
The international community should help developing
countries to improve their capacity for sustainable
development, especially at the level of youth education
and employment, increase social integration and
inclusiveness, and cultivate young people’s sense of
responsibility for social stability.
In that regard, the United Nations and the
international community should strengthen cooperation
with the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations by increasing support for
related projects in the field of youth. China is willing
to work with the international community, participate
actively in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism, take practical measures to prevent conflict,
contribute to safeguarding world peace and stability, and
help young people to achieve all-round development.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank the Peruvian presidency
for having organized this important debate on the
innovative resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace
and security, adopted three years ago. I also wish to
recall and thank the leadership of Jordan for promoting
the resolution.
We are also grateful for the informative briefings
provided by Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth; Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead
author of the progress study on youth, peace and security
(see S/2018/86); Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine of Haiti;
and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet of the Central African
Republic. They have reminded us most young people
of the world wish to contribute and are contributing to
peace and sustainable development for all.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the independent progress study on youth, peace
and security. We feel that the study’s main results
give cause for great hope, since they show that despite
the current conflicts and geopolitical tensions on our
planet, most of our young people not only want to
participate in peace processes but also demonstrate
a strong commitment to working for the peace and

S/PV. 8241

security of their communities and countries in many
innovative ways, through initiatives based on promoting
alliances and the use of new technologies. Our youth
want peace and they want to facilitate its sustainability
and their commitment, since investing in sustainable
and equitable development among countries is a way to
prevent conflicts and to turn their contribution into a
peace dividend.
For those reasons, Equatorial Guinea welcomes
some of the recommendations of the report with regard
to the importance of promoting national, regional and
global alliances in order to ensure research and the
collection of the necessary data on youth and peace
and security so as to ensure the implementation of
resolutions 2250 (2015), 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, and 1612 (2005), on children
and armed conflict, and other resolutions relevant
to achieving peaceful solutions to conflicts and to
protecting the civilians who will bear the responsibility
for peacebuilding and sustainable development. In that
regard, we are deeply concerned about the more than
400 million young people who live in areas affected by
armed conflict, terrorist groups and organized crime
and the stigma and violence of social and economic
exclusion — which can be linked to the racial, ethnic
and religious prejudice spread by populist movements,
as well as violent predators and petty criminals — and
who become passive or invisible victims trying to
escape conflict.
We are talking about the largest generation of
young people in history. More than half of the world
population is under 30 years of age. Many of them are
unemployed. In fact, more than 500 million live below
the poverty threshold, and about 14 million of those
are refugees or displaced by conflict. In Africa, more
than 60 per cent of the population is under 24 years
of age. That means that on our continent most victims
of conflict and those who suffer most from conflict,
not counting women of all ages, are young people and
children. Unemployment among African youth is high,
fluctuating between 10 and 29 per cent depending on the
region. Those figures are due to a lack of development,
unequal development among and within countries, a
lack of access to fair terms in international markets,
and conflict, terrorism and violent extremism, among
other issues. That combination of adverse situations
makes such young people and children vulnerable to
the manipulation of terrorist and organized criminal
groups. However, as the report that we are discussing

18-1189425/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

reminds us, most young people want and are working
for peace. That is why the fight against all such evils
must be anchored in the commitment to sustainable
development and equitable economic growth, gender
equality and the empowerment and participation of
young people and women at all levels. That struggle
should not be on the military front alone.
In his welcome speech at the seventeenth summit of
the African Union Assembly, held in Malabo, Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, on 1 July 2011, President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, then Chairperson of the
African Union, said that he called on African youth
as the legitimate heirs to Africa’s future, and that for
us, young people were not a problem for society but
a determining factor in society’s development process.
That faith in Africa’s young people has been a constant
during his presidency, as he has demonstrated through
his support for African Union initiatives such as the
Youth Volunteer Corps, the 2017 theme of harnessing
the demographic dividend through investments in
youth for sustainable development, the annual ChinaAfrica youth festival and the fifth summit of the
African Union and the European Union, which served
to strengthen those initiatives.
At the national level, Equatorial Guinea held its
first national youth congress in 2010, which led to the
adoption of national policies aimed at ensuring respect
for the political, economic, social and cultural rights of
young people. They include scholarship systems at both
the national and the international level, access to decent
housing and initiatives for the creation of decent jobs
as part of our Horizon 2020 national development plan.
In conclusion, we want to underscore our support
for General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) with regard to improving
young people’s abilities and skills and to creating jobs for
them, with a view to contributing actively to sustaining
peace. We also encourage the international community
to support young people in that regard. Africa is the
youngest continent in the world and the only region
where the number of young people continues to grow.
African youth represents the future of the whole world,
not just of Africa. The young people of any region
represent the future of all of us. That is why we call for
the international community and the various entities of
the United Nations, within their respective mandates,
to invest in international policies that promote equality,
cooperation and brotherhood among countries with
the aim of ensuring conflict prevention, sustainable
26/86

23/04/2018

development and lasting peace and security with the
participation of young people and in the context of
respect for the sovereignty of countries.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the presidency of Peru for convening and organizing
today’s meeting. We would also like to welcome
the presence of Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, Mr. Graeme
Simpson, Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Kessy
Ekomo-Soignet and to thank them for their briefings.
There are currently nearly 2 billion young people
around the world, more than 400 million of whom live
in areas affected by conflict or organized violence,
according to the report presented by Mr. Simpson (see
S/2018/86). It is therefore the duty of the international
community to pay particular attention to that
sector’s needs.
War and conflict tend to create a vicious circle for
young people as for others. In the case of young people
who live in conflict-affected areas, living without
expectations of being able to develop in a secure
environment, in many cases being prevented from
going to school or receiving training and forced to leave
their homes, they have fewer options and are therefore
susceptible to recruitment by armed or terrorist groups.
In order to break the vicious cycle of war, we must
address the structural causes of conflict as well as its
consequences. Interventionist policies and attempts at
regime change have had collateral effects, including on
young people.
We must also take into account inclusiveness and
the prevention and the protection of young people in
conflict situations, as well as the intrinsic relationship
between youth, peace and security and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Resolution 2250
(2015) touches on those aspects and is a good starting
point, but it is not enough. The recommendations of the
progress study on youth and peace and security, as it
establishes, are intended to serve as the starting point
for a large-scale transformation in which multilateral
organizations, States, civil society and other actors
must play their role.
Turning to inclusiveness, resolution 2250 (2015)
makes a clear call for the participation of young
people in decision-making, especially in the areas of
peacebuilding, political participation and conflict
resolution. In order to do that, an enabling environment
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

must be created and the necessary mechanisms provided.
We also believe that the role of young people must be
strengthened through social and economic inclusion.
To achieve that goal, young people’s participation and
needs must be taken into account both during and
after conflicts. The case of Colombia, where young
people gave the peace process a considerable boost is
a clear example. Those young people represented hope
by being willing to forgive and move forward. With
regard to prevention, the contributions of civil-society
organizations led by young people, and the impact of
the work they do, as well as their experience, must be
taken into account because they have great potential
for mobilizing their peers as well as the advantage of
understanding the local dynamics and priorities that
can be fundamental to lasting peace.
Young people can contribute positively to conflict
resolution, but that potential has not been harnessed
enough, owing to a lack of resources and to certain
stereotypes that depict young people as agitators
or victims of conflict. That is why they have been
systematically excluded from decision-making and
political processes, as has been the case with the young
people’s civil-society organizations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that have been formulating
strategies to peacefully address the lack of security and
how to deal with such issues as basic services, medical
care and education. We call on the international
community to support such organizations with flexible
financing and to take their specific needs into account.
We should also support demobilization, disarmament
and the reintegration of adolescents and young people
formerly linked to armed groups, with particular
emphasis on reintegration. That includes providing
rehabilitation, psychosocial support, education, genderspecific needs and socioeconomic opportunities,
as well as sustained support for their families and
communities, including the destigmatization of former
child soldiers.

S/PV. 8241

We reiterate our concern for the young people who have
been detained in recent months by the Israeli security
forces, including Ahed Tamimi, who has become a
symbol of Palestinian resistance and who is being tried
in a military court. That is inadmissible. We call on
the international community to respect and protect
the fundamental rights of young people. If we do not
start working on inclusiveness, prevention, and the
protection of this sector of the population, we will not
break the vicious cycle of war and we will have great
difficulty consolidating peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We appreciate the important briefings by
Ms. Wickramanayake and Mr. Simpson, and by
Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-Soignet,
representatives of civil society. We welcome the large
number of countries participating in today’s open
debate of the Council, and we would particularly
like to thank the civil-society organizations for their
support and contributions to the preparation of this
debate. We would also like to thank the United Nations
Population Fund and the Secretariat’s Office for Peace
Consolidation and Support.
We also want to express our recognition and support
for the work of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth,
and to highlight the Secretary-General’s commitment
to empowering young people and their participation in
decision-making that affects their future.

Within the framework of the fight against terrorism,
comprehensive programmes for recruitment prevention,
rehabilitation, reintegration and deradicalization
programmes should also be developed, particularly
with regard to the issue of foreign terrorist fighters who
are returning to their countries of origin, while taking
into consideration the issue of accountability when
cases warrant it.

The current generation of young people is the
largest in history. Overall, most of the people affected
in the various armed conflicts occurring around the
world are young. At the same time, young people can
make important contributions in favour of peace and
security. Peru would like to emphasize the role that
young people are called on to play in conflict prevention
and resolution, justice and reconciliation. Young people
are crucial to building an inclusive vision of the future
and achieving sustainable peace. We therefore welcome
the progress study on youth and peace and security
(see S/2018/86) provided for in resolution 2250 (2015),
sponsored by Jordan. It gathers the voices of thousands
of young people from all regions of the world, and
their message is clear. They want to stop being seen
as a problem and to be recognized as stakeholders in
peace processes.

Lastly, we should not fail to mention the problems
of young people in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Peru believes firmly that this is the right approach
to effectively implementing and promoting this issue

18-1189427/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

on the Council’s agenda. It is essential if we are to take
advantage of and maximize the potential, commitment
and resilience of young people in preventing and coping
with conflicts. To that end, it is important to create
inclusive and safe spaces that allow young people to
participate and contribute to peacebuilding and peace
consolidation processes in their national communities.
We welcome the efforts that are being made in that
regard and encourage their continuation.
This issue is clearly linked to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Among other things, the Sustainable Development
Goals oblige us to create decent employment for
our young people; guarantee equal opportunities
through access to health and education; and promote
peaceful societies with inclusive institutions. We are
also committed to promoting the human rights of all
young people, safeguarding their diversity and fighting
discrimination. That means rejecting stereotypes
that stigmatize them as persons prone to violence, as
well as recognizing and promoting their capacities
for participation and leadership in public life. The
participation of youth delegates in various United
Nations forums and processes is undoubtedly a good
practice insofar as it establishes bridges between
Governments and youth organizations around agendas
that contribute to with the maintenance of international
peace and security.
We must also combat the stereotypes that
perpetuate discrimination and violence against women;
we must invest in peacebuilding efforts linked to young
people and promote positive, nonviolent and equitable
masculine identities. We believe that promoting dialogue
between Governments and youth-led organizations is
important to the effective implementation of resolution
2250 (2015).
Peru also considers that the Council should
continue to promote this important topic and provide
periodic follow-up, particularly in the areas of conflict
resolution and sustainable peacebuilding. In that
regard, together with Sweden, we will present a draft
resolution that we hope will have the support of all
Council members. As the progress study on youth and
peace and security indicates, the time has come to
take a radical turn that recognizes young people as the
missing element in peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
28/86

23/04/2018

As I mentioned, we have a long list of speakers, so
I would like to ask speakers to limit their statements
to four minutes. For the same reason, the meeting will
continue through the lunch hour.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully associates itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the European Union.
I would also like to make some comments in my
national capacity.
I would like to thank the delegation of Peru for
organizing today’s debate and the speakers for their
statements. I congratulate Mr. Simpson and his team
on the considerable research they have done, which has
resulted in an ambitious document (see S/2018/86) that
not only gives very concrete recommendations to the
United Nations, regional organizations and Member
States, but also invites us to deeper reflection and to
confronting the challenges related to the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015).
Belgium welcomes the study’s emphasis on a
positive discourse on young people. It challenges a
number of stereotypical conceptions and demonstrates
that young people have an important capacity for
action that promotes peace. Creating an environment
conducive to young adults’ participation and inclusion
in prevention and peacebuilding processes is crucial.
Equal access to inclusive and quality education, as
well as opportunities for decent employment, are also
key elements in creating that environment. Through
education we can help young people to become
conscious, critical and open citizens, responsible and
capable of thinking constructively about their place and
role in society.
Accordingly, our Department of the Interior
coordinates a project called Bounce, financed by a
European Commission fund. Through a combination
of action and reflection, the project is aimed at
strengthening young people’s qualifications and skills
with a view to guiding them towards resilience, which
is the ability to bounce back in the face of difficulties.
Its training is based on a positive perspective — the
strengths and talents of every young person. We have
found that by changing perspectives from risk to
opportunity, from fear to openness and from control
to accountability, we can constructively address the
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

complex issue of violent extremism and make progress
towards inclusion.
At the national level, Belgium already provides
a structured platform for young people to express
themselves and be heard. Our active participation
in the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme
is another example of our commitment to inclusion,
whereby young people can contribute effectively to the
preparation of high-level meetings and participate in
them themselves. It is clear that effective inclusion can
be achieved only by ensuring the dignity, protection
and quality of life to which young men and women are
entitled. In that regard, as always, Belgium remains
firmly committed to the promotion of human rights,
which is a fundamental condition for peace and
development, and attaches particular importance to
the rights of vulnerable groups. We believe that it is
essential to protect the rights of young people and invest
in their development so that they can realize their full
potential and thereby contribute to peace and security.
It is also important to intensify our efforts to
involve young people in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. Pathways for Peace, the joint
World Bank-United Nations report, emphasizes the
importance of including young people in the prevention
of violent conflict and strengthening the relationship
between development, humanitarian action and
peacebuilding. Working for the future of young
people as conscious, critical and open citizens who
are capable and responsible is working for peace. We
therefore fully share the vision that young people must
be recognized as essential partners in peace. That is
why, in its partner countries, Belgium’s development
cooperation supports appropriate training, stimulates
employment and entrepreneurship and promotes the
rights of young people with a view to actively involving
them in decision-making processes.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Belgium is
committed to continuing to promote the rights of young
people with a view to active inclusion in crucial peace
and security processes. In particular, in our work as
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, we will
work to ensure that the youth dimension is positively
integrated into the Commission’s activities. Taking
into account the report’s recommendations, Belgium
will also work to draw attention to the challenges
surrounding young people and will advocate for greater
integration of the youth and peace and security agenda.

S/PV. 8241

We must also work together on the ways in which
the United Nations, including the Security Council,
follows up on those recommendations. On behalf of
my country, I welcome the fact that the report under
discussion today opens the door to a new dynamic in
the Security Council. I consider it important that the
Council be informed in a timely and comprehensive
manner of specific situations that concern young people
and are relevant to its mandate. It will have to be better
organized, particularly through the use of mechanisms
to access the necessary information. The stakes are
high, and Belgium intends to make its contribution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs of Croatia.
Mrs. Burić (Croatia): I would first like to thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
holding today’s timely debate and all the distinguished
briefers for their statements.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
I shall now make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
I am pleased to be participating in today’s open
debate on this very important topic, which we see
as complementary to the upcoming discussions in
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Croatia would
like to see the role of young people addressed more
profoundly in various forums and from various
perspectives, and particularly their role as actors in
efforts aimed at achieving peace and security. For that
reason, we support greater visibility for the youth and
peace and security agenda in the Security Council, both
by continuing with the practice of holding open debates
on the topic and by instituting yearly implementation
reports by the Secretary-General.
I would also like to congratulate all the partners
who contributed to the progress study (see S/2018/86) on
putting together a comprehensive and substantial report
that while it clearly gives reasons to be concerned,
more importantly gives us insights into the untapped
potential of young peacebuilders in our joint quest for
a safer world.
It is clear that too little is being done at the national,
regional and global levels to harness the potential of the
1.8 billion young people worldwide, especially given

18-1189429/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

the fact that a majority of them live in low-income
countries and often represent a significant part of the
populations in countries affected by armed conflict.
Young people should be recognized as partners and
agents in peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as they
unquestionably have a strong voice when it comes to
addressing their marginalization, violations of their
human rights and lack of perspective. This means that
we must reject the myopic view that sees young people
as a problem to be solved or that focuses only on the
small numbers of those who are involved in violence.
That issue becomes particularly pronounced in
the response to the global threat of terrorism and
violent extremism, which has in turn often produced
limited and counterproductive policy responses. As
the progress study also implies, there is no single
approach or solution that can prevent young people
from participating in violence or being recruited
into violent extremism. We also know that youth
empowerment is undermined when we continue to rely
on generalizations and stereotypes that identify young
men as potential perpetrators and young women as
potential victims. Especially now, when we are dealing
with the challenge of escalating threats of terrorism and
radicalism, we must focus on providing for the needs of
the younger generation and strengthening their sense of
being both safe and included.
Education for all as a human right and a basis for
promoting the realization of other rights is essential to
peace, human fulfilment and sustainable development.
It is a multifaceted effort that has multiplying effects.
It goes way beyond numeracy, literacy, the acquisition
of relevant skills and the provision of opportunities for
decent work. It fosters tolerance, global citizenship and
an appreciation and acceptance of cultural diversity, as
well as interfaith and intercultural understanding.
Youth unemployment is also far more than an
economic category. Lack of perspective is among the
worst kinds of poverty. It erodes a society of peace
and tolerance from within. Today’s topic cannot be
addressed thoroughly without taking into account the
development component.
We are encouraged by the fact that the youth yearn
for committed actions against violence, intolerance
and all forms of discrimination, as well as to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Young
people can serve as positive role models and are clearly
willing to embrace that role. They can influence
30/86

23/04/2018

and inspire their peers, raise public awareness and
encourage a broader discussion within a society.
Last but not least, let us not forget that they are the
leaders of tomorrow. Young people must be provided
with the necessary preconditions to fully realize their
potential. It is only with a holistic, multidisciplinary
approach that we can achieve sustainable results in
empowering the youth, and in turn, promote peace. That
includes the implementation of adequate development
policies and legislative frameworks, education and
inclusive cooperation with a several stakeholders, such
as academia, non-governmental organizations, the
private sector, religious authorities and the media.
In conclusion, to borrow the words of the great
Nelson Mandela, whose centenary of birth we celebrate
this year, young people are capable of bringing down
the towers of oppression and raising the banners of
freedom. We hope that by our joint efforts, today and
onward, we will enable them to do so.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Maldives.
Mr. Asim (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Government of Peru for convening today’s open
debate, which is the second to be convened under
Peru’s presidency this month. The focus on youth and
peace and security is most appropriate to complement
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
My delegation welcomes the remarks made by
His Excellency Néstor Popolizio, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, Ms. Jayathme Wickramanayake,
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, and the
representatives of the Member States and civil society,
which have enriched today’s insightful debate.
The youth bring with them an extraordinary level
of energy and passion that can be put to use for the
cause of peace, to enhance security and maintain
stability. There is a need to explore policy and
institutional reforms in order to engage youth more
productively in creating an environment for peace
to prevail. Discussions, such as the one taking place
today, serves as a useful platform to share experiences
and best practices and to enhance progress on the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015).
We must recognize that in many countries, the
youth demographic is often wrongly stereotyped and
stigmatized as the culprit of instability. Consequently,
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

national policies and strategies are often formulated to
target youth as an issue to be addressed, overlooking
the potential they have to offer in providing innovative
solutions. In the Maldives, we believe that the goals
and aspirations of the youth are driven by a strong
desire for peace and security. It is often external
aggravating social and economic circumstances that
lead to their involvement in activities that may result
in the disruption of peace and security. Therefore, our
national policies aim to mitigate those circumstances
by ensuring economic inclusion, gender equality,
universal education and raising awareness to cater to
the needs of the youth.
As recognized in the independent progress study
on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86),
pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015), we must ensure
that the rights of the youth demographic do not get
lost in the gap between the rights afforded to children
and the rights and political entitlements from which
they benefit as adults. That important transitional
period from children to adults must be catered for in
order to build societies that are resilient to conflict. In
that regard, the Maldives also advocates for inclusive
policies that recognize and accommodate the concerns
of the youth. Constructive and inclusive dialogue with
young people instil the idea of democratic societies and
resolution of conflict through peaceful means, while
carving the right path for future generations.
My delegation also wishes to highlight the
importance of partnerships to enhance the engagement
of youth through innovative means such as art, sports
and media, which have a wider outreach in targeting
this population demographic. The Government of the
Maldives has made significant investments to ensure
that young people are afforded the necessary social and
economic opportunities and to help to build cohesion
and unity among them. In that context, I wish to
highlight the crucial role that media, including social
media, has to play in shaping the minds and perceptions
of future generations. It is important to limit the spread
of misinformation and ensure that ideologies that
contribute to unity and social cohesion are propagated
among the youth. It is crucial to strike a balance in
guaranteeing freedom of speech, while ensuring that
incitements to violence and extremist ideologies are
not proliferated.
The Maldives has always perceived the youth as
partners for peace, rather than a cause of instability.
My delegation advocates for changing the perception of

S/PV. 8241

youth in a similar fashion among countries in conflict
and where conflict may emerge. Young people have
a strong potential to contribute to the prevention of
conflict through building cohesion and resilience
within societies and their role must not be overlooked.
Catering to a youth-inclusive approach would require
significant investments, which will reap invaluable
benefits, by providing a stable, prosperous and peaceful
future for generations to come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iceland.
Mr. Thórdarson (Iceland): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
convening today’s open debate on youth and peace and
security. I also thank the briefers for their excellent
statements. The independent progress study on
youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86) is very
informative, and Mr. Simpson and his team have clearly
consulted widely.
The study highlights the fact that most young
people hold a responsible and sophisticated view of the
world. The 1.8 billion young people in our world are
better connected than ever before. They know what is
going on locally, regionally and globally in a way their
parents and grandparents never have. That means they
can compare what is occurring in various parts of the
world. They see where Government and democracy is
working but they also see how deprivation, human rights
abuses and inequality undermine peace and prosperity.
Young people know that if societies are to be
peaceful and secure, they will need more than just the
absence of violence. They want to safeguard the planet
and are aware of climate change as a potential cause of
conflict for future generations. Nevertheless, the study
reveals that Governments tend to treat young people
as a problem rather than partners for peace. Yet, most
young people are peaceful. They want to take action and
lead but often feel excluded from the political process.
Education has a powerful role in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, but getting it right is complex. The
media gives a misleading view of young people, in
particular young men, and certain political forces seek
to manipulate them for political ends.
Societies that allow young people to participate in
public life are less likely to experience violence. For
example, the brutal repression of young demonstrators
and political activists by the Syrian authorities
contributed to igniting the seven-year long conflict.

18-1189431/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

Those and other elements in the study should concern
us deeply.
The study makes useful recommendations that the
United Nations and the Security Council could consider
more closely. We would support recommendations
that keep youth and peace and security on the agenda.
When the Security Council is designing peacekeeping
operations, the impact on youth should be considered.
Inclusive processes for peace and security have been
shown to give greater results. Thus, the participation of
young people in efforts to prevent conflict is not only
right; it is essential for success.
The Security Council and the General Assembly
must work together to make the youth and peace and
security agenda operational. I welcome the Council’s
expected draft resolution on youth, peace and security
and the decision by the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, to host a Youth
Dialogue on 30 May.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey.
Mr. Çavuşoğlu (Turkey): It is an honour to address
the Security Council on this special day, 23 April,
when in 1920, the Turkish National Assembly met for
the first time, in Ankara. The founder of our Republic,
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, dedicated this day to children
worldwide. Today, our hearts and minds are with
children and youth who are oppressed, trafficked and
smuggled around the globe.
There are 1.8 billion young people in the world.
That is the largest youth generation in history, and it is
a key asset for our common future. Yet today, all around
the world, extremist ideologies, radicalization and
terrorism are targeting young people. Terrorist groups
such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, the Kurdistan Workers Party,
the People’s Protection Units and the Fethullahçı Terör
Örgütü abuse and recruit women, children and youth.
Xenophobia, anti-Islam currents, ethnic and religious
discrimination and socioeconomic marginalization are
the root causes of radicalization among youth. We must
stop this. What we need is a holistic approach.
In Turkey, half the population is under the age of 31.
In addition, we host almost 1 million Syrian youth, and
we have developed tailor-made Government structures
and policies to address their needs. We encourage youth
to fully participate in economic and social life in Turkey.
We have lowered the age limits for parliamentary
32/86

23/04/2018

elections, and we make sure that they take part in
decision-making processes. We promote role models,
social reintegration and rehabilitation programmes.
Education is also a key factor. We leave no one behind
and provide equal opportunities for all. We also
promote dialogue among young people from different
backgrounds. All of those efforts complement our work
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We, the decision makers and politicians, have
important responsibilities. One of the reasons for the
rise of extremism in Western Europe in particular is
the divisive language used by some politicians. That
approach divides people along ethnic and religious
lines, and that is a very dangerous game. We must
refrain from creating stereotypes. Instead, we must
convey message of unity, positive messages.
Radicalization and violent extremism are not
limited to one particular religion, faith or community;
they are our common challenge, and we need to face it
together. Resolution 2250 (2015) is proof of the crucial
role of youth in peace and security. The new resolution
to be adopted should provide further guidance. We
must also use the potential of existing mechanisms,
such as the Alliance of Civilizations. Spain and Turkey
are trying to re-energize that initiative, which we need
more than ever.
We also need to create interaction among national,
regional and global measures. Good practices and
lessons learned in one part of the world can be
employed globally. That is why we need to expand the
United Nations capabilities to support Member States.
We will continue to contribute to all the efforts aimed
at empowering youth.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Ms. Kobia (Kenya): On behalf of the Kenyan
delegation to the United Nations, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate on
the role of youth in the prevention and resolution of
conflict, as well as in the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security.
Additionally, I would like to commend Mr. Graeme
Simpson on his leadership in producing the progress
study on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86),
which engaged Kenyan youth as part of the
consultative process. We appreciate the substantive
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

recommendations presented to Member States for
adoption and implementation in our respective national
capacities. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for
her comprehensive remarks and the other briefers for
their insightful comments.
Kenya has a very young population, with roughly
78 per cent of Kenyans below the age of 35. At a time
when the global youth population is at its highest,
the empowerment and meaningful participation of
the youth in all aspects of society is of fundamental
importance and has become a top priority for the
Government of Kenya.
Despite growing recognition of the crucial role of
young people in conflict resolution and prevention, they
still face difficulties not only in accessing the negotiation
table but also in influencing discussions and decisions
once they are part of the mediation process. That is
largely due to the negative or indifferent attitudes of
conflict parties towards inclusive processes and young
people’s limited political experience and clout.
In order to reduce barriers and fully realize
the potential of youth in the promotion of peace and
stability, the Government of Kenya has undertaken
concrete steps to create spaces for young people to
gain awareness and engage in the prevention of conflict
and maintenance of peace. In that regard, Kenya has
already begun the process of developing a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 2250
(2015). Consultations will begin to take place at the
county, national and regional levels to raise awareness
and gain insight from the relevant stakeholders prior
to the development of the draft action plan. Youth
organizations, civil society, international organizations,
academia and the private sector, among other relevant
stakeholders, will be key partners in that initial stage,
as well as upcoming stages.
In addition, Government bodies dealing with
peace and security matters are already taking steps to
be more inclusive. The National Steering Committee
on Peacebuilding and Conflict Management has
implemented guidelines for peace structures, which
stipulate that for every 15 of its members there should
be male and female youth representation. .
Moreover, through capacity-building training
on peace, national cohesion, conflict resolution and
mediation, the National Cohesion and Integration
Commission has been able to reach 24,964 young

S/PV. 8241

people across the country in its aim to create a pool of
young cohesion agents.
At the local level, a number of structures have been
created within educational institutions to facilitate
a greater contribution from the youth to the peace
and security agenda. Amani clubs — which translate
as “peace clubs” — have been established from the
primary to university education levels. Supplementary
to Amani clubs, each public and private university has
a group of peace ambassadors. Youth groups have also
been established in informal settlements and rural
areas, thus leaving no one behind.
I must recall that radicalization and violent
extremism continue to be a challenge for Kenya, and
more specifically Kenyan young people. We urge
the Council to unite more powerfully and go beyond
condemning violent extremism by also acting against
religious and ethnic-based hatred and exclusivity,
which undermine the potential of our youth. In that
regard, there is a need to collaborate with the private
sector, especially social media companies, to deny
terrorist groups access to those platforms as a means
of radicalization.
Let me end by reiterating Kenya’s commitment to
the full implementation of resolution 2250 (2015). We
welcome the recommendations made in the progress
study on youth and peace and security, and we look
forward to working with all relevant partners in the
adoption of those actionable steps at the national and
local levels.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Reinart (Estonia): I would like to thank the
Peruvian presidency of the Security Council this month
for organizing this timely debate, ahead of the General
Assembly’s high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The issue of the participation and
engagement of youth in achieving and sustaining peace
truly deserves our attention at every step of the way.
In that regard, we very much welcome the Security
Council concept note (S/2018,324, annex) on this topic.
Estonia also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Let me start by emphasizing the importance
of resolution 2250 (2015), which for the first time
addressed the need to engage young people in peace and
security discussions and recognized that young people

18-1189433/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

play a crucial role in the maintenance and promotion of
international peace and security.
Estonia welcomes the independent progress study
on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86), and we
highly appreciate that a number of young people were
involved in its preparation. We hope that the study will
be followed by action based on its recommendations and
that it will help to start truly meaningful engagement
of youth on matters related to peace and security. I
would like to highlight some aspects in particular
concerning why the meaningful engagement of youth is
of paramount importance.
First, encouraging the youth to be active participants
in society contributes directly to the prevention of
violence, including violent extremism and conflict. If
we are to succeed in our prevention efforts globally, it is
essential that we put inclusion at the heart of prevention
strategies. The progress study noted that structural
inequalities and social, political and economic
exclusion contribute to youth poverty, violence and
powerlessness. Therefore, in order to develop more
inclusive societies, we need to support equal access
for all young people to education and labour markets,
advance their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
promote the rule of law and gender equality and reach
out proactively to the most marginalized young people.
Secondly,
broad-based
and
people-centred
peacebuilding partnerships that meaningfully include
youth, women, civil society organizations and other
social actors are essential in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The youth are key actors of social
transformation, and allowing them to contribute with
their enthusiasm, idealism, energy and innovative
solutions will benefit peacebuilding efforts. Therefore,
once conflict has ended, it is important that young
people have the opportunity to participate in postconflict activities and decision-making processes.
It is important to allow the empowerment of the
voice of young people. To make that voice better heard,
Estonia lowered the voting age from 18 to 16 in local
elections, in response to the initiative of young people
who wished to be more involved in the decision-making
process at the local level. Thee outcome has
been positive.
It is high time for the contribution of young
people to sustaining peace to be further recognized
and supported by Member States and the United
Nations system. In that connection, we also welcome
34/86

23/04/2018

the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace (S/2018/43), and we are looking
forward to further discussion on that during the highlevel meeting this week.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Montenegro.
Mr. Darmanović (Montenegro): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate
on youth and peace and security, and I commend Peru’s
strong commitment to this issue. I also thank today’s
briefers for their valuable input to this debate.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union. Still, I
would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
We are continuously witnessing the dramatic
consequences of conflict and violence in different
parts of the world. It is often young people who face
obstacles, ranging from discrimination, marginalization
and poverty to armed conflict. Their voices are
distinctively underrepresented on issues that concern
them, including peacebuilding and the prevention of
conflict. Young people are the main victims of direct
violence in conflict situations, but sometimes also are
the perpetrators of violence, due to their vulnerability
to both voluntary and involuntary military recruitment.
The issue of youth and peace and security
requires joint action. We welcome the findings and
recommendations of the progress study on youth and
peace and security (see S/2018/86), pursuant to landmark
resolution 2250 (2015). Montenegro participated in the
negotiations for that resolution as part of the Eastern
Europe and Central Asian region.
The potential of youth to facilitate peace processes
is often undermined. We believe that it is crucial to
involve youth in such processes as stakeholders and
decision makers. That allows them to gain ownership
of the policies that affect them and all of us.
There are many talented and creative young men and
women who are pioneering innovation and new social
media tools and ways to reach the young population.
Montenegro supports all efforts aimed at voicing the
needs and priorities of young people and proposing
sustainable solutions for their problems. The national
youth strategy of Montenegro for the period 2017 to 2021
focuses on facilitating the access of young people to the
labour market and employment and to quality education,
their active participation in decision-making processes
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and policy creation and access to quality health care
and to culture, both as creators and consumers. That
is how we are striving to create an efficient framework
for the systematic improvement of the position of
young people in Montenegro. We strongly believe that
investing in youth is the best investment for the stability
and prosperity of our society.
The contribution of the United Nations system
in Montenegro, through different programmes and
projects, particularly the Programme on Youth
Empowerment, is of great importance for enabling young
people to use their full potential in decision-making,
entrepreneurship and participation in various social
activities. Montenegro is also very active in connecting
youth from the region of the western Balkans.
Representatives from the Government and civil sector
of Montenegro participated in a comprehensive process
of establishing the Regional Youth Cooperation Office.
We are proud that Montenegro was the first to establish
a liaison office for that important regional initiative,
which aims at reconciliation through the joint activities
of young people of the western Balkans region.
Young people around the world can make an
important contribution to sustaining peace and
stability. We realize that achieving the goals of peace
and development concerns their future, and they should
have a crucial stake in it. It is both a demographic
and democratic imperative that young people actively
participate in decision-making and are treated as a
vital asset to any society. Providing young people with
the right educational tools for crisis prevention and
peacebuilding has a positive impact on development
and sustainable peace. Montenegro genuinely supports
United Nations efforts to create spaces in which youth
can contribute to the peace and security agenda, and it
stands ready to be a reliable partner in those endeavours.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union. In my national capacity, I would
like to add the following.
I would like to express our appreciation for your
initiative, Mr. President, to hold this open debate on
the issue of youth, peace and security. I also thank the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, for her briefing, as well as the other
briefers for their input.

S/PV. 8241

Just over two years ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2250 (2015),
recognizing that the energy and creativity of young
people should be harnessed and actively engaged in
shaping lasting peace and contributing to justice and
reconciliation. We highly appreciate the work of the
team led by Mr. Graeme Simpson, and we welcome
the progress study on youth and peace and security
(see S/2018/86) prepared by its members in response
to the resolution. I would like to assure my colleagues
that the Ukrainian Government is carefully studying
the recommendations contained in the report and will
consider them in the process of further adjustment to its
national youth policy.
Unfortunately, we have to admit and agree with
the conclusion of the study: many young people around
the world are frustrated by the tendency of their
Governments and international actors to treat youth
as a problem to be solved, instead of as partners of
peace. It shall be one of our priorities to address that
challenge, in order to contribute to international peace
and security. We firmly believe that the 1.8 billion
young people around the world can play a crucial role
in building a world that is more peaceful than what we
have now. That can be achieved through ensuring the
inclusiveness of youth policies aimed at seamless social
integration and accommodating young people’s positive
and creative potential, to the benefit of societies.
We shall continue to pay special attention to this
issue through United Nations programmes and special
procedures for youth. Young people are the future.
While actively contributing to peace and security
through participation in peacekeeping operations — I
invite those present to just look the average age of Blue
Helmet personnel — they also suffer most from political
and man-made disasters, as do women and children.
I should like to highlight the fact that youth are
among those who suffered most in Ukraine from the
Russian aggression in Crimea and Donbas. Young
people in those areas lost their chance to receive
quality education and to work. More than 60 per cent
of internally displaced persons are young women.
Nevertheless, tens of thousands of young people
actively volunteered by providing support to our armed
forces in the fight to protect the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine. Youth and student
organizations became equally active in delivering aid
and humanitarian assistance to the people affected by
the ensuing hostilities.

18-1189435/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation has repeatedly urged the
Russian Federation to accept its international legal
responsibility, and we demand the termination of its
wrongful acts in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea,
the city of Sevastopol and certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. As an example, according to the
latest report on the human rights situation in Ukraine
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, which was released a month ago,
the Russian Federation continued to compel Crimean
residents into its armed forces, conscripting at least
4,800 men within two campaigns in 2017, in violation
of international humanitarian law. Moreover, courts in
Crimea started to hear cases on charges of draft evasion.
We therefore demand that the Russian Federation stop
the illegal practice of the conscription of young men in
the occupied territories and respect its obligations as
an occupying Power in accordance with international
humanitarian law, as defined by the General Assembly.
No matter how proud the actions of Ukraine’s
youth make us feel, repelling the foreign aggression
and managing its consequences is not the fate we
envisioned for our younger generation. Therefore,
the Government of Ukraine is now committed to
qualitatively strengthening the potential of our youth, as
well as creating equal opportunities and guaranteeing
equal rights for them. In that regard, we strongly believe
that education has to, and will, play a leading role in
shaping the future of our youth, reinforcing their role
in public life and instilling a spirit of open-mindedness,
tolerance and a can-do attitude.
To achieve that goal, an educational reform
was launched in 2017 with the adoption of a law on
education. That, among other things, is fully in line
with the recommendation of the progress study to
support inclusive labour policies and practices that
ensure equal access for all young people to the labour
market and the enjoyment of fundamental principles
and rights at work.
We reiterate our position that the empowerment
of youth and youth-oriented organizations is essential
in promoting positive role models, finding proper
responses to violence and building a peaceful social
fabric. Therefore, with regard to the youth population,
the Government of Ukraine has moved away from the
patronizing stance of working with youth to an inclusive
approach of youth participation. We note that such an
approach is also advocated by the authors of the study
before us.
36/86

23/04/2018

Ukraine is convinced that the role of youth in
ensuring peace and security cannot be overestimated.
The energy and creativity of young people can
contribute to the development and progress of their
societies. Unfortunately, there are also numerous
examples showing that energy can be, and is, exploited
for destructive purposes. It is our joint responsibility
to assist the younger generation in pursuing their
aspirations to build a better world of tomorrow, to
equip them through education with the right tools and
to make sure that young people become agents of peace
and positive change.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Ms. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As
Mahatma Gandhi once said, if we are to reach real peace
in the world, we shall have to begin with the children.
Given that nearly half of the world’s population is under
the age of 24, it is crucial to address their needs and
vulnerabilities and, even more, to harness the great
potential of young people when it comes to building a
peaceful and safe society.
I would like to focus on two areas that the SecretaryGeneral recommended in his progress study on youth
and peace and security (see S/2018/86): inclusivity
and education.
First, young people will have to live tomorrow with
the choices that we make today. It is therefore essential
that we include them in today’s decision-making.
That is not only an ethical imperative; it is also in the
interests of an international community that is serious
about its future. If peace is to be successfully sustained,
it has to be supported, embraced and implemented by
the youth — women and men.
There are numerous initiatives on political
participation, some of which we have heard and
admired today. I would also mention the African Youth
Parliament and the European Youth Parliament. They
are proof that young people want to take an active
part in shaping the future of our countries. We should
encourage them so that they also inspire those who so
far have chosen not to participate in referendums and
elections. Democracy is a work in progress and has to
be constantly worked on and defended, in my country
as well as in all others.
Youth inclusivity is particularly important in
conflict situations. In Syria, young people will play an
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8241

instrumental role in the search for a sustainable solution.
It is for this reason that Switzerland has supported the
Civil Society Support Room in Geneva since 2016.
More than 1,000 participants, most of whom are under
30 and represent over 400 Syrian non-governmental
organizations, have participated in these negotiations
under United Nations auspices. They have played a
constructive role in identifying priorities for the future
of Syria’s young people. We shall continue to support
them as much as we can.

Mr. Leffler: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

Secondly, I turn to education, defined by the poet
William Butler Yeats as “the lighting of a fire”. It is
by educating young minds that great change becomes
possible. We need a great change. All young people
should have access to inclusive and equitable quality
education, as called for in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. However, violent conflict
and persecution have uprooted many young women and
men, with displacement reaching record levels. Half
of refugees today are under 18 years of age and spend
more time in displacement and exile than in school.
That is the seed of future lost generations. A small
minority may even embrace alternatives with regard to
their sense of belonging, status and power, and the risk
of violence is thus exacerbated.

I would like to start by extending a special thanks
to the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and to
the lead author of the independent progress study on
youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86), as well
as to the representatives of youth and civil society,
for their statements. Allow me to express the EU’s
appreciation for the progress study and its support
for the recommendations therein. The EU contributed
to this landmark process through hosting a European
regional consultation on youth, peace and security, and
we welcomed that opportunity to channel the voices of
young Europeans into this process.

This is where we have to step in to break the vicious
circle of misery, radicalization and conflict. Switzerland
has therefore increased its budget for education
activities in fragile contexts by 50 per cent. Over the
past few years, for example, we have rehabilitated 128
schools in the Middle East, thereby facilitating access
to schooling for around 86,000 young people, among
them many Syrian refugee children.
An estimated 408 million young people aged
between 15 and 29 are living in contexts of organized
violence or armed conflict throughout the world. We
need to intensify our efforts to allow this generation
to have a future and to enjoy peace, security and
prosperity. There are great challenges ahead, and it is
difficult to predict how long it will take to overcome
them. But as the saying goes, the best way to predict
the future is to create it. I suggest we do exactly that,
together with our young people.
Today’s debate and the resolution to be adopted
are a further step in the right direction and for this,
Mr. President, I warmly thank you.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.

We applaud this open debate, with appreciation
for Peru’s leadership and the envisaged adoption
of a new Security Council resolution on youth and
peace and security. We anticipate a forward-looking,
strategic outcome to accelerate the implementation
of this important agenda. We also support annual
implementation reports by the Secretary-General as
well as yearly open debates in the Council, including
briefings by young peacebuilders.
The youth, peace and security agenda reminds
us that young people want to be heard; they want to
take action and they want to lead. Recognizing and
empowering those aspirations is the promise of the
youth and peace and security agenda. Allow me to lay
out the perspective of the EU on this topic.
To begin with, we need to challenge the
generalizations which identify young people with the
risk of radicalization and violent action. That mistakes
young men for potential perpetrators and young women
for potential victims. On the contrary, we know that
the overwhelming majority of young people — like
all of us — seek a peaceful future for themselves,
for their neighbours and for the broader national and
international community. We see that too little is done
to harness their potential to prevent conflict and to
contribute to sustaining peace.

18-1189437/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

The progress study and this open debate provide
an excellent opportunity to shift this narrative. In this
context, the EU fully shares the view that preventing
violence and sustaining peace is best served by
addressing young people’s experiences of exclusion
and marginalization. The EU also heeds the call of
young people, amplified by the progress study, to
prioritize and invest in youth-based and youth-led
peacebuilding activities.
I would like to offer three messages regarding
inclusion, resilience and leadership.
First, the EU has always striven to promote broadbased, people-centred peacebuilding coalitions, which
meaningfully include youth, women, civil society
organizations and other partners. We continue to
accelerate the implementation of the youth and peace
and security agenda and the women and peace and
security agenda, which are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing.
For the EU, youth inclusion starts with two-way
dialogue with young people. We want to understand
their vision for peacebuilding and find opportunities
to support and scale up their initiatives. Exactly a
month from now, the EU will host an innovative and
inclusive conference on youth, peace and security
in Brussels, in partnership with the United Nations
and civil society organizations. We hope that the
conference will create a new area and a new framework
for young peacebuilders from within and outside the
EU to engage in an interactive dialogue with leaders
and stakeholders from the EU and with multilateral
and non-governmental partners. The conference will
further reinforce the momentum behind the European
Union’s focus on the youth and peace and security
agenda and our cooperation with the United Nations on
youth in peacebuilding.
Secondly, the EU’s investment in youth is currently
the focus of multiple programmes on four continents.
As an example, we have recently launched a project
with UNICEF to strengthen the resilience and civic
engagement of adolescents and youth in conflictaffected areas in eastern Ukraine. A global project
with UNESCO works to strengthen education sector
planning capacities for conflict prevention and crisis
preparedness. Another EU project in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo reinforces youth involvement
in conflict prevention in areas affected by the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
38/86

23/04/2018

Thirdly, the EU fully shares the call of the progress
study to maximize youth ownership and agency on peace
and security. One illustration of how we empower young
people’s leadership is the Africa-EU partnership. At the
fifth African Union-European Union Summit, which
took place in Abidjan last November, young people
provided political recommendations on priority topics
for the African Union (AU) and the EU. Moreover, a
number of the young people present spent five weeks
working intensely with AU and EU structures to
develop those recommendations into a youth agenda
with concrete initiatives and proposals. That agenda was
presented to African and European Heads of State at the
Summit, and we are currently working on a follow-up
mechanism to ensure the continuous inclusion of young
people in the Africa-EU partnership.
As the progress study underlines, young people’s
work is a connector across peace and security, human
rights, sustainable development and humanitarian
affairs. In the same vein, the European Union’s work
for and with young people connects all actors, policies
and instruments of the EU and represents a key aspect
of the coherence of our action within and outside
the Union.
Many people, across all ages and generations, are
ready to make a difference to build peace. Mobilizing
the potential of young people as peacebuilders is one
of the big challenges and opportunities of our time.
The youth, peace and security agenda charts the way
forward for all of us working together.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Ms. Sipiläinen (Finland): I would like to thank
Peru for convening this debate. Finland commends
the progress study on youth, peace and security by the
Secretariat (see S/2018/86) and thanks Mr. Graeme
Simpson, along with his Advisory Group of Experts,
for their thorough work in carrying out the study.
Finland aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2250
(2015), on youth, peace and security, in 2015, but the
seeds were planted by active youth long before then. The
resolution promotes the idea of youth as a positive force
towards peace. Today it is important to focus on the
effective implementation of the resolution. The progress
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

study at hand is an invaluable instrument in supporting
the full participation of youth in peace processes.
Finland is pleased that prevention has been
established at the centre of the agenda of SecretaryGeneral Guterres. The progress study emphasizes the
role of young people in conflict prevention.
It has become clear that an inclusive approach to
peacebuilding is necessary for the achievement of good
quality results and that sustaining peace requires the
involvement of a wide range of actors from different
parts of society. That means youth, women and
civil society.
In most of the societies suffering from violent
conflicts, women are underrepresented in both formal
and informal decision-making. As we know, youth
make up another significant part of the population that
is often marginalized from political processes. That
means that the voices of young women too often go
unheard, and especially so in conflict situations. In
Finland, Ms. Jutta Urpilainen, the Foreign Minister’s
Special Representative on Mediation, has chosen
to focus her work on both young people and women
as priorities.
The women and peace and security agenda promoted
by resolution 1325 (2000) has gained significant
normative and political strength since its adoption,
18 years ago. Finland remains strongly committed to
advancing the women and peace and security agenda,
and our recently published third national action plan on
the resolution was drafted with the close participation of
civil society. We hope to see a similar path of progress
with regard to the youth, peace and security agenda.

S/PV. 8241

should be a mainstreamed, overarching approach in
future resolutions, with mechanisms for following
up its implementation. The progress study teaches
us that building mutual trust between young people
and Governments is a prerequisite for improving
youth participation. That means actively promoting
their participation and giving them responsibility,
not just tolerating their presence. The report also
includes concrete recommendations that need to be
implemented. I would particularly like to highlight
recommendations related to education and media
literacy, which can contribute both to recovery and
building a peaceful future.
Our role as decision-makers in our societies is not
to work for the youth, but with them. Young men and
women do not need the voices of others to speak on their
behalf; they just need to be enabled to get on the stage
to speak for themselves, instead of being prevented
from doing so.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Frølich Holte (Norway): First of all, I would
like to thank Peru for organizing this debate. Norway
congratulates the authors of the progress study on
youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86). We are also
proud to have supported the study financially.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend
Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake for her work as the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth. We look forward
to continuing our close cooperation with her.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, without
the full involvement of young people, there will be no
sustainable peace, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development will not be achieved and violent extremism
will not be curtailed. There is no greater resource than
our youth. Both the Security Council and the General
Assembly recognize the key role young people can
play in maintaining and promoting international peace
and security.

Active Finnish youth organizations have played
a strong role in promoting resolution 2250 (2015). In
our future efforts to advance the implementation of the
resolution, we intend to keep civil society, especially
youth organizations, strongly involved in the process.
Our national 2250-Network, a group of stakeholders
and non-governmental organizations with a focus on
representing youth, is a concrete example of that work.

Norway has taken several concrete steps to
implement resolution 2250 (2015). Through our
involvement in peace and reconciliation efforts in
Colombia, the Philippines and South Sudan, we have
seen at first-hand the important contributions of youth.
Based on that experience, we encourage the inclusion,
at an early stage, of young women and men in peace
negotiations and the resolution of conflict.

The progress study sends a strong message
about the importance of keeping young people on the
agenda of the Security Council. The youth perspective

Norway supports a number of youth movements,
including the Youth Civil Activism Network. The
organization has 1,300 members in 125 countries and

18-1189439/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2018

helps young people to develop skills and resources to
counter extremism in local communities.

implementation and design of this important first study
on youth, peace and security.

Education is a main priority for Norway. We have
doubled our support to global education over the past
four years to ensure schooling for more than 3 million
boys and girls annually.

We are proud to once again attend an interactive
and constructive discussion on the youth, peace and
security agenda, which was launched by Jordan during
our membership of the Council in December 2015 (see
S/PV.7573), based on the vision of His Royal Highness
Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II, who presided
over a historic meeting on this topic during Jordan’s
presidency of the Security Council (see S/PV.7432).

In the Group of Friends of Preventing Violent
Extremism, which is co-chaired by Jordan and Norway,
we share lessons learned and best practices for including
youth and civil society in national strategies to prevent
violent extremism.
At the national level, Norway has developed
legislative frameworks to ensure the integration of
youth into policymaking and the development of
initiatives to empower young people. We have also
established integration programmes to promote the
active participation and inclusion of refugee and
migrant youth in Norwegian society.
In 2014, the Government launched its action plan
against radicalization and violent extremism, which
outlines a strategic cross-sectoral approach. The
action plan focuses particularly on preventing the
radicalization of young people. One of the measures in
the action plan is a guidance programme for parents
and guardians.
Norway will continue to empower young women and
men to be agents of change in their communities — not
only to prevent violent extremism, but to remove its
root causes. As I said at the beginning, the innovative
abilities of youth will be crucial for achieving
sustainable peace and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
appreciate Peru’s cooperation, work and efforts to hold
this important meeting during its presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would like also to
thank the briefers, the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth and the two young women from Haiti and the
Central African Republic. I also thank Mr. Simpson
for preparing the progress study on youth, peace and
security (see S/2018/86). We thank the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations Population Fund
for their great efforts over the past two years. I would
like also to thank the United Nations Development
Programme and all those who contributed to the
40/86

We recall that the Council adopted resolution 2250
(2015) as the first resolution of its kind — unprecedented
international recognition of the need for young men
and women to contribute to global efforts to enhance
sustainable peace. The resolution has paved the way
for the participation of youth in decision-making at
all levels and supported youth in building capacity
to take the initiative and participate in charting their
present and their future. It has helped to transform the
stereotypes that youth are the problem and the culprits
or victims of violence, into a positive perspective that
sees youth as partners in combating violent extremism
and terrorism and achieving a much-needed culture
of peace.
The youth, peace and security agenda is crucial.
More than half of the world’s population are under
the age of 30, with 70 per cent of them living in two
regions torn apart by conflict, namely, the Middle
East and Africa. The international developments
and challenges that we face, especially in the Middle
East, have created a reality that lacks stability and has
negatively impacted youth and children, who have lost
their opportunities and access to quality education
due to displacement and slow economic progress. That
requires serious international and national attention to
provide development needs in the areas most affected
by conflict, as part of the conflict prevention effort.
That would help to enhance the resilience of youth
vis-à-vis the challenges they face.
In the light of the reality in our region, we have
launched the youth, peace and security agenda based
on our conviction that there needs to be a voice given
to youth at all levels. They need to contribute to
policies and institutional programmes regarding their
future, which would help us empower and support
them in improving them skills and realizing their true
potential. In turn, that would serve their societies and
countries. Resolution 2250 (2015) was therefore a
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

historic resolution aimed at peacebuilding, sustainable
development and enhancing trust between youth and
those who provide them with empowerment, as well as
the activation and operationalization of the role played
by civil society and youth organizations.
Jordan takes a leading role in the fight against
terrorism at the regional and international levels.
We have established several initiatives and believe
there must be concerted international efforts against
terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization, while
employing a moderate counter-narrative. To that end,
with the cooperation of Norway, we participate in the
Group of Friends on Preventing Violent Extremism,
which supports the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and provides guidance to youth through
United Nations agencies’ various counter-terrorism
initiatives and projects. We are also the co-facilitators of
the sixth review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We hope that a draft resolution
is agreed to improve the international response to
countering terrorism.
It is not enough to invest in policies and security
plans. We must invest in policies and sustainable
development plans that focus on quality education,
employment, the role of women and addressing the
root causes of inequality and social injustice and that
enhance the loyalty of youth to their societies and
homelands. That would create a link between peace
and security and development. National strategies
in support of youth need to be coupled with policies
that support childhood, which is a strong basis for the
upbringing of a very positive youth generation.
Jordan believes that investment in youth is done
through a number of means: first, by establishing a
modern educational system that caters to labour market
needs and eliminates poverty and unemployment;
secondly, by enhancing the culture of peace among
youth, improving their participation in decision-making
at the national and political levels and encouraging
their voluntary work; thirdly, the economic integration
of youth into their societies that goes beyond simply
providing them with job opportunities and by enhancing
their participation in strategies at the national and local
levels; fourthly, by enhancing the role of the media
through different platforms that would support youth
and improve media coverage on the positive input of
youth and their role, as well as encouraging creativity;
and fifthly, by enhancing the role of youth in social

S/PV. 8241

peace and cohesion and enhancing dialogue for the
exchange of experiences.
We are implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In that connection, our national strategies and policies
have linked the important role of young men and
women to those goals, which we cannot achieve without
youth participation and without providing every
opportunity for youth to build their capacity and realize
their potential in order to achieve development. In our
younger societies, youth are the link between peace,
development and human rights.
Jordan welcomes the progress study mandated
by resolution 2250 (2015). The report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (S/2018/43) enjoys our support, as do the
recommendations that are part of the reform of the
United Nations development system and other United
Nations reform processes. That constitutes a road map
for the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) and for
enhancing the participation of youth in peacebuilding
and their ability to create positive change. We call for the
implementation of such a mandate — particularly as we
are investing in the capacity of young men and women,
providing them with useful political participation and
ensuring all forms of protection against violence — so
that they are able to exercise their rights.
We support national, regional and international
partnerships and the establishment of new dialogue and
accountability mechanisms at the United Nations level.
Jordan has begun to implement resolution 2250 (2015),
as well as other relevant recommendations, and has
established the Champions for Youth group. So far, it
includes 24 member States, in addition to the European
Union. The aim is to follow up the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015) and maintain international
political momentum. Jordan has cooperated with
other United Nations agencies and partners to create
programmes for young men and women refugees, in
particular Syrian refugees.
At the national level, we have also developed
policies and strategies in line with resolution 2250
(2015). We established the Youth 2250 project, which
seeks to raise awareness among young people about the
implementation of the resolution. In that regard, we thank
the European Union for funding the project. Jordan also
developed a national youth strategy for the period 20172025 in order to identify priorities in supporting youth,

18-1189441/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

including training programmes for civic education and
participation in decision-making at the local level. That
is in addition to our national strategy for women, which
we developed to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security.
We have also included a youth pillar in our
comprehensive strategy to combat violent extremism,
and amended our national laws to include provisions
that enhance the role of youth and their positive
political participation.
Jordan has also launched a number of initiatives
that empower youth and enhance their participation,
including providing young entrepreneurs with financial
support for their projects and helping them find creative
solutions to challenges in their communities. That
serves to promote Jordan’s efforts to safeguard young
men and women and prevent an environment conducive
to extremism. Among the most prominent of our
initiatives are the King Abdullah II Award for Youth
Innovation; our Achieve Initiative, which was awarded
the Alexander Bordini International Prize for 2016; and
our National Democratic Empowerment Programme.
Finally, we face great opportunities but also great
responsibilities. We must translate the demographic
opportunity that is our youth into genuine peace
through frameworks that support young people and their
capacity at all levels to build sustainable world peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to begin by thanking the Peruvian presidency for
convening this very timely open debate on youth, peace
and security.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank Mr. Graeme Simpson, who
did a tremendous job as lead author of the progress
study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86). I
also thank all the other briefers who today gave us very
insightful and thorough presentations, starting with
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, whose work we
enthusiastically support.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, as well as with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Romania on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission. I
wish to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
42/86

23/04/2018

My country firmly believes that in today’s
world young people are vital drivers of peace,
change and prosperity. Their specific sensibility and
forward-looking approach, as well as their idealism,
creativity and energy, can meaningfully contribute to
building and sustaining peace, providing long-term
sustainable solutions and fostering conflict prevention
and reconciliation.
Italy is strongly committed to the implementation
of the youth, peace and security agenda. We were the
first Member State to provide support to the Office
of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth after her
appointment as the new Envoy.
In our vision, youth policies represent the best
link between the peace and security agenda and
Agenda 2030, in accordance with Secretary-General
Guterres’ view on sustaining peace. In that spirit, I am
glad to announce today that the Government of Italy
has decided to finance a major initiative for bridging
the two agendas and supporting their joint youthled implementation. Through an initial allocation of
$500,000 to the Department of Social and Economic
Affairs (DESA), Italy is contributing to the development
of a new project entitled “Young People’s Contributions
to Sustainable Peace in the Framework of the 2030
Agenda”, devised by DESA in cooperation with
several other United Nations agencies, including the
Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the United Nations
Development Programme.
This broad project is aimed at strengthening the
capacities of Government officials, youth organizations
and civil -society partners in the formulation and
implementation of national policies and programmes
promoting sustainable peace and security. Through an
open and inclusive participatory process, the project
will design and test key instruments for promoting the
participation of young women and men in processes
geared at preventing violent conflict and sustaining
peace in their societies. The outcomes of the project
will first be implemented in pilot countries in Africa
and the Middle East and North Africa region.
We are also committed to building networks of
young peacebuilders and activists in our own country.
Through an inclusive selection process involving civil
society, the Italian Government has for the first time
appointed two youth delegates who, through nationwide
advocacy activities as well as participation in meetings
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

at United Nations Headquarters, are helping to
promote the culture of active participation by youth in
peacebuilding and reconciliation processes.
Finally, the role of the Security Council is pivotal
in promoting the role of youth in peace and security.
To that end, as recommended in the progress study,
we would encourage the establishment of an informal
working group on youth, peace and security, akin to the
one on women and peace and security. We must continue
to tirelessly promote this agenda in the interests of all.
The Council can count on Italy’s full support and longterm commitment in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli Da Silva (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. We are also grateful for the
briefings presented in this debate.
Brazil is of the view that resolution 2250
(2015) was a landmark resolution in that it
recognized the need for a comprehensive and
positive approach to the role of youth in preventing
armed violence and conflict and in peacebuilding.
Young people make up the majority of the population
in countries in conflict and suffer disproportionately
from its effects. It is estimated that young men make up
90 per cent of fatalities in conflicts today.
Conflicts and armed violence also affect young
people by disrupting their access to education and
economic opportunities, which has a lasting impact
with direct negative consequences on peacebuilding
and the prospects for sustainable development of
future generations. Young people are also particularly
vulnerable to violent extremism and organized crime.
However, we must refrain from stereotypes associating
youth with violence, as well as hasty and repressive
responses. As recognized in resolution 2250 (2015),
we need an approach that is not only reactive, but
also preventive. In particular, the international
community should focus on addressing factors that
contribute to the involvement of young people in
violence, such as poverty, the lack of educational
opportunities and social and cultural exclusion.
It is also essential that young people play an active
role in post-conflict settings through mechanisms that
ensure the participation of young people in all stages of
the peace process.

S/PV. 8241

From a broader perspective, it is necessary to
create conditions to ensure the representation of
young people at all levels of governance. As noted
in the progress report, young people have been fully
demonstrating their capacity for leadership for peace
in a wide range of contexts — from preventing violent
extremism, political conflicts and organized crime to
activism in the area of nuclear disarmament and small
arms regulation.
Although Brazil has not been affected by armed
conflict on its territory, the country is still responsible
for promoting progress on the issue of youth, peace and
international security. During its chairmanship of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil sought to prioritize
youth by paying attention to their specific needs and
challenges in conflict and post-conflict contexts, while
encouraging their active participation so as to achieve
lasting and inclusive peace. We remain firmly committed
to the empowerment of young women and men through
projects aimed at building their capacity and at income
generation in the framework of the chairmanship of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Those initiatives, supported by Brazil,
also reflect the goals that the country seeks to reach
domestically, with the broadening of opportunities for
young people.
We are pleased that the Council and other United
Nations entities involved in peacebuilding are lending
special attention to the issue of youth, peace and
security. However, we believe that we must strengthen
our cross-cutting approach to the matter, including by
incorporating it into the mandates of peacekeeping
missions, preparing annual reports on the subject and
bolstering the direct engagement of young people in
the decision-making and principal organs of the United
Nations system.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation welcomes
this open debate on youth, peace and security. We
wish to thank all the briefers for their comprehensive
briefings. The independent progress study on youth,
peace and security (see S/2018/86) was particularly
useful and illuminating.
The world today has more young people than ever
before — 46 per cent of the global population is under 26
years of age. Many parts of the world, including my own
country, has a youth bulge, with young people making

18-1189443/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

up a majority of our populations. Inspired by hope,
optimism and an unbridled sense of idealism, youth are
agents of change in their communities and societies. Yet,
despite being repositories of the world’s greatest hopes,
the young also find themselves at the forefront of some
of the biggest challenges that we confront today. In an
ever-changing and increasingly complex world, they
face the pressures from socioeconomic inequalities,
political and social exclusion, discrimination and a lack
of fair opportunity.
Young people are also some of the worst victims
in situations of armed conflict, humanitarian crisis,
foreign occupation and long-standing and unresolved
disputes. Their sense of justice is aroused and their
patience is frequently tested by the inconsistent and
often selective global response to their pain, suffering
and plight. Yet we see that many of the fundamental
causes enraging our youth are often conspicuous by
their absence in our discourse on those issues.
As Secretary-General António Guterres reminded
us recently,
“No one is born a terrorist, and nothing
justifies terrorism, but we know that factors such
as prolonged unresolved conflicts, lack of the
rule of law and socioeconomic marginalization
can all play a role in transforming grievances into
destructive action.”
The toxic message of violent extremism preys on the
vulnerability of youth, recruiting them to its violent
ways by playing on their sensitivity to injustice and
oppression, and propagating hate, intolerance and
violence as the sole response to numerous inequities.
If one has nothing to live for, one finds something to
die for. We must break that nexus between desperation
and hopelessness.
The role of youth lies at the heart of international
peace and security. For far too long, young men have
been considered perpetrators of violence, and young
women its victims. While a small minority of youth
takes to violence, sweeping characterizations of young
populations have for long exacerbated their sense
of marginalization. It is time to debunk those false
stereotypes. It is time to recognize that youth are not
merely instruments of war, but essential partners in
peacebuilding. They are architects for economic and
social development and the establishment of effective,
inclusive institutions.
44/86

23/04/2018

We need to fight the violence of exclusion by talking
to young people, listening to them and giving them the
voice that they deserve. Resolution 2250 (2015), on
youth, peace and security, redresses that critical gap in
global thinking by recognizing the key role of youth
in conflict prevention and promoting lasting peace. We
must build on that momentum. There cannot be any
half measures in seeking to translate our commitment
to our youth.
My country, Pakistan, is proud to have led the
charge in successfully implementing holistic and
comprehensive strategies to counter the narrative of
extremism, and at the same time engage our youth so
that they can become productive members of our society.
We have adopted a whole-of-society approach based on
engagement with civil society, including faith leaders,
local communities and the media, to promote the
concept of a plural society based on building peaceful
and harmonious communities. A major focus of that
approach has been the empowerment of youth at the
grassroots level by engaging them as decision-makers
in the decision-making process.
We are also investing in youth so as to provide
them an opportunity to live their dreams and enable
them to become my country’s future leaders. My
Government has launched the comprehensive Prime
Minister’s youth programme, which aims at providing
the young and underprivileged with skills training and
access to higher education and employment. That, I am
happy to report, has already benefited over 1 million
young people.
We were proud to showcase many of our
achievements during the event entitled “Investing in
Youth to Counter Terrorism”, which Pakistan co-hosted
with Norway and the United Nations Office on CounterTerrorism here at the United Nations on 12 April.
Speaking at our event, Secretary-General António
Guterres said, “I do not agree that young people are
the leaders of tomorrow. More and more, they are the
leaders of today.” Let us therefore commit ourselves, or
recommit ourselves, to building on the positive energy
and innovative spirit of our young people and to striving
for a world where the illusion of cynicism gives way to
the ideal of hope and equal and inclusive opportunities
available to the young match their boundless ambitions.
That is the least we owe to them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8241

Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the initiative of organizing this open
debate on youth, peace and security today to further
discuss the positive role that young people can play in
conflict and post-conflict settings and how the Security
Council can help young people build safer and more
peaceful societies. I would like to especially commend
you, Sir, for your leadership during this month. It is
obviously no coincidence that, shortly after last week’s
open debate on women and peace and security relating
to sexual exploitation and abuse (see S/PV.8234), we are
today focusing on an issue that is of no less importance,
namely, the role of youth. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, as well as the others who briefed the
Council and enriched its deliberations this morning on
this important issue.

Resolution 2250 (2015) also requested that
the Secretary-General carry out a progress study
on young people’s positive contributions to peace
processes and conflict resolution. We believe that the
recommendations set out in the implementation report
presented to the Council today (see S/2018/86) are
an important contribution to an evolving framework
for action within which Member States, the United
Nations, civil society and other relevant stakeholders
could work even closer together with young people
towards achieving peaceful and inclusive societies. My
delegation encourages the Security Council to further
consider the critical issues and areas for intervention
recommended by the study, which fall within the scope
of its responsibility to bolster concrete and specific
actions for a greater role for young people to play in
strengthening peace and security.

I cannot agree more with my colleague from
Pakistan, who just spoke before me, when she said that
the youth are agents of change. I would add too that
we should also view them as ambassadors of change,
or drivers of change, who really deserve our close
attention, including in the area of peace and security.

Too often, public grievances and violence are driven
by the politics of exclusion, which can result from an
unrepresentative or abusive security sector — or by the
latter’s failure to protect citizens from security threats
and human rights abuses. Exposure to such destabilizing
factors and insecurity can have a profound effect on
the future of young people and their relationship with
justice and the rule of law. I am highlighting the issue
of security sector reform because, in only a few minutes
from now, at 3 p.m., South Africa and Slovakia, as
co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform, will host a high-level round table focused on
the issue of security sector reform and sustaining piece,
which is a contribution to this week’s ongoing efforts
related to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We will
certainly also focus our attention on the role of youth
in the context of the security sector and in the wider
context of sustaining peace.

In that context, I recall resolution 2250 (2015), of
9 December 2015, which is a milestone document in
our efforts to focus our attention increasingly on the
issue of youth, peace and security. It was the first to
recognize the important and positive role that young
women and men play in the maintenance and promotion
of international peace and security, countering violent
extremism and supporting peacebuilding efforts. Steps
that have been undertaken based on resolution 2250
(2015) aim at strengthening youth-centred approaches
and promoting the involvement of young people in
preventing violence, countering violent extremism,
transitioning from conflicts and building peace in
their communities.
Young people under the age of 25 today make up the
majority of the population in many fragile and conflictaffected societies. They represent over one third of
populations displaced by conflicts and disasters, and
that is why we all have to work together to promote
the full implementation of resolution 2250 (2015). In
that regard, my delegation welcomes and supports the
commitment of the Security Council to intensifying its
focus on issues relevant to the topic of young people,
peace and security within the broader context of
sustaining peace and preventing conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need
to raise greater awareness and understanding among
young people of the security sector and its work and
responsibilities, as well as the key challenges and threats
that security services may face, not least because young
people often are also at the core of security sector
personnel and those who serve the security sector and
the rest of the population. Young people must assume
an active role in the restoration of justice and security
as a priority in post-conflict peacebuilding. Creating
an enabling environment and opportunities for young
people throughout those processes in a participatory
and engaging manner in public life and facilitating their
access to education and employment remain the best

18-1189445/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

strategy to decrease the risk of violence and increase
human security in the long run.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country would like to thank Peru’s
delegation, the President of the Security Council for
this month, for organizing this constructive debate
on youth, peace and security. Young people make up
the most important segment of society. They are the
ones who achieve the desired objectives when it comes
to reconstruction, peace and countering extremism
and violence.
My country believes that the main threat facing the
world and youth today is the scourge of terrorism and
extremism, which represents a serious challenge to all
the societies. In its modern history, Iraq has suffered
from war tragedies that have depleted much of its
potential, especially the potential of its youth. Young
people are the mainstay of our nation and the source of
creativity and development. Iraq therefore has sought
to invest in its youth to ensure their participation
in decision-making, liberating our land, countering
extremism and terrorism and preventing terrorist
groups from recruiting young people in order to fuel
hatred and destruction. We have sought to make young
people agents for peace and security. A collective
international commitment to a long-term strategy is the
most effective solution for eliminating extremism and
violence and addressing their causes.
My country has supported its young people and has
been committed to the implementation of resolution
2250 (2015). Our national youth strategy for the
period 2013-2020, developed in cooperation with the
United Nations Population Fund, includes plans and
programmes to promote constructive mindsets among
Iraq’s youth and strengthen cooperation, brotherhood
and anti-violence efforts. We have also sought to
encourage sports among Iraqi youth as an alternative
to violence and terrorism. Since 2003, Iraq has been
attempting to rectify the mistakes made by the previous
dictatorial regime with regard to our young people by
inviting and encouraging sports teams to visit Iraq. We
have established the conditions necessary to assure all
international parties that Iraq can now host sporting
events at the international level by providing the
appropriate environment for that.
46/86

23/04/2018

Iraq has also encouraged the participation of
young people in elections and electoral campaigns. We
encouraged the establishment of a youth parliament,
which held its first session on 10 October 2017, to create
a genuine nucleus for free and sound political thinking
that promotes the objectives of Iraq and the international
community towards achieving security and peace.
My country has adopted a governmental programme
focused on strategic priorities to promote youth
services and well-being. It includes the establishment
of youth facilities and sports clubs to promote young
people’s athletic, cultural and scientific talents.
The Iraqi Government has issued a national human
development report entitled “Iraqi Youth: Challenges
and Opportunities”, which focuses on the concept of
joint prosperity and well-being, which is at the heart
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Iraq is also seeking to adopt plans to eliminate youth
unemployment and to encourage the employment of
young people by providing them with short-term loans,
supported by the State, in order to improve their income
and well-being. The visit by the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth to Iraq in August 2017 was in support
of our national youth strategy.
Iraq has realized the real potential of youth in
its fight against terrorism. That is why we adopted
a strategy to liberate our country and to ensure
reconstruction based on young people as active force
that believes in the spirit of challenge and patience. Iraq
is currently encouraging its diaspora to return to the
country and to invest their potential and experiences
in the country’s reconstruction. My country is aware
of the need to rebuild a new society with young Iraqi
hands, and eliminate the phenomenon of wasting the
potential of young people in crime and violence.
In conclusion, the Government of Iraq reiterates
its rejection of all forms of violence, extremism and
terrorism. We support the efforts of the international
community to eliminate those phenomena. We must
focus on young people and their future by combating
terrorism and its dangers. They have the right to enjoy
life. We must respond to their ideas and meet their
needs, as well as continue talking with them about their
role in building the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Liisberg (Denmark): It is a privilege to take
part in this open debate on youth, peace and security.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

We welcome the progress study (see S/2018/86) and
would like to applaud the participatory process in
which thousands of young people have been engaged.
Denmark is a strong supporter of resolution 2250
(2015), and therefore part of the Youth Champion Group
on the resolution. We have also sponsored a United
Nations Development Programme study on youth’s role
in supporting peace and stability, which has informed
the progress study we see before us today.
The reason for Denmark’s strong support is simple:
we firmly believe that global youth has huge potential
as peacebuilders and agents of positive change, and we
find it crucial to unleash that potential. We also have
to look at risk, because if we do not listen to the youth,
they may be a source of instability and conflict.
Youth all around the world deserve a bright future
and to live in a safe, free and prosperous world in which
fundamental human rights are respected. Youth are
not only the leaders of tomorrow, they are also crucial
partners of today, as many have said. Engaging youth as
essential stakeholders in peace processes and in policy
development in general is a way to reinforce legitimacy
and effectiveness.
In November, Côte d’Ivoire was host to a summit
between the European Union and the African Union
with the headline of investing in youth. It was a very
successful summit. I think part of the reason for that
was that we managed to agree that the summit should
include youth in the discussions and in determining the
solutions to the challenges they face.
The adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) was a
historic milestone. The clear normative focus and
political strength of the resolution is crucial, but it is
not enough in itself. The true value lies in the success
of its implementation. Our goal today must be to build
a stronger common understand of how we can translate
resolution 2250 (2015) into action. We must ask
ourselves how we can create results on the ground for
the millions of young people who are affected by armed
conflict but are limited in contributing to the solutions.
Allow me to mention an example. In Mali,
Denmark supports a youth organization called Think
Peace. The organization works on anti-radicalization
and countering violent extremism. Based on a mapping
exercise, Think Peace has come up with concrete
recommendations to Governments, political parties
and civil society on how to mitigate conflict and violent

S/PV. 8241

confrontations during the upcoming presidential
elections in Mali. We need more initiatives like that
one, where young people are meaningfully engaged in
finding the solution.
Let me conclude by repeating the main message:
youth are crucial agents of change. Together, across
generations, we must unlock that potential and
give youth the best possible conditions for them to
promote peace and security. That is our call for action
today — to ensure that meaningful youth engagement
in peace processes become mainstreamed simply
because it brings about change and because it can create
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First, I would like to thank the Government
of Peru through you, Mr. President, for its initiative to
organize this debate on the theme of youth, peace and
security. We also thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth and Mr. Simpson, Ms. Pierre-Antoine and
Ms. Ekomo-Soignet for their informative briefings.
Argentina has from the outset embraced the
Secretary-General’s new emphasis on conflict
prevention and the development of the concept of
sustainable peace or sustaining peace — a narrative
in which young people and women have an essential
role. Our country recognizes that peace and security
are interrelated and mutually reinforcing. We recognize
the important role of youth in conflict prevention and
resolution and as a key aspect to the sustainability,
inclusivity and success of peacebuilding and the
maintenance of peace activities. That is why we support
the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), which
promotes young people, at the international level, being
instruments of peace, dialogue and understanding and
fight against poverty, violence and intolerance.
Argentina believes that armed conflict hampers
educational and employment opportunity for young
people, who are vulnerable and are often exposed to
dangerous situations that impede their development and
affect their schooling. It is estimated that approximately
300,000 armed children and young people live in
conflict zones. They are victims, forced into a situation
that is an ongoing violation of their rights, and are
subject to recruitment, mutilation, abduction, sexual
violence, attacks against schools and hospitals and a
denial of humanitarian aid.

18-1189447/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

In addition to suffering violations of their most basic
human rights, young people are affected psychologically
and socially, which inhibits their development. They
can lose access to education and other age-appropriate
activities. They can experience feelings of guilt or a
normalization of violence if they have joined an armed
group — either voluntarily or by force — or if they
have witnessed or committed acts of extreme violence.
In many cases, feelings of loss, rootlessness, sexual
violence and addiction to toxic substances can also
adversely affect their mental health.
In the context of conflict, many young people are
drafted into military service or participate in warrelated illicit subeconomies. Often they are forcefully
recruited and, in other cases, are motivated by cultural,
social, economic and political pressures, since the
informal economy linked to conflicts can sometimes
offer work and social opportunities that are seen as
preferable to poverty and hunger.
We must pay greater attention to the root causes
of conflicts and the importance of finding solutions
based on national participation in which young people
can play a significant role in conflict prevention and
the maintenance of peace — if they are guaranteed an
inclusive environment through the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In its participation in the Economic and
Social Council, Argentina has maintained that the
Peacebuilding Commission serves a bridging and
advisory role between the Organization’s peace and
security efforts and efforts related to development,
human rights and humanitarian assistance. In line with
that view, we believe that the Commission, in its active
role of supporting the Security Council, can highlight
the contribution of young people during the design
and evaluation stages of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, especially in their peacebuilding phases.
In that context, Argentina supports UNICEF’s call for
urgent progress in efforts to protect children and young
people affected by conflict through the development of
national legislation, policies and actions to protect the
youngest members of society.
Education is fundamental to peace, security,
development and the full enjoyment of human rights.
Continuous access to safe education helps to protect
young people from the dangers of armed conflict.
Education is not only a human right but also an essential
48/86

23/04/2018

protection mechanism for young people affected by
armed conflict, helping them to reach their potential and
to contribute to the building of stronger communities.
In turn, ensuring the security of young people allows
them to become relevant actors in reconstruction and
post-conflict peacebuilding processes, which can take
place more rapidly if the education sector has overcome
the effects of war.
Recognizing that young people represent a large
proportion of the civilians who are harmed by armed
conflict and that the interruption of their access to
education and economic opportunities has decisive
consequences for lasting peace and reconciliation, in
March 2017, together with Norway, Argentina organized
the second International Conference on Safe Schools to
raise general awareness of the seriousness of attacks
against students, teachers, schools and universities
and of the military use of schools and universities. The
Conference was also intended to disseminate the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for Preventing
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict, adopted in Oslo in May 2015.
Argentina believes that it is essential for young
people to increase their meaningful and inclusive
participation as future leaders of peacebuilding with
a transformative potential, rather than engaging in
violence. Young people clearly have an important role
to play in developing their own future and in building
peace. They should be involved in aid, recovery and
reconstruction programmes and as part of transition
and national reconciliation processes. Governments
and civil society, including in partnership with the
private sector, must harness the energy, ideas and
experiences of young people in order to create a new
post-conflict society.
Similarly, Argentina reaffirms what is set out
in the Ibero-American Youth Pact with regard to
boosting the role of young people as promoters of a
culture of peace by establishing training programmes
on violence prevention and conflict resolution. In that
regard, Argentina promotes developing the ability and
skills of young people, as well as creating jobs for
them so that they can actively contribute to sustaining
peace. Special youth employment and training plans
and the development of human resources should
form the basis of innovative rehabilitation and social
reintegration programmes for young people in postconflict situations, in particular children, young former
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

combatants, those with disabilities and those who have
missed out on education opportunities.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that the ideals
and energy of young people — who are key agents of
social change, economic development and technological
innovation in their communities — constitute an
essential potential to help to prevent conflict and to
participate in shaping lasting peace. We therefore
believe that is appropriate to continue to deal with this
issue in the framework of the Council and to continue
to deepen knowledge about the relationship between
the role of young people and maintaining, building and
sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting on this very critical issue.
We live in a world bestowed with the largest
youth population in human history. While that is an
asset for building a more prosperous future, it also
presents us with the major challenge of facilitating their
empowerment and of encouraging them to effectively
participate in decision-making processes in all areas. At
the same time, it would enable them to help to build and
sustain peace, including by resisting and denouncing
extreme ideologies.
In the past few years, extreme ideologies and
terrorist groups have been the greatest threats to peace
and security, with youth being their prime victims and
targets for recruitment. Poverty, ignorance, injustice,
apartheid policies, occupation, situations of armed
conflict, marginalization and exclusion are the main
factors that increase the vulnerability of youth and make
them an easy target for radicalization and recruitment.
A recent pervasive xenophobic attitude, which in
some countries borders on racism, is another major
challenge that increases youth alienation throughout our
world, which is interconnected by various means, such
as migration and new communication technologies.
Such tendencies provide breeding grounds for
resentment, dispute and conflict.
To prevent youth marginalization and radicalization,
we have no choice other than to try to encourage tolerance,
invest in education and awareness-raising, alleviate
poverty, end discrimination, liberate lands under

S/PV. 8241

occupation, in particular Palestinian land in our region,
and effectively address conflict situations. Moreover,
enhanced civic education and dialogue within and
among communities and nations have an important role
to play in raising our younger generation’s awareness
of the threat to peace and security and helping to foster
an atmosphere of tolerance and civility. However, such
actions should not to be taken from the top. At both the
national and the international levels, youth need to be
involved and encouraged to meaningfully participate in
every relevant activity.
Safeguarding youth against the threat of
radicalization through the abuse of modern technologies
is also imperative. Online media platforms should
be induced to act responsibly. They should not be a
conduit for spreading extremist views among their
mostly young audience and as a means of recruitment.
The relevant companies should be responsible and
increase their control of the content exchanged through
their platforms. Should they shirk their responsibility,
Governments have to intervene and act promptly to
stop extremist online activities.
The strategy to which I referred would help to
empower the next generation to lead the efforts against
violent and extremist views and prevent it from falling
prey to those who seek only to aggravate such challenges
and cause further devastation and chaos.
In the context of Iran’s unquestionable commitment
to combating violent extremism, I am proud to recall
that Iranian youth have been the most immune to the
propaganda and recruitment activities of terrorist and
extremist groups.
Allow me to conclude by recalling the importance
of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at
its seventieth and seventy-second sessions on a world
against violence and violent extremism, based on the
initiative of the Iranian President. Those resolutions
address, inter alia, the imperative of empowering young
people to combat violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bulgaria.
Mr. Sterk (Bulgaria): Allow me to start by thanking
Peru for organizing today’s open debate.
I would first like to underscore that Bulgaria fully
aligns itself with the statement made earlier on behalf
of the European Union (EU).

18-1189449/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Government of Bulgaria has identified
youth engagement in peace and security as one of the
key priorities of the political agenda of the current
Bulgarian presidency of the Council of the European
Union under the broader topic of the future of Europe
and young people. Last week, Bulgaria hosted a major
European youth conference, which provided a platform
for a valuable exchange of ideas between Governments
and young people with the aim of developing the
new EU Youth Strategy through a participatory and
inclusive process.
Bulgaria has a long tradition of actively involving
young people in the development and implementation
of policies and programmes that impact their lives,
and of ensuring the meaningful participation of young
people in all spheres of political and public life through
broad and inclusive consultations. Youth empowerment
and youth participation in decision-making are key
priorities of the Government of Bulgaria, and my
country continues to strongly advocate for the more
substantial involvement of young women and men in
global affairs as well, including through the United
Nations Youth Delegate Programme, which Bulgaria
has been successfully implementing over more than 10
years, thereby ensuring that young people have a say
in global processes and that their voices are heard and
taken into consideration.
For the first time in the history of humankind, young
people represent a quarter of the world’s population.
They are therefore a tremendous peace and security
dividend and a major human resource for development
that should be mobilized to consolidate peace and
prosperity across the globe. I should like to reiterate
Bulgaria’s full commitment to resolution 2250 (2015),
which established the role of young people as partners
for peace. Bulgaria welcomes the independent progress
study on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86)
and the recommendations contained therein, especially
the proposals for ensuring youth participation in
decision-making and accountability processes at
the United Nations and for annual reporting by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council within the
framework of annual open debates.
Bulgaria highly values the crucial role of civil
society, especially youth and youth-led organizations
and young volunteers, in amplifying the contributions
of young people to peace and security, economic
development and social cohesion, as highlighted also in
the Study. In Bulgaria, we have many positive examples
50/86

23/04/2018

of young volunteers engaged in social initiatives,
including those related to refugee integration, social
entrepreneurship for persons with disabilities, human
rights campaigns, sustainable development projects,
etc.
Bulgaria believes that children and young people
can be key agents of positive social change and actively
promotes their human rights and their empowerment
through education, which is crucial to building peaceful
and inclusive societies. Young people have an important
role to play in creating the foundation for peace in
their communities and beyond. In that regard, I would
like to highlight the importance of the continuation of
education during armed conflict. Investing in young
people by strengthening their educational opportunities
and economic inclusion is instrumental in achieving the
youth, peace and security agenda. Bulgaria supports
these efforts both politically and through targeted
funding. The largest part of Bulgaria’s humanitarian and
development assistance is aimed at providing support
to children and young people in conflict-affected areas
and ensuring the right to education in emergencies. In
2017, Bulgaria contributed €100,000 to the Education
Cannot Wait global fund.
Bulgaria remains fully committed to the youth and
peace and security agenda and supports an enhanced
United Nations engagement with young people as equal
and essential partners for peace. That will further
strengthen young people’s role and contribution to
peace and security, thereby guaranteeing the durability
of peace through generations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania in his capacity as
Chair of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Neculăescu: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to address the Security Council today in
my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). The PBC congratulates Peru on taking the
initiative to organize this debate on an important and
timely issue.
The PBC recognizes the indispensable role young
people could play in any effort to build and sustain
peace and welcomes the presentation of the independent
progress study on youth and peace and security (see
S/2018/86), which offers insight into and an opportunity
for Member States to analyse and review means of
engaging with young people in the areas of peace and
security, thereby enriching our discussions.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

According to the study, the consistent exclusion
young people experience and the mistrust they express
for national and international authorities should be a
wake-up call for all of us. The PBC notes that young
people’s favourable participation in peacebuilding is at
the same time a right and a demographic necessity in
making our societies more inclusive and peaceful. If
we are to achieve inclusive, sustainable development
and build and sustain peace, we simply cannot afford
to lose the largest generation of young people the world
has ever known. The PBC recognizes the importance
of mainstreaming young women and men into
peacebuilding and of seeing young people as partners
to engage.
The PBC has heard directly from young people
about their peacebuilding work in contexts as diverse
as Burundi, Liberia, Kyrgyzstan and Solomon Islands,
and has experienced first hand the resourcefulness
and resilience of young people in the face of conflict
and violence. We recognize that the majority of young
people strive for peace and should be given meaningful
opportunities to participate in peacebuilding efforts.
The study says that trust in, not fear of, youth
must guide our work. That means giving youth the
right opportunities and ensuring that quality education
is available at the primary, secondary and tertiary
levels, including in refugee and displaced settings. It
also means providing young people with appropriate
employment opportunities.
The PBC expresses its support for peacebuilding
initiatives with positive reflections undertaken by
young women and men in conflict-affected countries.
Such activities are often launched with limited
funding assistance and recognition by national and
international actors alike. The PBC recognizes that a
lack of adequate funding of youth-led organizations,
in part because of the challenges youth organizations
face in accessing existing funding streams, limits the
contribution young people make to peaceful societies.
Significantly, initiatives such as the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative allocated
nearly $50 million dollars to youth and peacebuilding
programmes in the past two years, including direct
funding to non-governmental organizations. Some
40 per cent of the budget was allocated to local civil
society organizations. We also welcome PBF efforts
that promote initiatives supporting the involvement of
young people as contributors to political processes.

S/PV. 8241

The PBC encourages the Security Council to
take into account the role young people could play
in peacebuilding. The PBC intends to continue and
expand its direct engagement with young people both in
the countries and regions it supports and in its meetings
here in New York.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the European Union, and
we thank Peru for this timely open debate a day prior
to the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We also thank the
briefers for their valuable input. I would like to make
three brief points.
First, on the participation of young people in peace
and security, peace agreements fail when they are not
inclusive, in particular when leaders, mostly male,
conclude power-sharing agreements without taking
into account the interests of the entire population. That
must change. In some cases, it is already changing. One
example of where Germany is working to effect such
change is in South Sudan. In the framework of the peace
negotiations led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), we emphasize a complementary,
bottom-up approach that includes youth. Specifically,
the Berghof Foundation, a mediation partner for
Germany, has repeatedly involved representatives
and organizations of youth and women in Kampala to
channel their concerns and visions for a peaceful South
Sudan into the IGAD-led High-Level Revitalization
Forum peace talks in Addis Ababa.
As another example, as just mentioned by the
representative of Romania, we were also very pleased to
hear directly from young people from Burundi, Liberia,
Kyrgyzstan or Solomon Islands in the Peacebuilding
Commission. As a final example, Germany also
supports the African Women Leaders Initiative, led
by the African Union, which has a specific mentoring
component for young women.
Secondly, with respect to preventing violent
extremism, we must gain a better understanding of
why young people drift towards extremist groups and
what the triggers are. One excellent study on this topic,
entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa, was published
by the United Nations Development Programme late
last year. While the report identifies several triggers
for youth involvement in extremism, I would like to

18-1189451/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

highlight one observation in particular. Some 71 per
cent of the study’s respondents indicated that they had
been driven to join extremism by Government action,
including the killing of a family member or friend or the
arrest of a family member or friend. Therefore, while
structural factors play a role in radicalization, it is also
clear that the actions of Governments and their security
forces are another major, sometimes preventable cause.
For Germany, that means that when we counter violent
extremism and engage in counter-terrorism activities
as Member States, we must ensure that all our actions
comply with our international human rights obligations.
Only this can ensure their effectiveness in the long term.
Thirdly and finally, with respect to seeing the
positive potential of youth, we have to do more to
highlight the overwhelmingly positive influence of
young people on our societies, and we can promote
this positive influence by focusing on youth training
and employment. Employment is a fundamental driver
of economic development, and it is the best method
of poverty reduction. Decent work is the basis for
socioeconomic participation and enables young people
to have independent lives.
But more private-sector dynamism is needed
to create new jobs. Germany has launched a number
of initiatives in cooperation with the private sector
worldwide. In this regard, we work on employmenteffective business and cooperation models, demandoriented training and further education, as well as
upscaling and learning initiatives. In the same vein,
during Germany’s 2017 presidency of the Group of 20
(G-20), members developed the G-20 Initiative for Rural
Youth Employment. Allow me to take this opportunity
to call upon members of the business community to do
their part to harness the positive potential of youth.
In conclusion, it is clear that young people’s role
in sustaining peace is paramount. We must do more to
include them at the United Nations, and we must do
more to put issues that are relevant to young people on
the agenda of the United Nations. Allow me to assure
the Security Council that if elected as a non-permanent
member of the Council for the 2019-2020 term,
Germany would do its utmost to implement the youth,
peace and security agenda and continue to work with
young peacebuilders to secure sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
52/86

23/04/2018

Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to express our gratitude to Peru
for convening today’s open debate, to the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth for her briefing, and to
Mr. Graeme Simpson for his presentation of the
progress study on youth, peace and security (see
S/2018/86), which reaffirms the important and positive
role of young women and men in the maintenance and
promotion of international peace and security. We have
carefully considered the recommendations contained
in the study on how to derive greater benefit from the
contributions of young people in conflict prevention
and resolution, as reflected in resolution 2250 (2015).
We look forward to the final version of the document
next September.
We are at a turning point for humankind, for
never before in history have there been so many
young people as now. With 1.8 billion young men and
women worldwide, equivalent to 24 per cent of the
world’s population, it is clear that sustainable peace
and development, as well as global governance, must
include comprehensive consideration of the needs and
aspirations of young people, as well as their active
participation in society.
In an increasingly global world, stereotypes that
link youth and violence are propagated and generalized.
The stigmatization of young people is characterized by
clichés of young men tearing apart the social fabric
and blocking peace, or of young women as victims
or invisible actors with no capacity for action. Young
people are often perceived as threats and as part of the
problem. In contrast, the image that we should promote
is that of young people committed to finding solutions
and as agents of change, partners for peace and promoters
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
of the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals in every community and every city.
The interconnected world provides opportunities
that the United Nations and Governments must
seize. Young people are fulfilling their aspirations
through access to information sources. The political,
economic and social exclusion of young people, as
well as from justice and education, is the challenge
we must overcome. Removing obstacles is essential to
unlocking the potential of youth in promoting peaceful
and inclusive societies.
The United Nations Development Programme
indicates that poverty, lack of development opportunities
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and marginalization, not religious ideology, are among
the main causes of young people joining extremist
groups. Integrating young people as the main promoters
of the Sustainable Development Goals is a clear action
with enriching and forward-looking results for all
communities. At present, the lack of data makes it
difficult to accurately estimate the contributions of
youth to conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
to post-conflict situations. That is why we call for the
closing of information gaps so as to incorporate this
data into the political decision-making process.
We must therefore promote and strengthen
sustainable peace in our communities through
investment in education, job training and the creation of
sources of decent work for young people, guaranteeing
the full exercise of their rights and avoiding situations
such as the intergenerational reproduction of poverty,
scenarios of increased insecurity and the lack of
social cohesion. The participation and comprehensive
consideration of the needs and perspectives of young
women deserves special mention, bearing in mind that
communities based on gender equity generally have a
healthier, more equitable and inclusive social fabric,
in which the same human rights are promoted and
respected for all, and this makes them more resilient
to all kinds of conflict and violent expression. We
must continue to promote actions at the national and
international levels to empower women at all stages of
their lives.
Mexico is addressing the needs of young people
through its National Youth Programme, which has
provided institutional responses to guarantee the social
rights of 37.9 million young Mexicans. In Mexico,
the National Inclusion Strategy seeks to contribute to
access to social rights and the reduction of deprivation
through efficient coordination of public policies and
programmes. We have also aligned the objectives of
the National Youth Programme with the national goals
set out in the National Development Plan through the
promotion and coordination of actions to strengthen the
social participation of young people, as well as their
access to education, work, housing and health.
The Federal Public Administration of Mexico, in
conjunction with the Mexican Institute of Youth, carries
out Government interventions for specific aspects of
peace. Some examples are the National Programme
for Adolescent Health Care; the National Programme
for Public Security, which seeks to coordinate
interinstitutional linkages and incorporate a youth

S/PV. 8241

perspective into the dissemination of National Security
Commission strategies; the scholarship programme
for victims of crime and human rights violations; the
National Plan for the Prevention of Abuse and Violence
against Children and Adolescents; and the Programme
to Fight Discrimination and Hate Speech on the Internet
among young people.
Resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security,
has contributed to the normative strengthening of this
agenda, changing the way young people see themselves
in conflict. The challenge is to follow up on the actions
taken by the Member States and the United Nations
system to achieve their effective implementation. We
are confident that millions of young people around the
world are waiting to be invited to become agents for
the promotion of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The young people of the twenty-first century are
global citizens who want to do their utmost to build
societies that are increasingly just, inclusive, equal
and prosperous.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Moragas Sánchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union a few minutes ago.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Peruvian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today’s debate. I thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth, Ms. Wickramanayake, and the lead author
of the independent progress study on youth and
peace and security (see S/2018/86), Mr. Simpson, for
their briefings.
Spain is a member of Champions of Youth and is
firmly committed to resolution 2250 (2015), which it
sponsored. We firmly believe that young people have
enormous potential to promote international peace and
security and prevent violent radicalization processes,
to which they are particularly vulnerable. It is for
that reason that my country commends the study and
its recommendations. Spain is developing concrete
measures to ensure that young people have forums and
tools that allow them to play a positive role in prevention
and mediation efforts, the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security and the fight against violent
extremism. The current political, economic and social
challenges we all face further reinforce the importance
of ensuring that young people play an active role in the
promotion of peace, stability and prosperity in their

18-1189453/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2018

societies. That is vital in order to build communities
with greater capacity and resilience to respond to
the dynamic nature of radicalization, extremism and
rhetoric that incite hatred and intolerance.

Programme this year. The Programme seeks to provide
a positive environment for young people in which they
can develop their talent through the recognition and
support of their endeavours in various areas.

Our young people are extremely vulnerable to
those threats and we must develop innovative policies
and programmes that foster the political participation
and activism of the 1.8 billion young people throughout
the world. To that end, we must speak their vernacular.
It is not enough to provide forums for young people.
They have their own voice and it is essential that they
be heard and that their perspective be included in the
political and social debate. Democracy and human rights
must be strengthened as we combat radicalization and
intolerance. Only in that way can we restore the trust of
young people in institutions and ensure that they work
to improve and strengthen them, thereby granting full
legitimacy to State policies.

Spain knows that none of this will be achieved
without a gender approach. It is essential that we do
not break the link with the women and peace and
security agenda. There has been a shift from women
being considered as mere victims to being viewed as
vital actors in conflict prevention and resolution and
subsequent reconstruction efforts. Young women have
an enormous potential to contribute to peacebuilding.

Nationally, Spain is strongly committed to
improving mechanisms for young people participating
in public affairs, in particular in public policy review
processes. In that regard and as part of the European
Structured Dialogue for young people, for the first time
the decision was taken to include, along with policymakers, the heads of other ministries whose functions
cover key issues that affect young people, such as the
Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Justice, the
Ministry of Finance and Public Administration and
the Ministry of Housing. We must underscore the
participation of young people in review processes that
examine progress towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which is being implemented in Spain.
Various actors participate in that process, including
young people, through the various participatory
mechanisms. At the same time, action is being taken
to enhance the skills of those working on the issue
of youth, through dual training, so that they can
detect and intervene early to prevent the violent
radicalization of young people, through informal and
formal education mechanisms. We have also been
working in collaboration with youth organizations to
improve employment conditions for young people so
that they can obtain decent jobs, for example, through
the official recognition of skills and abilities acquired
in informal education mechanisms or through various
talent-development initiatives for young people, whose
contribution to society will be key to its development.
In the same vein, Spain launched its Young Talent
54/86

At the European level, Spain leads the agenda of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) on youth and peace and security and chairs the
Group of Friends of Youth and Security. In May 2017, an
OSCE conference was held in Málaga, under the theme
“Working with Youth for Youth: strengthening security
and cooperation online”. Ministers, other eminent
persons and, above all, more than 200 young people from
61 countries attended the conference. They adopted
the Málaga Youth Declaration, which reflects the
recommendations of resolution 2250 (2015) and makes
a key contribution to the fight against radicalization,
the prevention of extremism, the promotion of tolerance
and the fight against misinformation online.
Spain wishes to do more. That is why it has joined
the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme. We are
committed to strengthening the role of young people in
the implementation and review of Spain’s multilateral
policy, as well as to helping inform young people about
issues addressed at the United Nations so that their views
are always taken into account. The implementation of
policies geared towards the greater participation of
young people in various areas in Spain is due not only
to its compliance with certain international obligations,
but also to the firm belief that the participation of our
young people will ensure sustainable public policies.
Young people will not only benefit; they will be key
actors now and in the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s
open debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth; Mr. Simpson, the lead
author of the independent progress study on youth and
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security (see S/2018/86), and civil society
representatives for their briefings.
We welcome today’s open debate, held during a
week that coincides with the holding of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace and the report to be presented by
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
subject on Wednesday. The progress study on youth and
peace and security prepared by Mr. Simpson, pursuant
to resolution 2250 (2015), provides an opportunity for
us to review its findings and recommendations and to
share our views on the ways that Member States can
implement the youth and peace and security agenda. We
welcome the fact that a Colombian expert contributed
to the drafting of the study.
Let me give a brief overview of some of our
country’s experiences in implementing resolution 2250
(2015), which mirrors some of the recommendations of
the study in terms of more education, an increase in the
number of jobs and a boost in social capital. Colombia
applied these measures with equal vigour even before
the implementation of the peace process and in the very
same context.
According to the study, education was universally
recognized as a key theme of interest in peace and
security for young people, demonstrating the crucial
importance of education for young people of both
genders around the world. In Colombia, we guarantee
free education from kindergarten to grade 11, and we
have incentivized access to higher education. In seven
years, we increased access to higher education by
14 per cent. Similarly, we have implemented a national
programme that provides the best high school students
with access to the best private universities in the
country through a Government grant. That programme
has benefited more than 40,000 students. As the study
indicates, we want to provide a values-based education
for peace, and teach critical thinking skills and
non-violent methods of conflict resolution, with special
attention to the celebration of diversity.
With regard to employment, I would note Colombia’s
awareness-raising campaigns to promote decent work
policies, with the aim of promoting the creation of new
jobs and the training and protection of workers so that,
through these campaigns, local authorities can learn
how to take the opinions of young people into account
when formulating policies that will have a long-term
impact. As an example of this, we have eliminated the

S/PV. 8241

need to present military identification as a condition
of first employment — an obstacle to young people
gaining access to their first job in Colombia. Employers
can now offer jobs without that requirement. Obviously,
peacebuilding in Colombia is what makes it possible
for these and other measures to be considered by the
Administration. All those efforts have led Colombia
to achieve significant economic and social progress,
with policies targeting vulnerable groups, such as
young people — especially by focusing on combating
informality in the labour force.
Finally, with regard to the strengthening of
social capital in Colombia, we have understood that
peacebuilding requires an expansion of democracy that
allows for new voices to enrich the political debate on
Colombia’s problems, to strengthen pluralism and the
representation of the different visions and interests
of society, and to provide guarantees for political
participation and inclusion.
If we are to avoid new conflicts or recurrence, we
must tackle not only the challenge of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, but also of
bolstering our democratic culture and institutions in
order to regain the confidence of the population in State
institutions. That is precisely where the role of youth
is so important. We must risk thinking differently and
move towards the transformations we have sought as a
society. The peace process is designed for young people,
so that they can free themselves from the burden of
more than 50 years of war and propose new ways of
living together. We need to work on the issue of trust
in the regions. That is what young people have to work
on — how to bridge the gap between Colombians. The
best way to make a change is to open up scenarios for
dialogue, change the way we interact with each other
and promote environments free of discrimination.
With the recent approval by our Congress of the
youth citizenship statute, we are committed to promoting
the organization of this population group so that it can
establish youth groups, community organizations and
others that will allow them participate effectively in
our society. For example, their views on the priority
investments of their community resources will be
taken into account. Young people will have privileged
representation. In other words, we are empowering
young people right now to help them build a better
future for themselves. And we are sure that with that
law we will strengthen the capacity of young people to
do just that.

18-1189455/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

The recurrent use of force as a means of resolving
conflicts, at the expense of diplomacy and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, has only contributed to furthering
violence and bolstering extremism. Our actions must
provide our young people with options and give them
the tools to promote peace and isolate practices that
generate conflict. We reiterate our commitment to a
multidimensional response to the challenges posed by
extremism and remain convinced that cooperation and
dialogue within the United Nations framework will
enhance our capacity to combat this scourge.

23/04/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.

diverse backgrounds. In that connection, I would like
to introduce the case of Ms. Anab Mohamud Osman, a
young female officer from the Government of Somalia
who participated in the training course in 2017.
Carrying the spirit of her colleagues who lost their
lives in tragic terrorist attacks in Mogadishu, she was
proactive throughout the course and is now employed
by the Government as a stabilization and peacebuilding
assistant in order to engage in creating peace in her
country. Japan is pleased that the programme has trained
hundreds of highly motivated young participants, both
from Japan and from conflict-affected regions and
countries, who are now empowered as professional
peacebuilders with a strong sense of responsibility and
initiative for peace and security. Japan continues to
support their future success.

Mr. Hoshino (Japan): Let me first extend my
deepest appreciation to the briefers and all those
who participated in compiling the progress study. I
thank Mr. Simpson for his hard work. As the study
emphasizes, it is important to recognize youth as key
stakeholders in peace and security, while ensuring their
protection from all forms of violence.

The protection of young people is, of course,
important as they face armed conflicts, terrorism and
gender-based violence. I would like to call attention to the
mental health care for young people, in addition to their
physical health, as it tends to be less prioritized. Japan
believes that psychosocial support for young people is
imperative for peacebuilding and reconstruction.

The study calls for the international community as a
whole to overcome stereotypes that tend to view young
men as violent perpetrators and potential threats to
peace and young women as passive victims of violence. I
could not agree more. Japan has advocated for the active
participation and contributions of young people to peace
and security based on the human security approach,
which has two main strategies — empowerment and
the protection of those in need, including young people.

In that context, the Government of Japan is pleased
to note that a project in support of youth in the Central
African Republic is being implemented with the
financial support of the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security, to which Japan is a principal donor.
This project is led by the United Nations Development
Programme, with a number of other United Nations
organs — the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, UNICEF, the United Nations
Population Fund, the International Organization for
Migration, UN-Women, UNESCO and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic — joining
forces to implement the project to support the local
effort of the people of the Central African Republic.
The project is designed to integrate youth, improve the
delivery of and access to basic social services, enhance
sustainable livelihoods and promote social cohesion.

We will only succeed if we join efforts on the basis of
common values and strengthen multilateral cooperation.

We need to make many more conscious efforts to
empower young people. As the study points out, the
voices of our young people are not fully or frequently
reflected in important decision-making processes. Cases
are found in which young women and sexual minorities
are even disempowered by being deprived of access to
power and resources, not to mention opportunities for
political participation. In that regard, Japan is working
to empower young people by providing training and
educational opportunities and creating an enabling
environment for them to demonstrate their leadership
and innovative ideas.
In the field of peacebuilding, Japan has been
training civilian experts from Asia, the Middle East
and Africa through the Global Peacebuilders Program,
which particularly welcomes youth participants with
56/86

In addition to that, it should be noted that the project
includes providing medical and psychological care and
protection to women and girls who have survived sexual
violence. We hope that the project will enhance the
security of the people of the Central African Republic,
including young people, through the nexus of peace,
development and human rights in practice.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The study reflects the voices raised by thousands
of young people. We should respond to those voices by
taking into account the recommendations in the study
with regard to the planning and implementation of peaceand security-related policies. Young people are key
stakeholders in sustaining the peace and development
of a country. The starting point of their journey must
include their protection and empowerment.
In that regard, ending violence and achieving
negative peace is not enough. The elimination of social
inequality and injustice must be incorporated in order
to realize positive peace. Based on the concept of
human security, Japan continues to be committed to
the realization of a world where youth are much better
protected and are fully empowered.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. O’Toole (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important debate. At the outset,
I would like to thank Mr. Graeme Simpson and the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, as well as the representatives of the
FRIDA Young Feminist Fund and the Organisation
URU for their valuable briefings.
Ireland also aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
In 2015, Jordan took the far-sighted step of putting
the issue of youth on the agenda of the Security Council.
The adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) was a landmark
moment for the inclusion of youth and the recognition
of their capacity to be change-makers and to contribute
positively to sustaining peace.
Ireland was proud to provide funding to the
progress study on resolution 2250 (2015), presented to
the Council today by Mr. Simpson (see S/2018/86). We
are particularly impressed by the thorough consultative
process undertaken in conducting the study. In line with
the recommendations made in the progress study, Ireland
calls for the Secretary-General to report annually to the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution
2250 (2015). Ireland also thinks that it would be useful
for a Council focal point on youth, peace and security
to be appointed in order to mainstream the issue across
the Council’s agenda.
Ireland urges States not to treat the youth, peace
and security agenda as a new silo. This agenda has
obvious synergies with the women, peace and security

S/PV. 8241

agenda and resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
Sustainable Development Goals and the human rights
agenda. As Chair of the Commission on the Status of
Women at its sixty-second session, Ireland was pleased
to see the agreed conclusions outline the role of youthled organizations in strengthening the collective voice
of women and girls. That is important as we work to
challenge the perception of young women as passive
victims of conflict.
The youth, peace and security agenda is also
an important component of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The progress study makes
important recommendations about the role of youth in
conflict prevention and in sustaining peace. While it is
true that young men can be vulnerable to radicalization,
young people can also play a positive role in preventing
conflict and countering terrorism. Ireland urges States
to really consider the recommendations made in the
progress study in order to move beyond mere lip service
about youth. We do not need to give young people a
voice — they already have one. It is up to States to
empower their inclusion in peacebuilding processes.
Recently, Ireland marked the twentieth anniversary
of the Good Friday Agreement, the touchstone of the
peace process in Northern Ireland. We know all too
well how the trauma of conflict can pass down through
generations. The youth, peace and security agenda
is therefore a core issue for Ireland. In 2015, Ireland
established a United Nations youth delegate programme,
whereby two youth delegates are appointed annually
to participate in the General Assembly session. Our
youth delegates have carried out a survey of young
people in Ireland, which found that while young people
recognized the value of fostering peace worldwide, they
continued to feel marginalized from discussions around
such processes. Our youth delegates noted that there
were many conversations about young people, rather
than with young people. That echoes the comments
made in the progress study that young people should
not be on the table, but around the table. Ireland’s youth
delegates encourage Member States to adopt similar
youth delegate programmes and to include young
people in their delegations to the General Assembly.
When we discuss the women, peace and security
agenda here at the United Nations, we often say
that sustainable peace is not possible when half
the population of a society — that is, women — are
excluded. That is also true of youth. Sustainable peace
simply cannot exist without the meaningful inclusion of

18-1189457/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

young people. They are not the future or the leaders of
tomorrow. Young people are the present and the leaders
of today.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, United Nations High
Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations.
Mr. Al-Nasser: The United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations is honoured to be a member of the Steering
Committee for the progress study on youth, peace and
security (see S/2018/86) mandated by resolution 2250
(2015). I commend the work of Mr. Graeme Simpson
and the Advisory Group of Experts, including the
Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth. In
preparation for that study, they turned words into deeds
through inclusive and informed consultations with
more than four thousand young people from a diverse
set of countries and regions.
Empowering youth lies at the heart of international
peace and security. The United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations has long recognized the important
and positive contribution of youth and youth-led
organizations to conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts. Allow me to use this opportunity to speak
very briefly about three of our initiatives that feed into
this vein.
First, our Young Peacebuilders programme is
a peace education programme that supports youth
leaders and their organizations in gaining skills that
enhance their positive role in peace and security issues.
It also brings visibility to projects initiated by young
people for peace and the promotion of human rights
and cultural diversity. Last year, it took place in West
Africa. This year, we implemented the programme in
the Middle East and North Africa region.
Secondly, our Youth Solidarity Fund (YSF) is
a programme that provides youth-led organizations
with seed funding and capacity-building to implement
innovative and effective projects in the context of
intercultural and interfaith dialogue. We have funded
projects in Asia, Africa and the Middle East in areas
affected by inter-ethnic tensions, conflict and violent
extremism. More than 700 applications from 79
countries were received in the 2018 application period
for the YSF.
Thirdly, through our fellowship programme, we
provide a platform for young civil society leaders from
the Middle East, Europe and North Africa to experience
58/86

23/04/2018

immersive visits in each other’s regions. The theme of
this year’s programme is the role of young people in
peacebuilding and in preventing violent extremism. We
have received applications from hundreds of motivated
young people and, as in previous years, their experience
and expertise are remarkable.
Recognizing the role of new technology and digital
platforms for the dissemination of information, and as
part of our media and information literacy initiatives,
the Alliance of Civilizations has developed PEACEapp,
a series of workshops aimed at the strategic use of
applications and videogaming platforms to build
peaceful understanding among individuals from
different cultural and religious backgrounds.
The Alliance remains committed to working with
Member States, members of the Steering Committee
and all other partners and stakeholders to provide young
people with platforms and opportunities to achieve
sustainable peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mrs. Bernal Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Peru for convening this open debate, which gives
us an opportunity to analyse the significant contribution
young people make to efforts to maintain and promote
peace and security, as well as the role they can play in
conflict prevention and resolution.
We appreciate the contributions made to this
debate. In particular, we thank Mr. Graeme Simpson
and his team for the independent progress study on
youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86). Our country
sponsored and participated in the drafting of resolution
2250 (2015), which was proposed by Jordan, during our
membership in the Council in 2015.
Chile values the recommendations made in the
study. It highlights the initiatives young people around
the world have undertaken towards peace and urges
Governments and international actors to recognize
young people as the missing peace. That is in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which promotes peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
as well as Sustainable Development Goal 4, which,
among its goals, recommends an inclusive and quality
education for a culture of peace and non-violence
with respect to human rights, gender equality and an
appreciation of cultural diversity.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

We highlight the synergies between resolution 1325
(2005) — and subsequent resolutions on the women
and peace and security agenda — and resolution 2250
(2015), given the important role that young women
play as agents of change and forgers of peace. In that
regard, we urge the system to consider such synergies
in the definition of its actions, as well as the link with
the Vancouver Principles, which cover the situation of
children in armed conflict.
A few days ago, the Secretary-General pointed out
that it is necessary to consider youth not as a threat, but
as an enormous potential for our world, especially in
our search for peace, development, justice and respect
for human rights. Consistent with that policy, our
country supports the initiatives and recommendations
related to sustaining peace, such as including advisers
on the protection of children and youth in peacekeeping
missions and operations. We also recall the important
role of the Arms Trade Treaty and subregional initiatives
to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, as well as the implementation of resolution
2143 (2014), co-sponsored by Chile.
The role of education in the future of our children
and youth is indisputable. We must therefore contribute
to promoting and protecting that right, even in conflict
and post-conflict situations. Chile has joined the Safe
Schools Declaration and urges an evaluation of the
Lucens Guidelines in that regard. Critical infrastructure,
such as hospitals and educational centres, must be
protected in accordance with international law in times
of peace and conflict. The well-being of young people
and their positive inclusion in society will depend on it.
At the regional level, in 2016, Chile adhered to the
Ibero-American Youth Pact, which creates a political,
economic and social alliance that promotes the integral
development of young people in order to reverse the
different forms of exclusion that may affect them.
At the national level, our country has established
the National Institute for Youth, a public body that
proposes and promotes programmes for young people.
In that regard, I would highlight grants for initiatives
in the areas of human rights, equality, inclusion,
integration and non-discrimination. We have also set
up a volunteer network at the national level and a youth
volunteer programme within the Pacific Alliance.
We would also like to highlight the recent
establishment of an office on childhood in the Ministry
for Social Development, dedicated to ensuring

S/PV. 8241

comprehensive protection. That measure, which
gives continuity to work undertaken by the previous
Government, will allow the State to have access to a
dedicated institutional framework for coordinating
public services directed at children. Experience shows
that youth participation and inclusive development are
paramount if we want to help to build a more peaceful,
safe and just world for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the convening of this meeting, and expresses
its appreciation to Peru for furthering the debate on the
important matter of youth, peace and security.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The role of youth in relation to peace and security
is of particular importance to the African continent,
where some estimates indicate that 60 per cent of the
population on the continent are under the age of 25.
South Africa recalls the initiative of Jordan, which,
during its tenure in the Security Council in 2015, ushered
in the landmark resolution 2250 (2015) — the first
resolution on youth, peace and security. It underscored
the importance of youth as active positive agents in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
not reactive elements fuelling conflict.
South Africa welcomes the independent progress
study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86), and
the sterling work of its lead author, Mr. Graeme Simpson,
as well as the team constituting the Advisory Group of
Experts. Of particular interest to our delegation was the
emphasis placed on the positive role that youth can play
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace as envisaged
in resolution 2250 (2015) and subsequent resolutions,
including resolution 2282 (2016). Those resolutions
reaffirm the importance of youth in the deterrence and
resolution of conflicts and their role in sustainability,
inclusiveness and the success of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts.
The progress study on youth, peace and security
reveals the variety of ways in which young people
contribute to sustaining a broader concept of peace that
entails not just the end of violence, but the strengthening
of societies susceptible to the resurgence of violent
conflict, and their addressing their political grievances

18-1189459/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

through legitimate and peaceful political channels. In
that regard, South Africa supports the recommendation
that, in order to fully harness and support the innovation
of young people’s contribution to peace, there is a
need to invest in young people’s capabilities, redress
the structural barriers that limit youth participation in
peace and security, and emphasize partnerships and
collaborative action, where young people are viewed as
equal and essential partners for peace.
South Africa has acknowledged the role played by
the youth as agents of change. as they were instrumental
in advancing the goals of the broader struggle for
liberation and democracy in our country. Young
people who were often at the front lines of the battle
for freedom are also now at the forefront of combating
poverty, inequality and unemployment in South Africa.
The South African Government has therefore made
the empowerment of youth central to its development
agenda and has set up programmes dedicated to their
education, job creation and development. President
Ramaphosa has also identified our country’s most
pressing challenge as youth unemployment. In that
regard, South Africa is harnessing the potential of our
young people and drawing them closer to the country’s
economic activity by launching the Youth Employment
Service initiative. We have also established a youth
working group that will ensure that all representatives
of young people will have a say in the policies and
programmes that are meant to promote their interests at
the highest possible level.
My delegation has noted with concern that youth
programmes tend to give priority to the roles of young
men over those of young women in society, a problem
that is only emphasized by the fact that young women are
disproportionately targeted by sexual and gender-based
violence. We should therefore ensure that the outcomes
of today’s meeting reinforce the work being done to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security.
Ultimately, we need to create an environment that
can enable young people to contribute positively in
society. We see young people as having the potential
to be engines for growth and stability on our continent
and in the rest of our world. An investment in them
is an investment in future peace and prosperity and a
guard against the interests of belligerent forces such
as terrorist groups. We must harness young people’s
dynamism and positivity and build up their resilience
60/86

23/04/2018

in the face of sentiments that promote resorting to
violence as a way to achieve misguided interests.
In conclusion, we have the potential to make
meaningful change through investing in our young
people and giving them a voice to determine their
futures. We see today’s open debate as just such an
opportunity and look forward to an outcome that
strengthens the resolve of the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security by lifting
up and harnessing youth in the pursuit of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate on youth, peace and
security, which is an important topic for us all. We are
well aware of the important resolutions adopted by the
Security Council recently, focusing on investing young
people’s potential in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Young people constitute the majority of the world’s
population today, and youth constitutes the majority of
the population in conflict affected-countries, including
Yemen. We are well aware of the need to promote
the positive contribution of young men and women
by including them in efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. The international
community must redouble its efforts to reach a better
understanding of the important role that young people
can play and to promote youth initiatives within the
United Nations so as to ensure that their voices, ideas
and initiatives are heard and that the United Nations
becomes younger and belongs to the future.
For these reasons, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2250 (2015), the first resolution of its kind on
youth, peace and security. The resolution stresses the
responsible role that youth can play in maintaining and
promoting international peace and security. We thank
the Secretary-General for commissioning the progress
study on the implementation of the resolution, and we
welcome the relevant report (see S/2018/86), including
its recommendations.
I would like to contrast the youth of Yemen in 2011
and the youth of Yemen today. In 2011, young people
were the essence of the revolution that started at Sana’a
University, calling for change. However, today, in the
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

midst of the war launched by the Houthi militias, young
people are in a disastrous and tragic situation. Since
2014, the Yemeni Government has consistently sought to
seize all relevant options for achieving peace sponsored
by the United Nations. I will not go into the details,
except to say that we have made every effort to achieve
the dream of the young Yemenis who took to the streets
on the 11 February 2011 to call for a safe, prosperous
and stable Yemen that incorporates all segments of
society without discrimination or exclusion.
Since His Excellency President Hadi Mansour came
to power in 2012, the Yemeni Government has focused
its attention on young people because we believe in the
role of youth in building peace and prosperity and in
decision-making at all levels. A case in point was the
National Dialogue Conference, held on 18 March 2013
under the theme “In dialogue we make the future”,
and supported by the United Nations, the region and
the international community. It lasted 10 months, until
25 January 2014, during which time productive debates
took place in which all segments of society participated.
One of the main achievements of the Conference was
the broad participation of young people in its activities.
The Conference called for 30 per cent representation of
women and 20 per cent representation of youth in all
Legislative, executive and judicial State bodies. The final
document of the Conference called for the scientific,
professional, political and economic empowerment of
youth, providing them with the conditions necessary to
build their potential and contribute to their society and
their country. The final outcome document also called
for amending Yemeni law to provide tax exemptions
for all projects aimed at economically empowering
youth and women and, specifically, to facilitate
access to loans for women entrepreneurs and youth
entrepreneurs. The final document of the Conference
also called for the establishment of a Supreme Council
for Youth that would play an oversight and steering
role in adopting the necessary policies to protect youth
from social dangers and violence, while launching new
projects to develop the capacity and potential of young
people, ensuring their participation in decision-making
processes. The document also called for the adoption
of measures to provide jobs for young men and women
with a view to eliminating youth unemployment. The
youth of Yemen participated in these decision-making
processes and negotiations, which laid the foundation
for peace and stability in the new, united Yemen.

S/PV. 8241

Today, we are entering the fourth year of the
Houthi insurgency against the legitimate Government
of Yemen, after the Houthis usurped the Yemeni
State in September 2014 by occupying the country’s
capital. The young people of Yemen today have had
their dreams dashed after they took to the streets at the
time of the revolution. The Houthi militias continue to
commit the most heinous forms of violations against
innocent youth and others by detaining and arresting
activists, journalists, politicians and legislators. These
unprecedented violations have crossed all religious,
social and cultural red lines that had never been crossed
before, even during the country’s darkest times.
Over the past two and a half years, the Houthi
militias have kidnapped and arrested 16,800 people,
80 per cent of whom are young people. They have
not built educational institutions, cultural centres and
health clubs. They have not undertaken rehabilitation
projects with a view to providing political, financial,
technical and intellectual support to young people.
Instead, they have done something else. More than 484
Government buildings, health facilities, universities,
schools and sports clubs, as well as households, have
been transformed into detention centres.
Houthi militias have committed numerous
violations against young people, including extrajudicial
killings, arbitrary detention, torture and media
oppression, while transforming schools and hospitals
into military centres. They have also planted mines on
agricultural land, and recruited children and sent them
to fight their wars. The young people of Yemen have
lost every hope for a better future. Today they fight in
order to make a living. They are forced to fight as part
of the Houthi terrorist militias, Al-Qaida and Da’esh.
The young people and children of Yemen are fuel
to the war launched by the Houthi militias against the
Yemeni people. They are the majority of the victims
among the combatants. The militias have been so
cruel that they have even forced students to attend
compulsory military training before sending them to
fight. Children have become the focus of the Houthis
now that young people have come to understand the
gravity of the disaster and erroneous practices of the
Houthi militias.
Can members of the Council imagine the future
of Yemen’s young people under the control of armed
militias that act contrary to the will of the international
community and international law? We call on the

18-1189461/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community to assume its legal and moral
responsibility in the light of the violations committed
against the young people of Yemen. We call on the
international community to protect our young people
in line with international treaties, the outcome of the
National Dialogue Conference, the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). During
all rounds of negotiations, the Yemeni Government
has called for the release of all detainees, in particular
young detainees, and immediate measures to improve
the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
We take this opportunity to call on the Security
Council not to reward those who have destroyed the
dream of Yemen’s young people, rejected all peace
initiatives and sought to carry out a coup against the
Yemeni Government. A democratic, federal Yemen — a
Yemen that would exploit the full potential of its young
people — is the dream of every Yemeni youth.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I remind Council
members to limit their statements to a maximum of four
minutes. If delegations have longer statements, they are
kindly requested to deliver an abridged version in the
Chamber and make the full written statement available
to the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Security Council, under the Peruvian
presidency, for convening today’s important debate.
I would like also to thank Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth, for her valuable briefing and tremendous efforts.
I further thank Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author of
the independent progress study on youth and peace
and security (see S/2018/86), for his efforts and the
study’s important conclusions and recommendations,
which will help support children’s ability to achieve
international peace and security.
If we are to maintain international peace and
security, concerted international efforts are needed to
address the challenges and threats we face today as a
result of poverty, conflicts and wars. There is no doubt
that the 1.8 billion young men and women who make up
the largest portion of the population of many countries
throughout the world, in particular in conflict- and
war-afflicted regions, are capable of facing such
challenges and threats. They will make changes in their
62/86

23/04/2018

communities only if they are supported in seeking to
achieve their ambitions and hopes and if such changes
will enhance their protection and rights.
The adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) contributed
to an increased recognition of the important role of
young people in preventing conflicts and sustaining
peace and fighting violent extremism and terrorism.
The State of Qatar believes in the positive energy of
young people and their ability to make positive changes
in various areas, including international peace and
security. Therefore, it has spared no effort to put in place
policies and measures that can enhance the contribution
of young people to peace and development efforts.
In 2017, the Qatari Advisory Committee on Youth
was established in order to complement the efforts
of the State to promote the role of young people in
society and to implement the Qatar National Vision
2030. Twenty young men and women from various
Government and non-Government entities were elected
to the Committee, which seeks to enhance the culture
of dialogue and participation among young people,
enabling them to express their aspirations.
The State of Qatar acknowledges the importance
of addressing the root causes of the violent extremism
that leads to terrorism. In 2016, it organized a highlevel thematic conversation of the General Assembly
on children and youth affected by violent extremism.
Several Member States participated. Important
conclusions and recommendations were adopted with
regard to protecting children and young people from
violent extremism. Some States took measures to support
efforts in that area, leading to the establishment of many
institutions, programmes and initiatives in the fields
of education, employment, economic empowerment,
training and building the capacity of men and women
at the national, regional and international levels, in
particular in conflict-affected regions. Such initiatives
include the World Innovation Summit for Education,
the Upholding Education and Syrians Trust to educate
and train Syrian refugees, and the Education Above All
and Teach a Child initiatives, which all provide highquality education for millions of children and young
people around the world.
With regard to international cooperation, the
State of Qatar provides support and cooperates with
international organizations working on issues that
affect youth and combat extremism. We are a founding
member of the Global Community Engagement and
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Resilience Fund, which supports local initiatives to
build capacity and provide a counter-narrative to the
ideology of violent extremism. The State of Qatar
works with youth civil society organizations, including
Silatech, a social organization, established in the State
of Qatar in 2008, that supports activities aimed at
providing job opportunities and enabling young people
to participate in socioeconomic development. On
18 September 2017, a memorandum of understanding
was signed between the State of Qatar, the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and Silatech to
build the capacity of young people in the Arab and
Islamic region in the area of employment and to launch
projects that protect them from violent extremism.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that the State of Qatar is
committed to pursuing its efforts to create an enabling
environment to assist young people by providing
national, regional and international support to empower
them in peacebuilding, promoting the culture of peace,
tolerance and respect for religions. That will contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and benefit all peoples of the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and other briefers
for their briefings today.
Three years ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and
security. It was a landmark achievement representing
our progress in including and prioritizing young people
and their positive contributions to conflict resolution
and to maintaining peace and security. We are gathered
here today to build on that progress and to emphasize
the role of young people as vital partners for peace. The
youth of today are the world’s largest-ever generation of
young people. We must encourage their involvement in
politics, economic development and conflict resolution.
Their ideas, creativity and innovation will help build a
better future for all.
Those efforts are even more critical in the face of
terrorism and violent extremism. We must acknowledge
that young people are often targets for radicalization
and recruitment, but our approach must not be limited
to countering violent extremism. We should rather
encourage young people to become leaders for peace
and security. We must understand that by including
them as part of the solution we can help build their

S/PV. 8241

sense of belonging and purpose and improve their
well-being and self-esteem. Such efforts will in turn
lay the foundations for sustainable peace. We cannot
allow terrorist groups to continue indoctrinating young
people with hateful views and inciting them to violence.
Groups such as Hamas in Gaza recruit youth to terrorist
summer camps where they learn how to stab a Jew, plant
an improvised explosive device and make a Molotov
cocktail. Hamas is not alone in those lethal endeavours.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham exploits social
media platforms in order to recruit young people from
all over the world for terrorist activities. Poisoning
young people’s minds in these ways is pure evil. Let us
ensure that summer camps continue to be just for play
and social networks for uniting people.
In the understanding that young people are our
most promising resource, Israel believes strongly
in involving them in United Nations efforts and
foreign-policy decision-making, which is why we
have extended our youth delegate programme to three
months at a time, so that our delegate can contribute to
the work of our Mission and the United Nations on all
three pillars — peace and security, development and
human rights.
Israelis dedicated to involving young people
in local, regional, national and international policy
and efforts to build sustainable peace and security.
Our approach is both top-down and bottom-up, and
works to empower our young citizens through diverse
frameworks. Israel’s President, in collaboration with
civil society, has initiated the Israeli Hope programme,
which brings together Muslim, Jewish and Christian
youth from across the country. This special programme
aims to build common understanding and mutual
respect for the cause of peace. Many of our efforts
focus on building bridges and common understanding
through joint activities, while others focus on economic
development. We have seen the blossoming of joint
ventures between Israeli and Palestinian youth in
areas that range from peace and security to technology
and innovation. In December, the non-governmental
organization Games for Peace, which uses online
video games as a platform for promoting tolerance and
dialogue between Jewish and Arab schoolchildren,
won the Intercultural Innovation Award of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations. Such activities are
key to building a foundation for sustainable peace.
Israel will continue in its efforts to close the gap
between the youth population and young people’s

18-1189463/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

representation
in
decision-making
processes.
Resolution 2250 (2015) is just the starting point. Let us
listen to the voices of our young people. They matter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important open
debate on the very topical issues of on youth, peace
and security. Indonesia welcomes the opportunity to
continue to build on the Security Council’s landmark
resolution 2250 (2015). The overwhelming support
for the resolution is a clear demonstration that we
all consider the well-being and future of our young
people to be a shared endeavour. We would also like
to express our appreciation to Ms. Wickramanayake,
Mr. Simpson, Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. EkomoSoignet, and we have noted with interest all the excellent
recommendations that have been made.
Today’s young people are the most interconnected
generation ever, and yet they are facing challenges that
disrupt their potential to make a difference in their
own lives and those of others. Many still have to strive
to emerge from poverty and a lack of education, and
to deal with issues such terrorism, violent extremism
and transnational organized crime. Those challenges
threaten communities’ peace and stability and can even
derail peacebuilding efforts or ignite new conflicts. In
that regard, I would like to share Indonesia’s views in
the context of the five pillars of action of resolution
2250 (2015) — participation, partnerships, prevention,
protection and disengagement.
First, we should promote inclusiveness, building a
sense of belonging among our young people and making
sure that they are an integral part of society. They
should also be given a bigger role in preventing conflict
and encouraging peace and development. Governments
should invest more in creating environments where
young people are empowered to take ownership, take
control and exert a positive influence on the issues that
matter to all of us.
Secondly, we must empower young people to
be part of their societies and take on their role as
full-fledged members of those societies, as well as
protecting them from violent groups’ recruitment and
propaganda. It is a sad irony that in many cases, families
and communities are the last to know about what their
young members are thinking and doing. In our efforts
to combat the radicalization of young people, we in
64/86

23/04/2018

Indonesia have been working consistently to encourage
families and communities, together with grass-roots
civil-society organizations, to actively engage their
young people in developing programmes that deliver
tailored interventions.
Thirdly, Governments should invest more in
providing education, employment opportunities and
skill development for young people in order to prevent
them from being marginalized. Their optimism can
turn to frustration when they cannot earn a living, and
is often exploited by radical groups to fuel their own
agenda. It is important to make young people the centre
of our development efforts. There is no one-size-fitsall answer. The best strategy for generating work and
training our young people is to focus on solutions
that are tailored to local needs and to carefully design
education programmes that nurture the values of
tolerance, mutual respect and a culture of peace.
Fourthly, as the independent progress study (see
S/2018/86) suggests, many of our young people would
choose to reject a life of violence and crime if they
could. That choice must be supported, and yet there are
situations where young people are coerced into following
the negative influences that may destroy their lives. As
long as conflicts exist, they will continue to be fertile
ground where extremists and radical groups will seek to
recruit young people. That emphasizes the importance
of working to find viable solutions for conflicts. We
must ensure that repatriation and resettlement efforts,
as well as rehabilitation and reintegration processes, are
run smoothly and sustainably in both conflict and postconflict situations. We should never allow our young
people to take the path of violence and extremism.
In view of the large size of Indonesia’s youth
population, our Government has consistently worked to
ensure that they are able to fully exercise their rights.
In 2009 we enacted a youth law that serves as the legal
foundation for integrating youth empowerment into our
national development plan, which includes programmes
for ensuring access to education, basic health services
and young people’s participation in public life and our
decision-making processes, as well as in promoting
human rights, including young people’s rights. We also
recognize the importance of fighting for the hearts and
minds of our young people, encouraging dialogue and
partnering with them to build strong communities that
can counter the negative messages of extremism. We
believe that young people play an important and positive
role in the maintenance and promotion of international
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security. We should speak their language in
addressing this issue, because they know what is best
for them. Children are our future, and the future is in
our hands. It starts today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Mr. Arrocha Ruíz (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the Peruvian
presidency for its initiative in proposing today’s timely
debate, a very significant one in the history of the
Security Council, which draws our attention to the
importance and need to ensure that we take greater
responsibility for dealing with the challenge of the
youth, peace and security agenda, to which my country
is deeply committed. We listened with interest to
Mr. Graeme Simpson’s presentation of the independent
progress study on youth, peace and security (see
S/2018/86) and its recommendations, and we agree with
his assessment that stigmatization and stereotypes have
no place in that process. We also welcome the special
call for inclusion in the statements by the youth leaders
from Haiti and the Central African Republic.
Resolution 2250 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously by the Security Council in 2015, is
unquestionably one of our points of reference in
recognizing the role that young people can and should
play in preventing conflicts and violence and, even more
so, in consolidating peace processes. It is therefore our
duty to meet those expectations with concrete action
and to lay the groundwork to promote the inclusion
and participation of young people as strategic allies in
building a safer and more just world.
In support of resolution 2250 (2015) and as a
contribution to the progress study, in May 2017 Panama
hosted the first regional consultation on youth, peace
and security for the Latin American and Caribbean
region, in which we welcomed the more than 60 young
people who met to discuss a single agenda — preventing
violence and conflict and promoting and strengthening
peace. Beyond confirming the security challenges
that young people are facing in Latin America and the
Caribbean, the meeting demonstrated the potential
of young people to make a concrete contribution to
developing alternative mechanisms that involve them as
dynamic actors in working to achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We are also pleased to
report that in March we welcomed the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth to Panama for a meeting

S/PV. 8241

putting in context young leaders’ motivation and
involvement in transforming the development agenda.
As people have already said, the current generation of
young people have a greater wealth of scientific and
technological resources available to them than ever
before, so our efforts to involve this generation must
live up to the expectations of the globalized society that
they are dealing with. We are also seeing how young
people can be dangerously and damagingly exposed
to transnational crime, including, most worryingly,
terrorism networks.
Young people are clearly a priority for my
Government. That is why we have committed to
strengthening our national education and gender-equity
agendas as factors that are extremely important to our
society’s homogeneous growths. To that end, we have
developed a series of initiatives aimed at empowering
our young people to become active stakeholders in
formulating public policy. We know that investing in
education and human capital is a determining factor in
young people’s development.
As you say in your concept note (S/2018/324,
annex), Mr. President, the impact of conflict on young
people is not homogeneous because the realities they
encounter vary greatly depending on the region where
they live. Today, well into the twenty-first century,
we have seen with horror the rising numbers of young
women who are victims of violence, exploitation and
sexual abuse, especially in regions of armed conflict. In
view of these global challenges, Panama is committed
to its inter-institutional strategic youth plan for 2015
to 2019, which was specifically developed to improve
young people’s participation in conflict prevention and
security efforts, with the support of non-traditional
actors, civil society and private-sector stakeholders, in
order to form a multisectoral alliance focused on the
same goals.
By focusing on six fundamental areas, my country
aims to ensure social inclusion through access to
education, technology and job training; access to
quality health care and a healthy environment;
the prevention of violence; decent housing; equal
opportunities and access to credit; and access to the
arts, sports and culture, among other things. Through
specific programmes such as Bilingual Panama, we are
creating tools to give young people better opportunities
in the workplace, while our universal grant programme
is designed to help prevent school dropouts and in
particular to ensure that everyone can obtain a primary

18-1189465/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

education. In addition, since prevention is the key to the
success of such efforts, we have focused on renovating
sports complexes, thereby fostering a culture of sport
as a tool for promoting peace.
In January 2019, Panama will host World Youth
Day, an event that seeks to build a better world by
bringing together young people from all over the globe
around the common objective of working to achieve a
culture of peace by overcoming cultural and religious
barriers. In the presence of Pope Francis, a leader in
promoting a vision of faith and understanding, and as
a country with a humanitarian calling, Panama will
once again open its doors to global youth to provide a
space for dialogue and an exchange of views on peace,
tolerance and conflict prevention.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Panama’s
commitment to actively and constructively contributing
to the youth, peace and security agenda in order to
maximize the collective efforts that offer us the tools
we need to prepare our youth for what is unquestionably
a more globalized world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I would first like to
congratulate Peru on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate at a time when the world
is facing growing threats to international peace and
security. We would also like to thank Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth, and Mr. Graeme Simpson, the lead author of the
progress study (see S/2018/86), for their briefings.
Sri Lanka acknowledges the Council’s landmark
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and welcomes the
progress study on youth, peace and security that it
mandates. It is a valuable framework for integrating
our young people into our collective efforts to preserve
international peace and security.
Today we live in a world that is overwhelmingly
young, one in which 46 per cent of its people are under
24 years old. Migration and refugee movements, among
other things, have contributed to a youth bulge and fastchanging demographics. That is a cause not for panic
but for quick action and hope. Rather than viewing it as
essentially a problem, we should recognize its potential.
It provides a reason for the international community to
renew its commitment to implementing the 2030 Agenda
66/86

23/04/2018

for Sustainable Development. We must aggressively
attack the underlying reasons why some young
people become vulnerable to the violent narratives of
extremists. Economic deprivation; systemic injustice
and bias due to racial, religious and other prejudices;
feelings of helplessness and hopelessness in an unfair
social justice system; an unwelcoming society that
seeks to exclude and label — all of these are breeding
grounds for disgruntled, sullen youth. If we take away
hope and opportunity within the system, Jihadi John
will begin to look like an attractive option.
From the Arab Spring to the March for Our
Lives movement, it has been young people who have
energized the people, inspired action, held politicians
accountable and spoken up for democracy, equality and
justice. We must provide them with an environment
that is as welcoming and a tool set that is as effective as
possible so that they can live their best selves to their
full potential.
Let me turn now to my own country and our
efforts to empower young people in the context of the
five pillars of resolution 2250 (2015) — participation,
protection, prevention, partnerships, disengagement
and reintegration.
First, in the context of this debate, let me say that
Sri Lanka is faced not with a youth bulge, but with a
rapidly ageing population. While Sri Lanka stands
out as one of the success stories of considerable
advancements in human development in South Asia,
that brings its own economic and social challenges.
Early investments in health and education have resulted
in significant reductions in infant mortality rates,
increases in life expectancy and decreased fertility
rates. Those achievements have influenced Sri Lanka’s
demographic cycle. By 2041, one out of every four
persons is expected to be an elderly person, making Sri
Lankans the oldest population in South Asia.
International labour migration, largely concentrated
among groups of young adult of working age, has
increased during the past three decades, reducing
the proportion of the working-age population in the
country. Because of the extent of youth migration, the
proportion of the elderly in the population has increased.
For us, therefore, our young people are precious and
indispensable to our success.
As a country that had, until 2009, suffered under
the oppressive yoke of terrorism for nearly three
decades, including two youth insurrections, Sri Lanka
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

understands the challenges of addressing the issue. Two
insurrections in the 1970s and 1980s led to sweeping
social and political reform, including the setting-up
of a youth commission, the enactment of land reform
laws and the establishment of a national youth council.
Since 2015, following the devastating conflict, we have
been embarked on implementing a reconciliation and
transformative justice mechanism in order to ensure
prevention and non-recurrence, along the lines of the
resolution 2250 (2015).
Sri Lanka has focused on a comprehensive and
responsive rehabilitation and reintegration programme
for over 12,000 ex-combatants who surrendered to the
security forces, including 594 child combatants, at the
conclusion of the conflict in May 2009. The strategies
and activities included improving their physical
and mental state by spiritual, sociophysiological,
personality and leadership training targeted to suit job
opportunities. Apart from ex-combatants who directly
surrendered, over 2,000 ex-combatants who had
been arrested for their direct involvement in terrorist
activities underwent voluntary rehabilitation in lieu
of prosecution.
We have sought to include our young people and other
stakeholders in building a post-conflict reconciliation
and peacebuilding mechanism to ensure ownership and
control of their futures. A national consultative task
force — entirely driven by civil society and operating
under the four pillars of truth, justice, reconciliation
and non-recurrence — consulted with youth leaders,
women, community leaders and others from all over
the country in order to seek their views in establishing
a comprehensive reconciliation mechanism. Sri Lanka
also established a national policy on reconciliation
in 2016, coordinated comprehensive district-level
development plans for former conflict affected areas
and launched interfaith, arts and culture programmes.
We established the Office of National Unity
and Reconciliation as the implementing body for
those programmes. Among a range of activities, the
Office of National Unity and Reconciliation works on
educational sector reform to incorporate national unity
and reconciliation as a pillar within the education sector
with a view to instilling in our children the importance
of plurality. Those reforms include the twinning of
schools, student-teacher exchanges, an examination of
school textbooks to replace potentially inflammatory
material and stereotypes, and the introduction of a
guidebook on the rights and responsibilities of children.

S/PV. 8241

We have also introduced psychosocial programmes
for those who have been traumatized. The Office of
National Unity and Reconciliation provides training to
leaders and clergy of various religions in peacebuilding
with a view to using them as early-warning mechanisms
to defuse potential conflict situations.
Sri Lanka is also on the cusp of introducing
a comprehensive social and emotional learning
programme for three- to five-year-olds in its preschools
island-wide. The programme seeks to adopt a
curriculum mediating all aspects of experiential, social
and emotional learning in order to end discriminatory
mindsets at a very early age and the cycle of violence. It
seeks to change the mindsets and attitudes of children
during their formative years through value-based
education, activity, play and sports as a compulsory
new subject. As a country recovering from conflict,
we remain convinced that the only way to heal the
wounds of division and sustain peace is by inculcating
the values of empathy, oneness, inclusion, forgiveness,
compassion and love in our children while they are
young and open to change. One of the best ways to
achieve that is through the universal language of sport
and play.
Education remains one of the key preventive
measures, and Sri Lanka has recognized the importance
of developing youth skills. In that regard, we took the
initiative to declare 15 July as World Youth Skills
Day. General Assembly resolution 69/145, recognizing
World Youth Skills Day, received the overwhelming
support of the General Assembly. In conclusion, Sri
Lanka believes that our children and youth are not only
our future, but also our present. We see them as our
greatest asset on our path to a better, peaceful and more
secure world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and Peru for convening this open debate.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth, as well as the special guests at this meeting, for
their briefings this morning.
My country, as everyone knows, has a historic
commitment to youth after having lived through a 12year armed conflict. Now, 26 years later, Salvadoran
youth have become important agents of change in the
post-conflict stage and in building a culture of peace.

18-1189467/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

One of the key features of the population of my country
is that it is mostly young, with 63.7 per cent under
30-years old.
In order to benefit from that demographic boom
and offer new prospects to our youth, El Salvador
must address violence and insecurity as two of the
main challenges facing them, and integrate all relevant
actors into the efforts undertaken to that end. We know
that challenges remain, but we are committed to the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) to bridge the
gaps left by the armed conflict in our country and to
build an inclusive society in which young people play a
fundamental role in decision-making and in building a
culture of peace. That is why our national youth policy
categorizes our youth in three groups: as an at-risk
group, as subjects of the law and as strategic actors
in development. That policy seeks to carry out three
main processes, namely, developing their identity and
autonomy; improving their social integration and civic
engagement; and promoting social cohesion and a sense
of belonging.
As we will also emphasize tomorrow at the General
Assembly high-level meeting on peacebuilding and
sustainable peace, for my delegation, peacebuilding is
not only a transitory stage, but also an ongoing endeavour,
since it implies not only the cessation of armed conflict,
but also the construction of public institutions and the
development of a civic consciousness that provides a
firm foundation. That task consists of prioritizing cases
of widespread violence in society. In that context, the
Peacebuilding Commission has the responsibility to
adopt a broader and more inclusive approach, while
preserving the most urgent cases as priority.
Likewise, we stress the need for the peaceful and
constructive engagement of youth, especially young
women, from the earliest stages of prevention, crisis
resolution and peacebuilding. In that regard, we take
note of the progress study on youth, peace and security
(see S/2018/86), and we agree with its findings regarding
the role of the media in forming stereotypes among
young people. Unfortunately, the negative actions that
certain young people take are always highlighted and
the coverage of positive actions is left aside.
Similarly, we stress that youth, peace and security
cannot be disassociated from the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. From today’s perspective
relating to sustainable development and its link with
youth, peace and security agenda, I recall that, in 2016,
68/86

23/04/2018

my country was selected by the United Nations system
for the accelerated implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), and we are one of seven
countries that participate in the pilot project for the
implementation of SDG 16 targets and indicators to
achieve peace, justice and strong institutions.
We also call attention to the fact that, at the national
level, we are currently sponsoring an initiative to move
forward our national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015). In September of 2017, youth
organizations, together with my country’s Government
and in conjunction with the United Nations Population
Fund and Interpeace, established a focus group on
resolution 2250 (2015) and a working group on SDG
16 and that resolution, aimed at discussing the pillars
set out in the resolution and interpreting it within the
context of our national reality so as to advance towards
the development of a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015).
In conclusion, my delegation affirms its
commitment to maintaining its support for the
achievements of the goals set forth in resolution 2250
(2015) and for the establishment of mechanisms working
in complementarity with the national action plan
towards the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, which advocates
for strengthening the capacities and participation of
young women.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Let me to commend your delegation,
Sir, for convening this open debate, as well as for the
concept note before us (S/2018/324, annex), which
contains valuable information for guiding this debate.
We are also grateful to those who delivered statements
before us.
Experience shows that armed conflicts and
humanitarian crises put populations at risk, in
particular young people, who are the most vulnerable
and consequently the most victimized. In recent years,
however, we have come to see that young people’s
participation is an essential element of the process of
conflict resolution, which positively influences the
work of peacebuilding, although it also pains us to see
how young people have been instrumentalized for abject
purposes and ideological causes that are diametrically
opposed to their well-being. It is therefore necessary,
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

we believe, to underscore the fact that work must be
stepped up to enable young people to assume leadership
roles and, through education, integration and political
participation, to avoid becoming involved in violent
extremism. Accordingly, Guatemala holds resolution
2250 (2015) in high regard, given that young people
make up a majority of its population.
The Security Council has hardly turned a blind eye
to the leadership roles that young people must play, as
evinced in resolution 2250 (2015), based on the premise
that, if we fail to ensure their safety, education and
comprehensive development, young people will be unable
to reach the level of inclusion necessary to strengthen
their capacities and, consequently, to make their
contribution to peace and human rights. My delegation
acknowledges the importance of resolution 2250 (2015)
as it defers to the guidelines and recommendations of
the Peacebuilding Commission on how to ensure young
people’s participation during and after armed conflict
within the context of peacebuilding strategies. We have
witnessed how, in various regions, young people have
been drivers of change for social transformation, while
directly affecting their communities and creating new
inclusive models of social development.
The links connecting youth, peace and security are
inextricably tied to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development; hence the important relevance of the
independent progress study on youth and peace and
security (see S/2018/86) for which we are grateful to
Mr. Simpson and his team. Although the world has
made significant progress in making young women
and men visible as strategic development stakeholders,
a gap remains between formal acknowledgement of
such ownership and effectively putting it into action
on the ground. We therefore consider it absolutely vital
to prioritize investment in the education, health and
well-being of young people so as to provide them with
comprehensive services without discrimination or any
form of sectarianism. In that regard, we underscore
the fact that States must ensure the representative
and inclusive political participation of youth, which
will allow that group to position itself at the centre
of development, thereby creating broad consensuses
that will lead to optimum levels of prosperity for the
development of citizens, as well as young people.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its firm
commitment to promoting a culture of preventing
armed conflicts as a means of addressing interrelated
challenges of security and development, as well as

S/PV. 8241

strengthening the capacities of the United Nations
to prevent armed conflicts. In specific post-conflict
situations, youth has always been a vital and positive
driver of helpful changes. In that regard, it is important
that we ask ourselves if we are fulfilling the founding
promise of the Organization, which is to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, or if that is merely
a rhetorical flourish. As responsible actors within the
international system, we are called on to join efforts
to build and maintain peace, thereby enabling future
generations to learn to live within a culture of tolerance
and respect — while considering lessons learned,
especially those of the two World Wars, so that such
a conflagration shall never again destroy the future of
generations to come.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Saleh Azzam (Lebanon): Allow me at the
outset to express my delegation’s appreciation for the
remarkable efforts made by the Peruvian presidency,
and your able leadership of the Council, Sir, throughout
the month of April. I also thank you for convening
this important open debate, your team for the concept
note (S/2018/324, annex), and the briefers for their
pertinent presentations.
This debate is of particular importance not
only to Lebanon, but to the Arab region as a whole.
Approximately 60 per cent of the population of our
region is under 25 years of age, thereby making it one
of the most youthful regions in the world. Yet, quite
unfortunately, it is also a region where optimism
and zeal are waning among young people. Mounting
political frustration, lack of economic opportunities
and diverse social challenges are, regrettably, depriving
youth of the spark of hope.
In Lebanon, despite the Government’s dedicated
efforts to address pressing economic challenges, the
overall impact of the lack of economic opportunities on
youth is tangible. These have also been exacerbated by
the economic repercussions of the Syrian displacement
situation. As of August 2017, the unemployment rate
stood at 25 per cent, with unemployment among young
people — those under 25 years of age — at 37 per cent.
Although approximately 35,000 young people graduate
from universities annually, only 5,000 jobs are found.
That is only one job for every seven graduates.
The numbers are telling and reflect certain social
repercussions of that economic challenge, particularly

18-1189469/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2018

in the increasing figures of migration to other countries
to seek jobs.

violent extremism strategies, but also of international
endeavours on those two interrelated subjects.

Among youth, the lack of opportunity and hope
can be a recipe for disaster. One expectable, albeit
worrisome by-product of economic, social and political
frustrations is the desperate resort to radical ideas and
beliefs, which are, in certain cases, conducive to violent
extremism. We therefore wonder what factors could
promote and support young people’s active involvement
in building peace, thereby preventing violence and
contributing to positive social cohesion.

During the negotiations over the biennial resolution
on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in June 2016, Lebanon was one of the leading
countries seeking to include in the text references to
the decisive role of youth in the prevention of terrorism,
in particular through education. Education is without a
doubt a tool of immense importance. It becomes even
more so when it instils the values of openness and
tolerance, and promotes critical thinking.

To begin with, national Governments should
uphold their share of the responsibility. The central role
of youth in peacebuilding and sustainable development
needs to be recognized and integrated into relevant
policymaking. With regard to Lebanon, I am glad
to highlight the National Youth Policy, which was
endorsed by the Lebanese Government in 2012. That
policy was a key milestone in our national efforts to
empower youth and address their concerns. The final
outcome was the fruit of the joint efforts of young
women and men from civil society organizations,
political parties, universities and high schools, and of
relevant ministries, in particular the Ministry of Youth
and Sports, as well as United Nations agencies.

I wish to conclude by taking this opportunity to
inform the Council that, on 27 March, the Lebanese
Government officially endorsed Lebanon’s national
strategy for preventing violent extremism. Youth
empowerment is one of the nine core pillars of
the strategy.

Adjacently, civil society shoulders a considerable
responsibility with regard to youth empowerment and
its ultimate contribution to peace and security. Social
media also offer youth a platform to express its hopes,
fears and political, economic and social grievances. In
that respect, Lebanon boasts a vibrant and powerful
civil society and an open press and social media space
in which youth-led communities are particularly active.
These are opening doors for youth to have a growing
and impactful presence in the public sphere. The
ongoing parliamentary electoral process testifies
to that impactful presence as we are witnessing an
unprecedented level of participation and involvement
of young men and women, including civil society
activists, in various aspects of the process.
Terrorism and the violent extremism conducive to
it are among the most alarming threats to international
peace and security today. Young women and men are
present on the different sides of this global challenge.
They are not only victims and perpetrators, but also
solution providers. It is imperative that youth become the
centre both of national counter-terrorism and preventing
70/86

The late United States President Herbert Hoover
famously said: “Older men declare war. But it is youth
that must fight and die”. If young people are enabled to
play their well-deserved role in decision-making, if they
are provided the chance to have their say on matters of
peace and security, a safer, more peaceful world is more
likely to emerge, ascend and prosper.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me join others in
sincerely commending you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate on youth, peace and security. This
particular open debate comes on the heels of the equally
important one on women and peace and security, which
convened about a week ago (see S/PV.8234). Botswana
heartily welcomes your continued engagement on
this issue and looks forward to a debate that will
contribute to global development, international peace
and security, and global partnership, particularly as it
relates to the youth who constitute the majority of the
world’s population.
We also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for presenting his comprehensive
report (see S/2018/86), on the progress study of youth’s
contributions to peace processes and conflict resolution.
Botswana aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the representatives of Mali, on behalf of the
Group of African States, and Indonesia, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The global environment continues to experience
many challenges, some totally unprecedented. This
has placed an enormous burden on Member States,
as well as on regional, subregional and international
organizations, to deliver on the very purpose and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is
only through collective efforts that the goals we all
aspire to for the betterment of humankind and of the
future we want can stand a chance of being realized.

S/PV. 8241

youth empowerment. I must emphasize the importance
of partnerships in that regard.
Partnerships in peacebuilding are essential.
Although they are often considered from the perspective
of preventing violent extremism, partnerships with
young people facilitate their aspirations, as they are
engaged meaningfully as partners in implementing
policies, rather than as onlookers.

Practically all the speakers before us have alluded
to the fact that the fast-evolving challenges confronting
the world today continue to grow in both scope and
magnitude. Their sheer enormity threatens the security
of our planet and even the existence of the human
race. Botswana is not, however, convinced that these
challenges are beyond our collective capability, nor
are they insurmountable. Since its inception in 1945,
the United Nations has strived to provide a platform
for nations to work together in addressing the various
challenges we continue to face, and it is proper to say
that notable progress has been achieved, particularly in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Like other Member States that have taken the floor
before us, Botswana has also made significant strides
on the above key pillars and is thus contributing to the
advancement and empowerment of youth, although we
still face challenges and constraints. We take special
pride in having established a ministry responsible
for young people — the Ministry of Youth, Sports
and Culture, way back in 2007. A department solely
dedicated to youth affairs has also been established
alongside the Botswana National Youth Council, which
acts as an umbrella for all registered independent
youth organizations in Botswana and through which
financial support and grants are made available to those
youth organizations.

We are glad to know that since the adoption of
resolution 2250 (2015), there has been a series of
worldwide consultations on the engagement of children
and young people in peacebuilding activities. The
adoption of the resolution was the first step of the United
Nations in recognizing the important role young people
play in preventing conflicts and sustaining peace.
It is in itself a groundbreaking and historic moment
for the United Nations, which specifically addresses
the topic of youth from an international peace and
security perspective.

Obviously, more needs to be done in this area and,
like many other nations across the world, we are also
concerned about what previous speakers have referred
to as the youth bulge, which is educated, unemployed
and very vulnerable. The number of youth graduates
in our country has grown drastically over the past
couple of years, exceeding the Government’s capacity
to provide employment for them. It is in that light that
the Government of Botswana has stepped up efforts to
attract foreign direct investment so as to facilitate job
creation for these young people.

This is also an opportune time for Member States to
discuss not only the progress achieved in the two years
since the adoption of the resolution, but to also engage
on how we hope and plan to ensure that the goals and
principles espoused in the Secretary-General’s report,
which was presented this morning, can be aligned
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Secretary-General’s report identifies five priority
areas for action in pursuit of efforts to promote youth
as agents of peace and security, and invariably see their
lives improve.

My delegation holds firm in the belief that the
recommendations and findings of the study that the
Secretary-General shared with the Council this morning
will help inform the national policies of United Nations
Member States on how young people can contribute to
peace processes and conflict resolution. Africa needs
to seize upon the demographic dividend arising from
the youth bulge in its population in order to enable
young people to constructively contribute to Africa’s
development, as well to peace and security. The youth
bulge is, thus, a resource to be harnessed.

Education plays the dual role of building
competencies for social cohesion and civic engagement,
while also developing skills for economic engagement.
It is an extremely important undertaking as it relates to

The time has come for us to partner with young
people and to be innovative, creative and forwardthinking in order to address some of the challenges that
we face.

18-1189471/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2018

The Secretary-General’s report has drawn our
attention to the most critical concerns of our youth
and recommends that we engage youth as partners
in development and policymaking. Again, in terms
of resolution 2250 (2015), the role of young people in
building cohesive societies can no longer be overlooked.
Their creative and innovative ideas need to be put to
good use for the benefit of their countries.

focused on women and young people in Francophone
regions and their role in peace and development. In
acknowledgement of the 270 million young people in
Francophone areas, the organization has since 2014
been committed to including them in all its bodies at
all levels. The 2014 summit gave rise to the IOF’s youth
strategy, which hinges on an inclusive approach based
on human rights.

In conclusion, let me underscore the point that
young people throughout the world need a conducive
environment in which to develop and thrive. They need
an environment that sees them as agents of change and
as contributors and partners in development. This body
can contribute to that process.

I wish to focus on all consultations conducted
by the organization not only with its youth networks
but also with its member States and to share with the
Council some aspects of our efforts on the basis of two
core premises.

Let me in concluding make a request: perhaps,
Mr. President, you should require that Member
States present progress reports to this body on their
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) so that we can
be informed of the efforts they are making to promote
the involvement of young people in development and in
decision-making on issues that affect them.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the International
Organization of the Francophonie.
Mrs. Saidane (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking the Peruvian presidency for
having convened today’s debate on an issue of critical
importance for the advancement of our collective
aspirations vis-à-vis international peace and security.
We hope that the Council will consistently follow up on
the youth, peace and security agenda. Council. I wish
also to thank all of those who spoke this morning, as
their input makes it possible for all our debates on this
issue to be increasingly well-informed and detailed.
More than two years have elapsed since the
adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), which represented
an unprecedented acknowledgement of the urgent need
to mobilize young people in the promotion of peace
and security, reaffirming the fact that without young
people nothing is possible, nothing can be envisaged
and nothing can be achieved.
The International Organization of the Francophonie
(IOF), which currently has 84 member States and
Governments, acknowledges young people as actors
critical to the success of its efforts in all areas. Based
on this certainty, in 2014 the IOF, at its fifteenth summit
of Heads of State and Government, held in Dakar,
72/86

The first concerns the call made by young people
today for us to question some of our certainties. Indeed,
it is evident that young men and women represent the
majority of the population and that it is we, those above
age 35, who are now in the minority. Yet we continue
to expect the majority to adapt to the demands of the
minority without even including it in a dialogue on
the necessary adjustments. This is especially true for
mediation and crisis-exit processes, which, with a few
exceptions, rarely welcome young people. Not only
that, what we are in effect asking of them is that they
get on a speeding train without ever considering how
fast it is going.
The second premise relates to one of the points
that the study on young people, peace and security
specifically underlines, something that we welcome.
We need to move away from simplistic stereotypes that
view young people only as a high-risk, irresponsible
and potentially violent group, even though the vast
majority of young people wish only to contribute
positively to peace, security and development, and have
already been doing so.
I wish here to discuss some of the efforts undertaken
by the IOF to forge a robust partnership with and for
young people that is aimed at building peace within the
French-speaking community, which has by no means
been spared conflicts and violence.
First, with respect to inclusion and participation,
our efforts are not limited to systematically including
young people in decision-making processes and
bodies; the aim is also to give them a voice, through,
for instance, the Free Together campaign. In its
first year the campaign, launched in 2016 on social
networks, mobilized more than 5,000 young people
in the French-speaking community in the context of
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

an initiative crafted by young people and focusing
on the revalorization of coexistence, respect and the
engagement of young people in public life. These same
young men and women are also continuing to make
contributions in the framework of the Francophone
network for the prevention of radicalization currently
being set up, as well as in the context of the national
“Free Together” initiatives, specifically in Côte d’Ivoire
and Benin, in partnership with the national authorities.
Furthermore, convinced that it is more important
than ever to work to reconcile young people and
decision-makers and to create the climate of mutual
trust that is critical for dialogue, the IOF has harnessed
its capacities in the area of advocacy, political mediation
at the highest level and technical partnership with its
member States in order to contribute to the maintenance
of the rule of law, which protects young people, their
voice and their participation.
The United Nations Development Programme,
which in 2017 carried out a study on factors contributing
to violent radicalization in the Sahel region, stressed
the fact that one of the triggers of such violence was
without a doubt State violence against citizens, and this
aspect must remain at the heart of our concerns.
In addition to being guarantors of coexistence,
young people, as has been stressed repeatedly today, are
the economic actors of today and tomorrow. Given that
the economic integration of young men and women is a
critical component of their contribution to the building
of peaceful societies, the IOF has adopted an economic
and digital strategy through which it mobilizes funds
for the support of innovation and entrepreneurship for
young project leaders.
As education remains the cornerstone of young
people’s involvement, the IOF also supports the
development of educational and vocational training
policies, through, inter alia, the Institute of the
Francophonie for Education and Training, based
in Dakar, as well as the Francophone University
Association, which includes more than 800 institutions
of higher education.
Lastly, the IOF focuses on the mobilization of efforts
in the areas of integrated cooperation and of sustainable,
inclusive and responsible human development. The task
is so urgent and the challenge of such magnitude that
no country or organization can achieve it alone; hence
the importance of today’s debate. Because all national
and international actors must act hand in hand with and

S/PV. 8241

for young people, an alliance was created between the
IOF, the Commonwealth, the Ibero-American General
Secretariat and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, which together represent 167 States and
61 per cent of the world’s population. That alliance
led to a call for universal humanism, launched jointly
by the four women at the helm of those organizations,
and to an action plan in which youth is acknowledged
as a key actor in the stability of societies and in the
establishment of the social cohesion necessary for
peace and security.
I wish to conclude by focusing on that call, which
is part and parcel of the quest to better align the efforts
of the various relevant organizations and existing
mechanisms, and to stress that we already have
numerous opportunities at our disposal to systematically
integrate young people into decision-making processes,
as they are already organized enough to be credible
interlocutors. We must accept being called into question;
that is the aim of our present and future efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): The youth,
peace and security agenda is about transforming
systems that lead to the exclusion of young people and
engaging youth in all aspects of social, economic and
political life. It requires targeted funding and targeted
programming and, above all, giving young people
the opportunity, capacity and access to be leaders
in their communities, as well as at the national and
international levels.
How to do that is a challenge that every country
faces. This agenda is universal. As the independent
progress study on youth, peace and security so well
illustrates, it lies at the heart of all of our prevention
efforts, whether we are talking about preventing violent
conflicts, violent extremism or violent crime.
To that end, Canada welcomes the progress study
and is proud to have supported its innovative and
participatory research process. We were also pleased
that Canadian youth were able to discuss and validate its
emerging recommendations last fall on the margins of
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial. We
believe that the progress study will make an important
contribution to the discussions we will be having this
week on building and sustaining peace. As the recently
launched United Nations-World Bank “Pathways for
Peace” report recommends, managing youth’s unmet

18-1189473/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

aspirations and their inclusion in society is a critical
component of any measures to prevent violent conflicts.
(spoke in English)
As we collectively consider the recommendations
of the progress study, Canada would like to highlight a
number of key points.
First, there is genuine synergy between the youth,
peace and security agenda and the women and peace
and security agenda. Canada is implementing a feminist
foreign policy with a strong focus on women and peace
and security. Canada’s second national action plan on
women and peace and security provides a framework
for a cohesive whole-of-Government approach to
ensure that gender perspectives are integrated into all
peace and security efforts. Gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls are also driving our
feminist international assistance policy, which includes
the need to engage men and boys.
Secondly, we recognize that some of the most
important work is being done by civil society at the
grass-roots and local levels. Too often the work of such
organizations is unrecognized, while our interventions
target processes led by capital-based actors.
Through our new Women’s Voice and Leadership
Programme, Canada will allocate $150 million over
five years to respond to the needs of local women’s
organizations in developing countries that are working
to advance the rights of women and girls and promote
gender equality. We hope that there are lessons here for
how we can support youth leadership and participation
as well.
Thirdly, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, which Canada
strongly supports, engaging youth and making them
part of the response to violent extremism is crucial.
Youth, predominantly affected by violent extremism,
can play an important role in identifying solutions,
supporting communities and building resilience to
this threat.
Fourthly, when we talk about youth, peace and
security, we must not forget about child protection,
including preventing the recruitment of children in the
peacekeeping context. As many here know, Canada
developed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers last fall. This initiative seeks to identify
early-warning signs, take action to end recruitment and
74/86

23/04/2018

promote the reporting of abuses and grave violations
against children. Since then, the Vancouver Principles
have been endorsed by 63 Member States. In the coming
years, Canada will convene the endorsing States, the
United Nations and members of the child- protection
community to develop practical implementation
guidance for these principles.
Finally, responsibility for taking this agenda
forward ultimately rests with Member States, but the
United Nations has an important role to play. We believe
that the United Nations and Member States can do more
to facilitate young people’s meaningful participation
in peace negotiations and peacebuilding processes,
ensure the collection of sex- and age-disaggregated
data related to youth, peace and security, and put in
place mechanisms for meaningful consultation and the
engagement of young people. We also believe that, as
with the women and peace and security agenda, the
Council should mandate regular reporting from the
Secretary-General on youth, peace and security, and
ensure that young people’s participation is included in
Security Council mandates.
Canada will continue to support this important
agenda through our own domestic and international
policies, and we stand ready to support the work of the
United Nations in implementing the progress study.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): Mr. President, I wish
to thank you for having convened this open debate on
maintaining international peace and security through
promoting and protecting youth rights, which has
become one of the key issues on the United Nations
agenda. I wish to take this opportunity to inform the
Council about the latest developments in Uzbekistan in
this area.
For the past year and a half in Uzbekistan, under
the leadership of President Shavkat Mirziyoyev, very
dynamic processes of societal transformation including
the promotion of youth rights, have been observed. The
Government has been taking bold steps towards further
expanding reforms in all fields, with the aim of building
a democratic State and a just society guided by a simple
principle: that human interests come first.
Today the world’s youth population has already
reached almost 2 billion people, and the planet’s
future and well-being depend on what kind of people
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

our children will grow up to be. The Government of
Uzbekistan therefore attaches great importance to
youth-related issues. We in Uzbekistan have enacted
a national law on the youth policy of the State, which
defines the legal framework and guidelines for the
formation and implementation of our youth policy, with
a view to strengthening the role of the public, especially
non-governmental organizations, local authorities
and the media, in implementing that policy. We also
overhauled the youth movement by creating the Union
of Youth of Uzbekistan, which is now more actively
involved in the socio-political life of the country.
An effective youth policy is particularly important
nowadays, at a time when terrorist threats and the
radicalization of young people are widespread across
the globe. As research shows, most crimes linked
with extremist activity and violence are committed by
people under the age of 30.
In this regard, today it is extremely important
to fight for the hearts and minds of young people by
providing them with the conditions necessary for selfrealization and creating a barrier against the spread of
the virus of the ideology of violence. For that reason,
we in Uzbekistan believe that it is crucial to advance
multilateral cooperation in the sphere of social support
for youth by protecting their rights and interests.
This June, Uzbekistan, in collaboration with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
will host an international conference on the role of
youth in preventing and countering violent extremism
and radicalization that lead to terrorism, which will
address the following key issues: understanding
the nature of violent extremism and radicalization
leading to terrorism; exchanging opinions on effective
strategies to prevent youth from falling prey to radical
ideologies; identifying needs and opportunities in terms
of implementing specific actions by States and civil
society for preventing the spread of radical ideology
among youth, while ensuring respect for human rights;
and sharing positive experiences and lessons learned by
Central Asian States on engaging youth in confronting
violent extremism and radicalization. I am very pleased
to note that the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth,
Ms. Wickramanayake, has been invited to that event,
and we look forward to her participation.
During the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly last September, the President of
Uzbekistan proposed the development of a United

S/PV. 8241

Nations convention on the rights of youth, a unified
international legal instrument aimed at developing and
implementing a youth policy in a context of globalization
and of the rapid development of information and
communication technologies.
Given the importance of this issue, we in Uzbekistan
hope that this initiative will receive the overwhelming
support of all States Members of the United Nations,
and we will jointly develop a draft of such a convention
and make coherent efforts to bring it to fruition.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the Peruvian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s important debate, as
well as all the speakers who have contributed to it.
My country fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union,
but I would like to add a few comments from our
national perspective.
We highly appreciate the quality of the independent
progress study (see S/2018/86), and I wish to express
my country’s support for the recommendations set
out therein and to express my thanks for the work of
the Advisory Group of Experts and the secretariat
established for the study, made up by the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations Population Fund.
I welcome the participatory and inclusive approach,
which made it possible to reflect the views of young
people around the world and to produce a study that
reflects their reality.
We hope that the idea of a new Security
Council resolution on youth, peace and security
will become a reality. It is essential to complete the
normative framework in this area and help reduce its
fragmentation. The study before us today presents
a unique opportunity for forward-looking strategic
planning to accelerate the implementation of youth,
peace and security programmes at all levels — national,
regional and global.
Too many young people around the world have lost
confidence in their Governments and in the international
community. They feel excluded from governance
systems, which creates a sense of injustice and of being
left behind. We must fight against the stigmatization of
young people, against prejudices and generalizations,
facilitate their inclusion in processes of peacebuilding,

18-1189475/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

economic growth and social development, because
young people are obviously our greatest treasure and
the future of the planet.
In that context, in order to promote a coherent
approach based on facts, Luxembourg is also in favour
of an annual implementation report by the SecretaryGeneral and the holding of annual open debates such
as this in the Security Council. In order to ensure the
legitimacy of these processes, the active participation
of young peacemakers will also need to be ensured.
Whether it be at the national or international level,
it is essential to build on young people’s capacities for
action and initiative by providing them with the means
as well as the space necessary to enable them to build
inclusive networks that lets them be heard and fight
the structural obstacles that block their contribution to
peace and security. Thereafter, they must be involved
and recognized as equal partners, from the outset, in
peace and security initiatives that concern them.
In all of the foregoing, young people can count on
the ongoing commitment of my country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me first express
my thanks to the Peruvian presidency for convening
today’s important debate on youth, peace and security.
I would also like to express gratitude to the briefers for
the reports and the study (see S/2018/86) presented to
the Security Council.
The Georgian delegation aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union. However, I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.
Young people represent the majority of the
population in regions affected by wars and armed
conflicts today. Yet the same young people can
actively contribute to the peace and security of their
communities and societies, and they do, but their work
and voices need greater recognition and empowerment
from our side. Examples of young people’s contribution
to the prevention of violent conflicts in different
parts of the world speak to the potential of youth in
promoting the concept of sustaining peace. To fully use
their potential, we share the view cited in the progress
study on the follow-up to resolution 2250 (2015), aimed
at expanding youth participation and engagement.
76/86

23/04/2018

Georgia considers youth to be one of the major
driving forces in building and maintaining peace,
as well as in conflict prevention and transformation
processes. With that in mind, the Government of
Georgia facilitates the engagement of youth in public
diplomacy and confidence-building projects, including
supporting access to quality education for conflictaffected youth. One of the latest peace initiatives of
my Government — A Step to a Better Future — seeks
to ease access for residents of the occupied regions
of Georgia — Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia — to all levels of education, including
vocational, available in the rest of the country. But for
this endeavour to succeed, it is vital that the issue of
flagrant violations of human rights of the population of
the occupied regions be addressed, namely, restrictions
of freedom of movement, kidnappings and killings. Just
three weeks ago, in this very Chamber, I spoke about
the most recent brutal example of this: the torture and
killing of a young ethnic Georgian, Archil Tatunashvili
(see S/PV.8218).
As long as Georgia’s regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia remain under illegal
foreign military occupation, my Government is being
prevented from exercising its duties and responsibilities
in the territories. The so-called law on the legal status of
foreign citizens, introduced in 2016 by the occupation
regimes, deprive local Georgians, including youth, from
the possibility of fully participating in almost every
aspect of life and from having a say in decision-making
processes that directly affect them and their existence.
Young people of ethnic Georgian origin in both regions
are continuously deprived of basic human rights,
including the right to freedom of movement and, most
important, the right to receive education in their native
language. They are targets of ethnically based violence
and other forms of discrimination on ethnic grounds.
Against that backdrop, while we reaffirm our
commitment to promoting the engagement of youth in
decision-making processes, we call for the international
community’s increased attention in order to protect
young people’s rights in the occupied regions of Georgia
and in other conflict-affected areas around the world as
a matter of principle.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): We thank the Peruvian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

today’s open debate. The voices of the young women
from three different continents expressed the concerns
and aspirations of their peers from across the world,
including from the occupied Palestinian territories and
Rakhine state.
Bangladesh welcomed the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015) and eventually joined an informal group,
Champions for Youth, in support of the youth, peace
and security agenda. We consider the progress study
(see S/2018/86) to be an important contribution
to our discourse on a multidimensional agenda.
The recommendations contained therein provide a
comprehensive framework for promoting youth’s
potential role as the connective tissue in building and
sustaining peace. It is crucial that young people all
over the world be given an opportunity to realize their
potential, building on the foundations set forth in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Bangladesh is a fairly young country, with a large
population of young people. Our nation is projected
to harness the demographic dividend until 2035. We
see our young men and women blazing their trails
and leaving their footprints in almost all spheres of
life. They often challenge the status quo and then help
to chart a way forward through vibrant engagements
and consultations. In so doing, they carry forward the
proud legacy of youth leadership and participation
through our nation’s anti-colonial, independence and
democratic struggles.

S/PV. 8241

skill sets so that they can avail themselves of gainful
employment opportunities at home and abroad.
Some of the key challenges faced by our youth
are not necessarily unique to our context. Young men
and women remain vulnerable to violent extremist
narratives that can lead them astray, along the path of
radicalization and terrorism. A considerable number
of young people continue to fall prey to the motives
and trade of organized criminal networks involved in
trafficking om humans, drugs and arms. Traditional
gender norms and practices disproportionately impact
the potential of young women in particular.
Investment in youth makes eminent sense from all
points of view. The case for financing youth-centric and
youth-led initiatives is relevant not only for national
authorities, but also for international development
partners. The United Nations Peacebuilding Fund has
demonstrated some useful precedents and results in
that regard; it would be advisable for others to follow
its lead.
Finally, I have personally seen, again and again,
how young people among our troops and police continue
to make a difference in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. With the right environment and tools, young
people can indeed prove to be a force to reckon with for
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.

In recognition of our youth’s seminal role in
national peace and development, our Honourable Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina has presented the vision of an
inclusive, knowledge-driven economy under the slogan
“A Digital Bangladesh”. The vision aims to turn our
young men and women into true agents of change by
creating an enabling policy environment for them.

Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate on youth and peace and security, and
for your continued support for youth issues. We also
thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and the
lead author of the progress study on youth and peace
and security (see S/2018/86) for their briefings.

The updated national youth development policy
adopted by our Government last year exemplifies our
efforts to ascertain that no young person is left behind
on our national development pathway. The policy
upholds the provisions in our Constitution that ensure
the rights, justice and equity for all young people,
irrespective of gender, religion, caste, ethnicity or
physical and mental abilities. Our Government remains
committed to implementing an inclusive education
policy that fosters critical thinking and a culture of
peace among our young people and provides them with

Thanks to the leadership of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, resolution 2250 (2015) was adopted three
years ago. Since then, significant efforts have been made
to mainstream and highlight the positive work of young
people in issues of peace and security. The United Arab
Emirates welcomes the efforts that led to the progress
study and commends its participatory approach. We
find the study especially valuable in addressing longheld stereotypical beliefs and ideas concerning youth,
and called for a more detailed and balanced approach
when crafting policies related to young people.

18-1189477/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

The United Arab Emirates attaches great
importance to developing a more comprehensive notion
of peace, with a focus on the prevention of extremism
and violence, while addressing the root causes of
those issues. The study highlights the fact that in our
quest for peace and security, young are indispensable
allies. I would like to underscore the importance of
the work of women and girls. We see that the agendas
of youth, peace and security and of women and peace
and security overlap in several areas. We therefore
encourage building on former achievements.
Given the high number of young people who
experience violence worldwide, as highlighted in the
study, and against the backdrop of a region beset by
conflict in recent years, the United Arab Emirates
looks to its youth and the youth of the region to become
positive drivers of peace. With strong political backing
at the highest level, the United Arab Emirates has
taken concrete steps nationally towards the meaningful
inclusion of youth in decision-making processes. In
2016, the United Arab Emirates appointed a young
female Minister of State for Youth Affairs. Since the
appointment, several mechanisms and initiatives have
been established, including the establishment of youth
councils at every level of Government and the adoption
of a national youth strategy. Those steps underpin an
open policy of engagement that is the cornerstone of
nurturing a peaceful and thriving society.
It is a common understanding that maintaining
peace does not equate to simply ensuring the absence of
violence. The United Arab Emirates is of the view that
many of the challenges in our region cannot be solved
without exploring the potential of young people and their
active involvement. Our role as key policy-makers is to
provide young people with the proper tools for success,
such as good education, competitive job markets, equal
opportunities and a nurturing environment, all of
which, as the progress study illustrates, are among the
most important factors of growth and peace.
In the United Arab Emirates, we take pride in
supporting a tolerant and moderate model that provides
alternatives to the cycles of extremism and violence
in our region, with the aim of unlocking a talented,
creative and innovative generation. At the heart of that
model is a focus on prevention that underpins the stakes
and investments that we have made in pursuing a policy
of engaging and empowering youth. Building on that,
the United Arab Emirates is home to such initiatives as
the Arab Youth Centre, which provides opportunities
78/86

23/04/2018

for young Arab pioneers in different fields to mobilize
their peers and take part in the sustainable development
of their communities.
In conclusion, it is our duty as Member States to
mainstream and embrace youth in our work at the United
Nations as one of the solutions to reach our goals. The
United Arab Emirates launched the Youth Delegate
Programme in 2016, which involves Emirati youth
in the official United Arab Emirates delegations that
participate in General Assembly meetings, committees
and relevant international forums. Convinced of the
importance of such programmes, we encourage all
States to launch programmes for youth delegates and
enrich the work of the General Assembly with a youth
perspective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Monaco.
Ms. Picco (Monaco): More than half of the world’s
population is under the age of 30 and nearly 90 per
cent of those young people live in the very areas where
the United Nations deploys most of its peacekeeping
missions. Graeme Simpson’s progress study on youth
and peace and security (see S/2018/86), mandated by
resolution 2250 (2015), strikingly illuminates the long
road that still has to be travelled to fully mobilize the
tremendous asset that is young people, who are too
often the victims of armed conflict and conspicuously
absent from peace processes and conflict resolution.
I will limit myself to the remarkably innovative
and ingenious action, highlighted in Graeme Simpson’s
study, of young people who use sport to deal with their
suffering, foster their demobilization and facilitate
their reintegration.
As the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
recognizes, sport has made a growing contribution to
development and peace in its promotion of tolerance
and respect, the empowerment of women and youth,
individuals and communities, as well as health,
education and social inclusion objectives.
The Group of Friends of Sport for Development
and Peace, which Monaco has co-chaired since 2010
with Tunisia, promotes the unique tool that brings
together communities and individuals — a tool that
deserves further integration into strategies for both
conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation and
peacebuilding. The testimonies that we receive from the
Group of Friends are unequivocal: sport is a simple and
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

effective vehicle for bridging social, religious and racial
gaps and even for combating gender discrimination.
Founded in 2007 in Monaco by Olympic champion
Joël Bouzou, the organization Peace and Sport enjoys the
patronage of Prince Albert II. It supports programmes
in five continents and benefits from a network of
champions for peace. Sporting activities are particularly
important on a day-to-day basis, because of crowding
in camps for refugee and internally displaced persons,
and for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
That was demonstrated in 2017 in South Sudan with a
volleyball competition, and more recently, in 2018, as
part of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, where the Civil Affairs
Division organized a football tournament to promote
education and social cohesion.
The universal language of sport perfectly
encapsulates the four ‘P’s of resolution 2250 (2015):
participation, protection, prevention and partnerships.
We must not underestimate the capacity of sport
to contribute to curbing violence, restoring trust,
re-establishing social ties, ensuring the reintegration
of ex-combattants and supporting their physical and
emotional recovery.
The recommendations in paragraph 60 of the study
are particularly interesting. The investment of $1 per
young person between today and 2025 — which will
mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015) — would be a great symbolic success, all
the more resounding if it young people are involved. We
are fully confident that the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth will be able to assist us in achieving that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Cortorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We wish to congratulate the Security
Council, under the presidency of Peru, for convening
this first open debate since the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security, as well as
Mr. Simpson for presenting the progress study on the
subject (see S/2018/86). We also extend our sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth
and the representative of civil society for sharing their
important perspectives.
Resolution 2250 (2015) is a historic document and
a point of reference for Member States to give a greater
voice to young people in decision-making and to

S/PV. 8241

implement mechanisms that allow them to participate
meaningfully in peace processes. The study not only
places young people at the forefront of a dialogue that
directly impacts them, but also serves as an inspiration
for us to take advantage of the unique energy that
they possess to fulfil the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, namely, Goal 16, on the promotion of
peace and inclusive societies.
We must be careful when viewing young people only
as perpetrators or victims of violence. Young people
have a pivotal role in guaranteeing the success of efforts
to maintain lasting peace, promote peacebuilding and
achieve more equal and just societies. We must therefore
guarantee their active and meaningful participation in
that regard.
It is essential that we ensure respect for the law and
the protection and full enjoyment of human rights, with
greater attention given to the most vulnerable young
people, with a view to prevention and the consolidation
of peace. It is also urgent that we guarantee young
people access to quality education and social protection,
as well as economic empowerment.
We are pleased to see that the study addresses
various types of violence. One of the most appalling
types of violence is that perpetrated against women,
affecting mainly young women, which is an evil that
afflicts many countries of the world. In that regard, the
Dominican Republic is working to train young people,
primarily men, in the areas of analysis, prevention and
eradication of violence against women.
Moreover, climate change threatens the peace and
security of nations, from the hurricanes that beset
our region, to drought, increasing temperatures and
water scarcity, which contribute to social upheaval and
violent conflict, thereby directly affecting the security
and development prospects of young people around
the world. In that vein, involving youth in creating
awareness about climate change is essential if we are to
respond immediately and effectively.
We must exercise caution when it comes to the
dangerous narrative of exclusively highlighting
programmes that support young people involved in
conflict. We tend to forget to foster more programmes
that favour young people who contribute to
peacebuilding. Many organizations do not have enough
funding to achieve their peace and security goals,
which limits their work and the scope and impact of
their projects. We need further alliances among young

18-1189479/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

people, Governments, civil society and the international
community.
Gathering data is crucial, not only to be able to
calculate exactly how many young people are exposed to
different forms of violence or have their rights infringed,
but also to be able to guide policies and programmes
aimed at the empowerment and the well-being of our
youth, primarily based on the five pillars of resolution
2250 (2015). We recognize that monitoring the progress
made in implementing the resolution is fundamental,
as with the women and peace and security agenda,
through an annual report to analyse the implementation
of the recommendations of the study.
The Dominican Republic plans to join the Security
Council as a non-permanent member during the period
2019-2020, and those will be part of our priorities. We
understand that we should not only address the youth,
peace and security agenda in isolation or solely in
open debates, but also in other discussions within the
Council, the General Assembly and the United Nations
system.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic is fully
committed to implementing the recommendations of
the progress study pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015).
We hope to have an opportunity as a Council member
to continue working with the United Nations, Member
States and civil society to advance the goals of the
youth, peace and security agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, I wish to thank the Peruvian presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth and the other briefers for providing us with
valuable information.
Egypt has duly taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s progress study on youth and peace and
security (see S/2018/86) and its recommendations.
Egypt has a young population, with about
22 million people between the ages of 18 and 29,
namely, 24 per cent of the total population. We
believe that young people are the main driving force
that societies need for development and progress, for
avoiding wars and conflicts and for peacebuilding. For
that reason, article 82 of our Constitution stipulates
that the State guarantees the care of youth and must
80/86

23/04/2018

help them discover their talents and develop their
cultural, scientific, psychological and physical abilities,
including encouraging them to engage in group and
volunteer activity and enabling them to take part in
public life.
Egypt celebrated International Youth Day last
August, under the slogan “The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”. In that regard, Egypt
hosted the World Youth Forum for the period from 4 to
11 November 2017, with more than 3,000 participants
from all over the world, including Heads of State
and Government, personal envoys, thinkers, public
figures and academics, as well as the participation of
research centres and private sector. The Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme also
participated in the forum representing the SecretaryGeneral.
The Forum discussed aspects of the study prepared
by the Secretary-General. It simulated five Security
Council meetings on topics such as means to address
the threats to world peace and security posed by
terrorist organizations, irregular migration, challenges
faced by states and immigrants, as well as the impact of
conflict on peoples and nations, with the means to limit
their danger on development and the youth.
Resolution 2250 (2015) represents the starting
point for a legal framework for the youth, peace and
security agenda. However, such a framework will bear
fruit only if it is accompanied by a set of practical steps
that will help to strengthen the role of youth and their
participation in their societies, and protect them from
extremism and conflict. In that context, I would like to
make the following observations.
It is important to give young people economic and
educational opportunities to break the vicious cycle
of extremism and violence. We must include them in
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
locally and internationally, and harness their innovative
capacities in forming new international partnerships
between States and international financing entities
to spur economic activity and address post-conflict
rebuilding. It is also important to acknowledge young
people’s needs and address the root causes of conflict.
Moreover, we must safeguard and respect their national
and cultural identities with a view to preventing them
from sliding into extremism.
In his forthcoming report, the Secretary-General
would be well-advised to especially focus on young
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8241

people in occupied Arab territories, as is noted briefly
in the progress study. They are subjected to violations by
the occupying Power when they stand up for their cause.
We must also include young people in decision-making
processes. To that end, we have launched a leadership
programme that aims to build upon and mobilize
their capacities to take decisions in governance,
administration and public policy. Civil society
organizations, especially those led by young people,
also play an important role in preventing extremism.

effective responses to today’s complex crises, prevent
conflicts and sustainably prepare their countries for
the future. Resolution 2250 (2015), which the Security
Council adopted unanimously in December 2015,
marked the beginning of a process that will secure a
more relevant role for young people in the maintenance
and promotion of international peace and security. We
have translated it into Portuguese to ensure that the text
is more widely known to relevant stakeholders and the
general public.

Furthermore, it is also important to incorporate
the gender dimension in all youth programmes through
capacity-building, particularly of women and young
people. Volunteer opportunities contribute to the
development of young people’s skills. In that regard,
we commend the efforts undertaken by United Nations
Volunteers. Media can also play an important role in
raising awareness on a culture of peace and combating
violent ideologies.

As the progress study on youth, peace and security
(see S/2018/86) clearly states, young people are already
seeking ways to prevent violence and consolidate peace
around the world. It is our responsibility to ensure
that they are heard and recognized as true partners for
peace. The study also indicates that for young women
and men, peace and security depend on human rightsbased protections and redress. Portugal fully agrees
with that. Young people can be partners for peace only
if their rights are fully respected, whether political,
civil, social, economic or cultural.

We reiterate the call of the World Youth Forum,
held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, to establish an
international electronic forum to develop strategies to
tackle the challenges facing young people worldwide.
The various international conferences throughout
the world strengthen opportunities for dialogue
among youth, but also between young people and
their Governments, as well as with civil society and
international organizations. In that regard, Egypt
emphasizes the importance of holding the World Youth
Forum in November of each year. We call on everybody
to participate in the forum.
In conclusion, we acknowledge that there are many
conflicts that draw in young people. They might spill
beyond conflict zones and borders. The issue under
consideration today is the first step to creating a
practical framework to engage young people in working
towards a more peaceful world. We must cooperate to
counter the adverse consequences of an environment
that pulls young people towards violence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to
commend the Peruvian presidency for convening today’s
open debate on youth, peace and security. Young people
currently represent a majority of the populations in
countries affected by conflict. As the largest generation
ever, one-fourth of the world’s population, the efforts
of young people will be essential if we are to ensure

Young people are often more vulnerable to violent
extremism. They are also more prone to being recruited
into extremist groups, partly owing to a sense of
marginalization and social and economic exclusion.
Ultimately, a lack of kinship and belonging leads
to young people’s alienation and disfranchisement,
which in turn aggravates their vulnerability. That is
exacerbated in our globalized societies by extremists
and terrorists’ growing use of information and
communication technologies to incite, recruit, fund
and plan terrorist acts, disseminating a false narrative
of glory and a sense of empowerment, all of it just a
computer click away.
We must therefore work to ensure that young
people’s human rights are fully respected and that
they can be meaningful members of society. It is
also important to ensure that they can participate
meaningfully and inclusively in political life. In that
regard, Portugal fully agrees with the progress study’s
recommendations on enhancing the capacity of youth
organizations and recognizing youth leadership. For
those purposes, we believe there is no greater tool
than education. The full realization of the right to an
education, including higher education, is crucial to
achieving those goals and ensuring that young men and
women are part of the solution rather than part of the
problem. That is especially important in crisis situations.
Portugal has been supporting the Global Platform for

18-1189481/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

Syrian Students, which is an excellent example of
how the international community can work together
to create opportunities for those affected by crisis and
emergencies and ensure a future for their country and
region. I would like to take this opportunity to call on
all partners to support the Global Platform, as well as
the recently launched Rapid Response Mechanism for
Higher Education in Emergencies.
In conclusion, Portugal has always been a staunch
supporter of the youth agenda at the United Nations and
firmly believes that the World Programme of Action
for Youth, established with the adoption by consensus
of General Assembly resolution 50/81, 20 years ago,
continues to offer an adequate response to the serious
challenges faced by young populations, since it
provides Member States with a blueprint for practical
guidelines for national action and international
support. Furthermore, Portugal has continuously and
consistently encouraged the participation of young
delegates in international events related to youth. In our
view, investing in policies and programmes to create
an enabling environment for young people to prosper,
fulfil their potential, enjoy their human rights and
engage as responsible social actors is a prerequisite for a
successful collective strategy against the dissemination
of violent extremism and for the maintenance of peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Ms. Moutchou (Morocco) (spoke in French):
At the outset, my delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate on
youth, peace and security.
Today, a quarter of the world’s population is under
the age of 24. This is the largest generation of young
people the world has ever seen. They are therefore
decisive agents of social development and represent
tremendous potential for sustainable development. The
United Nations proclaimed 1985 as the International
Youth Year, thereby laying the foundations for the
global consideration of youth-related issues. Ten
years later, the General Assembly adopted the World
Programme of Action for Youth, which offered practical
guidelines to improve the situation of young people. For
its part, resolution 2250 (2015) recognized for the first
time the positive role played by young people in the
promotion of lasting peace, defining them as important
82/86

23/04/2018

partners in global efforts to achieve peace and combat
violent extremism.
As the world evolves, so do the issues facing young
people, who today are bearing witness to a world where
poverty goes hand in hand with the concentration of
wealth, where ignorance exacerbates social tensions
and where conflict causes them to doubt the promise
of a better future. In the face of exclusion, lack of
opportunities and unemployment, the ambitions
of young people morph into frustrations that are
exploited by criminal and extremist groups. We must
bridge this gap exploited by the enemies of humanity,
peace and development. The long-term solution to
youth radicalization lies in building more inclusive,
participatory and egalitarian societies.
It is in this spirit that Morocco has for years
undertaken numerous commitments to young people,
particularly by giving pride of place to youth in
the Constitution of Morocco, calling on the public
authorities to universalize the participation of young
people in the Kingdom’s socioeconomic, cultural and
political development. We have adopted a quota for
young people in Parliament, launched an integrated
national strategy for youth for 2015-2030, and created
a national institute for youth and democracy, a
national youth documentation and information centre
and an advisory council for youth, as called for by
the Constitution, and other training and integration
centres for young people. In Rabat, we have created
the Union of Young African Parliamentarians, which
fosters exchanges and cooperation among young
parliamentarians on the African continent. We have set
up a national initiative for human development, which,
inter alia, focuses on the promotion of the well-being of
all population groups, specifically young people.
We commemorate Youth Day, an annual event that
highlights royal solicitude and provides an opportunity
to appreciate the projects set up for young people and
to take stock of the achievements and accomplishments
made in the field of youth promotion. In March 2017, in
the context of implementing resolution 2250 (2015), we
held a national forum on young people facing violence,
extremism and the promotion of peace and security,
which was enshrined by the Bouznika appeal.
To conclude, allow me to emphasize the two
following points. First, young people are often
a preferred target of extremist rhetoric, which is
anathema to coexistence and the culture of peace.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The establishment of sustained dialogue among
young people on issues concerning youth, peace and
security will allow them to strengthen their defences
against hate speech, radicalization and extremism.
Secondly, youth empowerment and participation
in public life are key factors in the construction and
development of peaceful societies. This requires us to
seek new opportunities for the effective, structured and
sustained participation of young people in all aspects of
political, economic, social and cultural life, particularly
through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
expressing our appreciation to the presidency of Peru
for organizing this important open debate on youth,
peace and security. It offers a timely occasion to reflect,
ahead of tomorrow’s high-level event of the General
Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, on
how best to involve youth in efforts towards that end.
We note the progress study (see S/2018/86) prepared in
response to resolution 2250 (2015), and look forward to
its full version.
In conflict-stricken and fragile regions, young
people are frequently disproportionately affected by
violence, unemployment, lack of access to education
and medical and social services. Young migrants,
refugees and internally displaced persons are often
trapped in conflict zones. Most of the casualties in
armed conflicts are young men, while young women
are at heightened risk of physical and sexual abuse.
The negative stereotypes that depict young people
as victims or perpetrators of conflict hinder their
participation in peacebuilding processes. In this respect,
we firmly believe that young men and women should
be involved in the elaboration and implementation of
youth policies, specifically those supporting youth
peacebuilding interventions.
In the face of increasing global threats, prevention
is the most effective strategy to protect our societies
from armed conflicts and violent extremism. Only by
tackling the underlying root causes can Governments
prevent the spread of and eradicate these scourges.
There is a strong need for soft strategies that identify
and pre-emptively address radicalization and other
factors that drive conflict. Young people are more
susceptible to adopting extremist ideologies. In this

S/PV. 8241

regard, intercultural dialogue is a tangible instrument
for promoting respect for diversity, pluralism and
human rights among youth.
My country, with its tradition of tolerance and
peaceful coexistence among ethnic communities and
the three major religions, has successfully incorporated
multiculturalism into State policy. Since the launch of
the Baku process in 2008, it has become a key global
platform for dialogue between people. Since 2011,
the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue has been
organized biannually by Azerbaijan. This initiative
is recognized by the Secretary-General as a global
platform for cross-cultural dialogue.
As the study points out, “peace and security are
more than just the absence of violence” (S/2018/86,
para. 20). Engaging young people in meaningful and
transformative opportunities, supporting their personal
progress and recognizing their role as agents of positive
change is crucial in order to help them develop strong
values and principles. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development pledges to leave no one behind. Including
young people in all aspects of decision-making and
fostering their participation in global processes will
not only benefit the sustainable development of our
societies, but will also give them a sense of purpose
and identity. In this context, my country, Azerbaijan,
has successfully carried out policies that support youth
empowerment and benefit their economic and social
integration. The National Youth Foundation and the
Ministry of Youth and Sports are the main State bodies
responsible for the coordination and implementation of
youth policies.
We actively encourage and promote international
youth cooperation. In 2014, Azerbaijan hosted the first
Global Forum on Youth Policies, jointly convened by
the Office of the United Nations Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, the United Nations Development
Programme, UNESCO and the Council of Europe. The
forum brought together over 700 participants from 165
countries and 115 Governments, thereby becoming the
biggest conference ever to be held exclusively on youth
policies. In 2017, the thirteenth World Scout Youth
Forum and the forty-first World Scout Conference
were held in Azerbaijan under the theme “Together for
positive change”, with the participation of more than
1,500 delegates from 151 national Scout organizations.
Volunteering is another powerful tool for positive
youth participation. By engaging youth in various

18-1189483/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

large-scale international events, Azerbaijan has
provided the latter with many volunteer opportunities.
The ASAN Volunteers Organization, a branch of the
State agency for Government services to citizens of
Azerbaijan, provides a venue for volunteers to prepare
for future careers and develop a sense of community
and social responsibility.
To conclude, let me reiterate that we are fully
committed to supporting young people at both the
national and international levels and to encouraging
youth engagement initiatives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): Allow me at the outset
to thank the Peruvian presidency for convening this
important open debate on youth, peace and security. In
a world where both conflict and young populations are
growing, it is easy to fall into the negative narrative
relating young people to the problem, perceiving them
as either the perpetrators or the victims of violence, and
rarely as part of the solution.
However, this narrative is changing, as young people
are now considered the missing piece in achieving and
maintaining international peace and security. Since
2011, this has been the case in Tunisia, where young
women and men decided to take matters into their own
hands and peacefully changed the course of history
in the country. The majority of young people around
the world still face challenges that keep them from
reaching their full potential. Member States, United
Nations agencies and all relevant stakeholders need to
cooperate and multiply their efforts in this regard.
First, it is our responsibility to create a conducive
environment in which young women and men will
thrive. This can be done only by listening and
understanding young people and their needs through
sustained mechanisms of interaction. Our focus should
not be only on young people in conflict situations or on
those who are already involved in peacebuilding. An
inclusive representation of young people from different
backgrounds and in different circumstances is our tool
on the path towards conflict prevention.
Secondly, the role of youth in realizing peace and
security should not be considered without recognizing
the correlation between human rights and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Young women
and men must be, first and foremost, perceived
84/86

23/04/2018

and treated as rights bearers. Their participation in
peacebuilding processes cannot reach its full potential
without enabling them to be effective stakeholders
in society.
As Tunisians are only a few days away from
completing a full cycle of democratic and free
elections for the first time by electing their municipal
representatives, a focus on the role of young people in
this process has been reinforced. A system of youth
quotas was adopted in the electoral law, ensuring a
direct and equitable participation of young people all
over the country.
Thirdly, we need to realize that the role of youth
in peace and security is a cross-cutting issue that goes
beyond the political process. We need to uncover the
root causes of the challenges faced by young people,
mainly their economic and social situations. Sustaining
peace and security first requires the economic inclusion
of young people in order to ensure their well-being
and livelihood.
Finally, a focus on gender is key in order to allow
young women to play their full, effective role in
promoting and maintaining peace and security. As the
perception of identity develops mainly during youth, we
need to shape the concept of gender among young people
by promoting respect, equality and inclusiveness. It is
also important to provide young women with training
opportunities to take an active part in peacebuilding.
With the adoption of a new law on eliminating violence
against women in July 2017, Tunisia is determined to
achieve the goal of gender equality and to combat all
forms of discrimination against women, particularly
young women and girls.
With their energy, ability to adapt and innovative
minds, youth could be mobilized as mediators,
community mobilizers, humanitarian workers and
peacebuilders. Their capacities need to be nurtured and
supported. Today’s open debate helps us to send a signal
to young people around the world that their voices
are heard and that their power as agents of change is
recognized. Tunisia remains committed to continuing
to work at the national, regional and international
levels and with all relevant stakeholders — especially
youth — to advance their rights and ensure the
realization of their full capacity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
18-11894

23/04/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on such a vital topic, shedding light on the
progress achieved since the adoption of resolution
2550 (2015), the first Security Council resolution to
focus on youth in the context of peace, security and
sustainable development.
I would like also to thank Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth; Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author of the
progress study on youth and peace and security
(see S/2018/86); and Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine,
Member of the Advisory Council of the World Young
Women’s Christian Association, for their valuable
briefings and for the progress study. We are thankful
for the progress achieved since the adoption of the
aforementioned resolution.
The Kingdom of Bahrain confirms the need
to address the root causes of the exploitation and
recruitment of youth to serve terrorist and extremist
groups by empowering young people in all fields and
involving them in the development process in their
countries so as to use their potential in the service of
their countries’ construction and development.
The Kingdom of Bahrain believes in the importance
of investing in youth. Our world has technological and
scientific assets that would allow young people to become
active and productive in their countries, particularly as
this group accounts for 2 billion people — equivalent
to one third of the world’s population. We therefore
recognize the importance of the role that youth can play
in the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals so that we can live in a world in which justice,
tolerance and peace prevail.
We note that national initiatives focusing on youth
allow institutions to eliminate stereotypes that have
long linked young people to violence and extremism.
At the national level, the Kingdom of Bahrain
operationalized its national youth strategy in 2003,
and last year the Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs
organized a Youth Forum on Peacebuilding to promote
the potential of Bahrain’s youth as peacemakers in the
face of violence and terrorism. The Forum shed light on
the concept of world peace, debated that concept from
different perspectives and provided an opportunity to
learn about the expertise and efforts of participating
States and international organizations in the field of
peacebuilding. It also promoted the culture of tolerance

S/PV. 8241

and moderation in society drew up a future blueprint to
promote peace and fight terrorism.
The Kingdom of Bahrain realized the importance
for Government organizations, private and public
institutions, international organizations and individuals
to participate in empowering youth. In cooperation
with the United Nations Development Programme and
the Economic and Social Council, it organized the King
Hamad Award to empower young people to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. This is the first award
of its kind in the region, aiming to incentivize sectors
around the world to focus on youth and prioritize them
in national programmes of action.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has also launched
pioneering initiatives for youth around the world as
a means of providing the necessary environments in
which to share ideas and shed light on their creative
initiatives. The Ministry for Youth and Sports Affairs
also launched the global Nasser Bin Hamad Youth
Creativity Award, in which young people from over
112 countries around the world participated. The award
focuses on the creative achievements of young people
in scientific and technological fields and promotes their
participation in competitions.
The progress study on youth, peace and security,
contained in the letter from the Secretary-General,
refers to the fact that youth-led peace and security work
is noticeably innovative and resourceful in using art,
sport and media. I note that the Kingdom of Bahrain
recently hosted the first Arab Conference on Sport,
on the role of sport in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals in the Arab world. The Conference
was organized by the Ministry of Youth and Sports
Affairs, in cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme in the Kingdom and the
International Council for Health, Physical Education
and Sport, with emphasis on the role of sports as a
gateway to peace.
In this context, we would also like to mention
that the increased use of social media by young
people is positive. Societies have become more open
to each other and it has become easier to make new
acquaintances and exchange ideas, concepts and
experiences. Social media sites have become a bridge
for dialogue on various topics and a tool allowing
youths to participate freely in their countries and make
their voices heard by officials in their own countries. It
is therefore most necessary to preserve cyberspace as a

18-1189485/86

S/PV.8241

Maintenance of international peace and security

tool for the positive development of societies, and not to
use it for destructive ideas.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain will
continue to pursue this approach in encouraging
national and global initiatives in order to allow young

86/86

23/04/2018

people to play their due role in achieving sustainable
peace and security. We shall also continue to work with
the international community to share our best practices
in this field.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

18-11894
