S/2014/105*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 February 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2048
(2012) and 2103 (2013), and covers major political, security, human rights,
humanitarian and socioeconomic developments since my past report, of 19 November
2013 (S/2013/680).

II. Restoration of and respect for constitutional order
A.

Political situation

1.

Overview of the political situation in the country
2.
The political landscape during the period under review was dominated by
preparations for the upcoming general elections, the continuing political crisis
within the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC)
and the investigation into the circumstances surrounding the arrival in and departure
from Bissau of 74 individuals allegedly of Syrian nationality.
3.
On 7 December, the Transitional President, Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, held a
meeting that was attended by representatives of 21 political parties, the armed forces
and the international community to discuss a possible extension of the transition
period, which was expected to end on 31 December 2013. On 27 December, the
Permanent Commission of the National Assembly approved the extension until the
election and subsequent swearing-in of new parliamentarians.
4.
The National Assembly met the Transitional Prime Minister on 10 December
and the Minister of Territorial Administration of the Transitional Government on
13 December for an update on the status of the voter registration process. On
13 December, the Director General of the Technical Office for Support to the
Electoral Process informed the National Assembly that it would not be possible to
complete the process by 30 December owing to the limited number of available
voter registration kits.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 25 February 2014.

14-23247* (E) 250214

*1423247*

S/2014/105

5.
In the meantime, PAIGC remained engulfed in an internal crisis in the run-up
to its national congress, at which it was expected that the party’s organs and
presidential candidate would be elected. The regional congresses, held to elect
delegates to the national congress, were marked by bitter divisions and, at times,
violent confrontations. On 21 December, a coalition including two PAIGC
presidential candidates, Carlos Correia and Adja Satú Camará, as well as Domingos
Simões Pereira, a candidate for the PAIGC leadership, signed a document entitled
“Alliance for unity and cohesion in PAIGC”. The document’s signatories also called
for an amendment to the PAIGC statutes to allow the president of the party to have
responsibility for chairing the main organs of the party and the general secretary to
head the party’s list in the legislative elections (in the event of the party’s victory,
the general secretary would become prime minister).
6.
In December, supporters of Braima Camará, a candidate for the PAIGC
leadership, challenged the rulings of the PAIGC legal department on the results of
the regional congresses in the regions of Oio and Bafatá, in north-central GuineaBissau. Concerned about the potential impact on the country of PAIGC being barred
from the elections owing to a failure to provide its list of legislative candidates
within the legal time limit, on 8 January the Transitional President requested my
Special Representative, José Ramos-Horta, and the African Union Special
Representative, Ovidio Pequeno, to assist him in mediating the crisis. Mr. RamosHorta and Mr. Pequeno worked together to persuade all sides not to allow political
differences and personal animosities to undermine efforts to bring the transition
period to a conclusion.
7.
On 10 January, the Regional Court of Bissau ruled in favour of Mr. Camará’s
supporters with regard to the regional congress in Oio. On 17 January, the Regional
Court of Bafatá ruled against his supporters regarding the regional congress in
Bafatá. On 24 January, the PAIGC Central Committee reorganized the election for
the regional congress of Oio, leading to the election of supporters of Mr. Simões
Pereira.
8.
On 29 January, deposed Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior, who was leading
PAIGC at the time of the coup d’état of 12 April 2012, announced that he would be
a candidate for the presidential election, without specifying whether he would do so
under the PAIGC banner. The party’s national congress, which was postponed on
several occasions, eventually commenced on 2 February in the north-western town
of Cachéu. On 9 February, the national congress elected Domingos Simões Pereira
as president of the party.
9.
On 1 January, Koumba Yalá, former President and former leader of the Party
for Social Renewal (PRS), stated that he would be retiring from active political life.
On 30 January, PRS elected Abel Incada, a businessman, as its presidential
candidate.
10. On 19 January, the Guinea-Bissau Forum, a coalition of 23 political parties
previously referred to as the Forum of Political Parties selected Fernando Vaz to
lead their electoral list in the upcoming elections. Mr. Vaz is currently the minister
in charge of the Council of Ministers and spokesperson for the Transitional
Government. He is also the leader of the non-parliamentary Guinean Patriotic
Union. The Guinea-Bissau Forum selected Afonso Té, its Chair and the leader of the
Republican Party for Independence and Development, as its presidential candidate.

2/9

14-23247

S/2014/105

11. On 10 December, 74 individuals claiming to be Syrian nationals who had
arrived in Bissau from Casablanca, Morocco, attempted to board a commercial
flight to Lisbon with fake passports. As a result of the intervention of the security
forces of Guinea-Bissau and the Minister of the Interior of the Transitional
Government, the flight crew were allegedly forced to transport the 74 individuals to
Lisbon. Upon arrival, the individuals requested asylum from Portugal. The airline
suspended its flights to and from Bissau.
12. On 23 December, the Minister of Justice of the Transitional Government
announced that the commission of inquiry that had been established on 13 December
to investigate the incident had concluded that the insistence shown by the Minister
of the Interior of the Transitional Government that led the airline to transport the
74 individuals to Lisbon was due to “internal security reasons”. The commission
had also concluded that a transnational criminal network with links to personnel
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the international airport in Bissau and the
State Information Services was involved. On the same day, the Transitional Prime
Minister informed the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) that the report of the commission would be submitted to the
Office of the Prosecutor-General for investigation and that the Transitional
Government would request the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) to assist the authorities of Guinea-Bissau in dealing with the
transnational criminal network.
2.

Overview of the human rights situation in the country
13. During the reporting period, no significant progress was made in the areas of
human rights protection and the fight against impunity. There were new cases of
political harassment of former and current members of the Transitional Government
and a widespread sense of insecurity and impunity. Restrictions on the right to
freedom of expression and assembly, imposed since the coup d’état of 2012,
remained in force.
14. Following the beating of the Minister of Transportation and Communications
of the Transitional Government on 5 November 2013, reportedly by armed men,
some wearing military uniforms, the Prosecutor-General pledged to carry out an
investigation into the incident. Between 12 and 15 November, the Judiciary Police
interrogated eight suspects, including the Commander of the Rapid Intervention
Police. All were released without charge.
15. On 21 November, the former Minister of the Presidency of the Council of
Ministers and electoral campaign manager of former Prime Minister Carlos Gomes
Júnior, deposed in 2012, Adiatu Djalo Nandigna, was detained and interrogated for
several hours by the State Information Services upon her return to Bissau, for
having “illegally left the country” following the coup d’état of April 2012.
16. On 12 December, the Prosecutor-General briefed parliamentarians on the
status of investigations into grave human rights violations, politically motivated
beatings and assassinations. He cited insufficient material and human resources, as
well as the non-cooperation of State institutions, as barriers to the administration of
justice. With regard to the killing in March 2009 of the former Chief of General
Staff of the armed forces, General Tagmé Na Waie, he stated that the investigative
process was complete but that a trial date had yet to be set. Regarding the
assassination of former President João Bernardo Vieira in March 2009, he said that

14-23247

3/9

S/2014/105

the hearings of two crucial witnesses were pending. He added that problems over
the physical security of those witnesses persisted, as Guinea-Bissau did not have a
witness protection law or corresponding mechanism. As to the killing of a Nigerian
citizen on 8 October 2013, he said that investigations by his office, the Judiciary
Police and the National Guard were still under way but had been hampered by the
lack of logistical means. He also noted that the authorities had not yet identified the
culprits behind the threats to life and property at the Embassy of Nigeria.
17. On 13 January, Carlos Costa, a member of the PAIGC Central Committee and
a leading member of the 2012 electoral campaign team of Mr. Gomes Júnior,
informed UNIOGBIS that he had been detained and interrogated on 11 January by
the National Guard and men in “plain clothes” for distributing electoral materials
bearing the image of Mr. Gomes Júnior left over from the 2012 presidential election
campaign.
3.

Regional and international efforts towards the restoration of and respect for
constitutional order
18. During the period under review, my Special Representative continued to
engage with international partners of Guinea-Bissau, in particular with a view to
encouraging the speedy delivery of pledged assistance for the electoral process. To
this end, he held regular information-sharing and coordination meetings with the
diplomatic corps accredited in Bissau. My Special Representative also encouraged
the Transitional Government and the Transitional President to hold regular meetings
with international partners, to improve communication with those providing support
to the electoral process.
19. At its 408th meeting, held in Addis Ababa on 13 December, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union requested the transitional authorities in
Guinea-Bissau to identify and take action against those suspected of involvement in
violence in the country. It urged the transitional authorities to ensure security sector
reform, as a precondition for the promotion of democracy and the rule of law. It also
appealed to the international community to support the reinforcement of the
Economic Community of West African States Mission in Bissau (ECOMIB).
20. On 8 January 2014, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
announced the appointment of Carlos Moura as its Special Representative to
Guinea-Bissau. Speaking to the media in Bissau on 14 January, Mr. Moura stressed
that, by appointing him, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries was
reiterating its commitment to assist Guinea-Bissau in ensuring that the elections
scheduled for 16 March would be held on time. He pledged to work closely with the
transitional authorities in that regard.
21. A mission of the International Organization of la Francophonie visited GuineaBissau from 10 to 13 December 2013 to assess electoral preparations and identify
possible areas of support. A United Nations electoral mission comprising
representatives of the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat travelled to
Guinea-Bissau from 8 to 16 January to assess the preparations being made for the
presidential and legislative elections. The European Union deployed an exploratory
mission from 9 to 16 January to determine the need for an electoral observation
mission.

4/9

14-23247

S/2014/105

4.

Efforts towards a democratic electoral process
22. The voter registration process, which aimed at registering an estimated voter
population of 810,961 persons, commenced on 1 December 2013. While the
operation was scheduled to run until 21 December, the Transitional Prime Minister
informed my Special Representative on 18 November that a decision had been made
to extend the voter registration period until 30 December. The extension contributed
to confusion among the population and to undermining confidence in the operation.
The lack of a national public information campaign, crucial for a voter registration
exercise carried out for the first time by mobile, not fixed, brigades, and the absence
of detailed updates by the transitional authorities added to the confusion and further
undermined confidence.
23. The initial days of operations were marked by long delays in the registration
process. Operations commenced with the distribution of voter registration kits
provided by the Government of Timor-Leste that had arrived in the country on
23 November.
24. The Government of Timor-Leste, through its electoral mission in GuineaBissau, provided financial and technical support that was critical for getting the
voter registration process under way. ECOWAS and its member States pledged
$19 million, a significant part of which was allocated to the payment of salaries of
field voter registration personnel. However, there were some initial delays in
disbursement owing to challenges encountered by the Transitional Government in
ensuring compliance with ECOWAS financial rules and minimum standards for
accountability.
25. In an effort to accelerate the voter registration process, the Transitional
Government requested the Government of Nigeria to assist in providing additional
voter registration kits. In response, the Government of Nigeria donated 300 kits and
deployed five information technology technicians to Bissau. The distribution of the
300 kits to voter registration locations was hampered, however, by a number of
technical problems.
26. During meetings convened on 4 and 5 January 2014 by the Transitional
President with various national and international stakeholders to discuss the voter
registration process, the Transitional Government announced that the voter
registration period would be extended until 30 January. On 6 January, the
Transitional Prime Minister sent a letter to the Speaker of Parliament requesting the
National Assembly’s agreement to shorten the electoral timelines to facilitate the
holding of the elections on 16 March. During a meeting on 8 January, the
Transitional President informed my Special Representative that the legislative and
executive branches had informally agreed that an extraordinary session of the
National Assembly would be convened once the voter registration had been
completed to discuss a reduction in the electoral timelines.
27. The voter registration process experienced both technical and planning
deficiencies, as well as challenges related to the coordination of national and
international stakeholders. The call made by the Transitional Government for each
international partner to manage its own contributions to the process did not facilitate
proper coordination and did not allow for the pooling and management of funding
and technical assistance by the United Nations Development Programme, as is done
traditionally.

14-23247

5/9

S/2014/105

28. On 14 January, upon the advice of my Special Representative, the Transitional
Prime Minister convened a meeting of the coordinating committee for the electoral
process and financial support for the general elections of 2013-2014, which had
been established on 31 October 2013. During the meeting, the committee discussed
a report on the first 30 days of the voter registration process provided by the
Technical Office for Support to the Electoral Process. In the report, the Technical
Office identified the late disbursement of funds as a major constraint for the
operation that had led to delays in the training of voter registration personnel and an
insufficient number of voter registration kits.
29. My Special Representative visited voter registration sites throughout the
country, including in Bissau and in the regions of Bafatá, Quinara, Cacheu, Biombo
and Oio. During all visits, he witnessed high numbers of people seeking to register
and noted the enthusiasm and motivation among the population.
30. By 30 January, the process had gained enough momentum for the Technical
Office for Support to the Electoral Process to announce in a press conference the
registration of 677,114 voters, 12,349 of whom were part of the diaspora,
representing about 83 per cent of the estimated voter population. Additional
progress was achieved with the deployment of 150 of the 300 voter registration kits
provided by the Government of Nigeria.
31. The voter registration process concluded on 10 February. Funding for the
following phase of the process (polling) has been secured through the generous
commitments made by the international partners of Guinea-Bissau, including the
ECOWAS Commission, the European Union, the Peacebuilding Fund of the United
Nations and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, as well as Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, TimorLeste, Togo, Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

B.

Security situation
32. During the reporting period, the security situation remained relatively stable.
On 4 January, during a security operation, military officers stopped a convoy in
which my Special Representative was travelling. When the case was reported to the
Transitional President, the Chief of General Staff of the armed forces issued a
communiqué in which he apologized for the inconvenience caused and ordered all
searches of vehicles to be terminated. However, UNIOGBIS has received reports
that the military has continued to search vehicles of diplomatic representatives.
33. On 24 December, the Minister of the Interior of the Transitional Government
approved and adopted a national electoral security plan for 2014, which had been
developed with the support of UNIOGBIS. According to the plan, electoral security
will fall under the auspices of a joint command of the Ministers of the Interior and
Defence of the Transitional Government, with the participation of ECOMIB. The
transitional authorities requested support from the National Electoral Commission,
ECOMIB and UNIOGBIS to facilitate the training of the police and military officers
operating under the joint command. On 23 January, UNIOGBIS and the Embassy of
Brazil in Guinea-Bissau agreed on modalities for the use of the Brazil-funded João
Landim training centre for internal security forces, in order to conduct such training.

6/9

14-23247

S/2014/105

34. The Transitional Prime Minister informed my Special Representative on
31 December 2013 that the military had been offering logistical support to the voter
registration brigades. During his field visits, my Special Representative was able to
observe, and therefore confirm, that such logistical support was being provided.

III. Socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
35. The social and economic situation in the country deteriorated further during
the period under review. According to provisional data, the financial situation in the
treasury of the Transitional Government became more acute in the fourth quarter of
2013. The Transitional Government faced increasing difficulties in paying civil
servants’ salaries in a timely manner, accruing up to three months’ salary arrears in
many cases.
36. Trade unions in the private sector also reported challenges related to salary
arrears. The two trade union confederations, the National Union of Guinean Workers
and the General Confederation of Independent Trade Unions, called a general strike
from 16 to 20 December that paralysed both the civil service and the private sector.
The trade unions demanded the payment of two months’ arrears. Transportation
operators also joined the strike, demanding an immediate end to the “stop”
operations conducted by traffic police. Anti-riot police teams were deployed in
strategic locations in Bissau to monitor possible gatherings during the first days of
the strike, but no security incidents were reported. The transportation sector stopped
the strike on the third day owing to complaints from the population.
37. The teachers’ strike, which started on 30 September, was lifted on 16 December
following an agreement between the two teachers’ unions and the Transitional
Government for the payment of four months of salary arrears. In order to ensure
satisfactory completion of the current school year, the teachers’ unions and the
Transitional Government signed a social pact for the education sector on
26 December; the pact was subsequently endorsed by the Transitional President. The
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), which provided technical support for
the process as a mediator, also signed the pact, as a witness, along with parents’
association and the students’ association of Guinea-Bissau. The pact aimed to create
a climate of social peace in the education sector and ensure the smooth and
uninterrupted functioning of classes, among other things.
38. In December 2013, the Transitional Government, the World Food Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Plan International and
other international partners published the results of an emergency food security
assessment conducted in August 2013 to evaluate the impact on food security of a
poor cashew marketing campaign and low market prices. The assessment concluded
that nearly half the population relied on cashew nut sales for their primary income.
It also highlighted that the drop in cashew nut prices experienced in 2013 had been
one of the main “shocks”, affecting 74 per cent of households, lowering income and
decreasing access to food commodities. The assessment also revealed that only 7 per
cent of the population was food secure, with levels varying according to the regions.
Oio and Quinara were the most food-insecure regions. The food security situation
was expected to stabilize between November 2013 and January 2014, but to
deteriorate again between February and June 2014 — the cashew harvest and
trading period. The World Food Programme has been implementing a protracted

14-23247

7/9

S/2014/105

recovery and relief operation in Guinea-Bissau, scheduled to be completed in
January 2015, that focuses on education, health, nutrition and food security. As part
of the operation, it is planned that food will be provided to approximately 150,000
beneficiaries annually.
39. During the reporting period, the southern region of Tombali was affected
by a cholera outbreak: 470 cases were recorded, resulting in 30 deaths as at
mid-December 2013. UNICEF and the World Health Organization have been
working with the Ministry of Health and non-governmental organizations to
mitigate the impact and halt the spread of the epidemic to other regions.

IV. Observations
40. The successful conclusion of voter registration is a milestone towards the
holding of credible, inclusive and peaceful legislative and presidential elections.
The initial problems encountered in the registration process did not dampen the
enthusiasm of the people of Guinea-Bissau in registering and obtaining voter
identification documents. I commend the people of Guinea-Bissau for their
commitment to exercise their democratic rights in a peaceful manner.
41. I welcome the efforts made by the transitional authorities to stay the course
despite significant technical and political challenges. I also commend the
international partners of Guinea-Bissau, particularly ECOWAS and the
Governments of Nigeria and Timor-Leste, for their support and for providing critical
equipment. The dedication of other partners that have made firm commitments to
support the polling phase is also highly appreciated.
42. It is critical that the momentum and enthusiasm that the voter registration
process has generated be maintained through the polling. The uncertainties that
affected the voter registration process almost to the end, including difficulties with
printing and the issuance of voter cards, may have raised some doubts, but on
balance the process has allowed for the inclusion of many who desired to register. I
encourage national stakeholders to continue to use legal means to resolve disputes
related to the voter registration process in the interest of peace and stability in the
country. I also urge all stakeholders to resolutely move forward to the next phase
with commitment, vigilance and a deep sense of shared responsibility.
43. I call upon the international partners to maintain their financial and technical
support to the electoral process, in particular through the timely delivery of such
support, with all necessary guarantees for transparency and accountability. I also
call for a redoubled effort at enhanced coordination of electoral assistance under the
leadership of my Special Representative, in line with Security Council resolution
2103 (2013) and in close collaboration with the United Nations country team.
44. While underscoring the progress made with the conclusion of voter
registration, I am aware of challenges that persist in ensuring that the nominating,
campaigning, actual polling, counting and results management processes take place
as scheduled and in a peaceful, orderly, transparent and credible fashion, with full
acceptance of the results by all stakeholders. In this regard, I take note in particular
of the impact of the extended voter registration process on the timelines for the key
tasks that remain, and call upon all stakeholders to urgently address this issue with
the necessary flexibility. I finally urge all people of Guinea-Bissau, including

8/9

14-23247

S/2014/105

political parties and their supporters, the defence and security forces, civil society,
traditional and religious leaders and women’s and youth groups, as well as the
media, to play their roles in a responsible manner in order to facilitate the conduct
of credible elections.
45. Notwithstanding the efforts of national and international partners to encourage
political compromise among the people of Guinea-Bissau, I note with concern that
the political leadership in the country remains deeply divided. The divisions
permeating the polity threaten the whole process of restoring constitutional order in
the country. I call upon all political leaders, in particular the leadership of PAIGC,
to rapidly address their internal problems in a responsible manner in order to
contribute to peaceful and credible elections.
46. Acts of violation of human rights, intimidation and politically motivated
violence have remained at worrying levels since my report of 19 November 2013
(S/2013/680). As election day draws closer, political tensions may rise. I urge all
parties, in particular, the civilian and military transitional authorities, to exercise
restraint during this sensitive period in order to create an environment conducive to
free participation in the electoral process.
47. I remain deeply concerned about the extreme fragility of the rule of law. The
inability of the judicial system to bring guilty individuals to account entrenches
impunity, erodes the very essence of the State and denies victims their right to
justice and redress. Obstruction of justice, intimidation of those conducting
investigations into criminal activities and insufficient allocation of resources to
investigate those acts and other major crimes and human rights violations are
unacceptable. I call upon the Transitional Government and the judicial authorities to
ensure that those responsible for criminal acts are held accountable in a timely
manner, with full respect for the due process of law.
48. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team, under the leadership of my Special Representative,
as well as to the regional and international partners of Guinea-Bissau for their
contributions to the efforts to restore constitutional order and promote peacebuilding
in the country.

14-23247

9/9
