A /75/PV.102

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

102nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 9 September 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Draft decision (A/75/L.133)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft decision A/75/L.133, entitled “Closing date of the
seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft decision A/75/L.133?
Draft decision A/75/L.133 was adopted (decision
75/577).
The President: I invite the attention of the
Assembly to draft decision A/75/L.134, circulated under
agenda item 25, entitled “Operational activities for
development”. Members will recall that the Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 25 at its 48th
plenary meeting, on 31 December 2020. In order for the
Assembly to take action on the draft decision, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of agenda item 25.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 25 to the
Second Committee.

In order to enable the Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the draft decision, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 25
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/50 4B).
Agenda item 25 (continued)
Operational activities for development
Draft decision (A/75/L.134)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft decision A/75/L.134. In this connection, I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph (b) of draft decision
A/75/L.134, the General Assembly would also decide
to convene the United Nations Pledging Conference for
Development Activities on an annual basis shortly after
the “Operational activities for development” segment of
the Economic and Social Council session, in order to be
informed by the discussions, within existing resources
and seeking additional funding through voluntary
contributions, as necessary.
The adoption of the draft decision would not
entail any budgetary implications with regard to the
programme budget. Pursuant to paragraph (b) of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-24685 (E)

*2124685*

A/75/PV.102

the draft decision, it is understood that the annual
Conference would consist of one day of two meetings:
one in the morning and one in the afternoon. That
would constitute an addition to the meeting workload of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management, which would be accommodated within
existing resources on an if-available basis. If the
Conference is extended for a longer period, the costs for
additional service would need to be met by voluntary
contributions. In order to ensure the highest probability
of interpretation services, the date of the Conference is
to be determined in consultation with the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management.
The statement that I just read was distributed
through the plenary place on the e-deleGATE portal
and will be made available in the Journal of the United
Nations under the e-statements link for this meeting.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Paraguay, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position before adoption.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I am pleased to inform the General Assembly
about draft decision A/75/L.134, whose goal is to
strengthen the United Nations Pledging Conference
for Development Activities. It was a great honour to
be asked by you, Mr. President, to lead the informal
dialogue, which explored possibilities that would
enable the event to be less rigid and more dynamic. I
was glad to take on the challenge, as I firmly believe
that today the purpose of the Pledging Conference is
more important than ever. Sustainable and flexible
financing for the United Nations development system is
vital to its ability to support countries in their efforts to
build back better in the wake of the coronavirus disease
crisis and to achieve their development goals. That will
enable us to reach the people we serve by optimizing
development operational activities and to live up to our
commitment — as we regularly say within the United
Nations — to leave no one behind.
In the past few months we have consulted with
Member States through informal dialogue and written
exchanges to discuss the various options. The submission
of today’s draft decision is the outcome of those
discussions, and I would like to thank all delegations for
their active participation and constructive engagement
during the informal consultations. As facilitator, I took
into account the views of Member States in order to
produce a balanced text that could be supported by all.
2/23

09/09/2021

The final text modifies the scope and the annual date
of the Conference. The change in scope will enable the
Conference to include fundraising for activities of the
entire system centred on collective outcomes, a critical
catalyst for reform of the United Nations development
system and an essential element in achieving its goals.
The Conference will also include United Nations
funds, programmes and specialized agencies engaged
in operational activities for development. The change
in the annual date for the Conference will ensure that
it is complemented by the debates in the operational
activities development segment of the Economic and
Social Council session, as well as informed by the
Secretary-General’s annual analysis of the funding of
the development system, published in April.
The new annual Conference date, shortly after
the operational activities development segment, will
also make it more convenient and compatible with the
budget cycles of major donors. We are pleased with
the outcome and firmly believe that the changes will
help the Conference be more effective in achieving its
objectives. It was a great pleasure to note that the text
was also very well received by delegations and that
the silent procedure of the informal consultations was
not broken, which reflected every Member’s resolve. I
would like to personally thank you, Mr. President, for
entrusting me with this important task. I also once again
thank all delegations for participating and expressing
their views during the enriching consultation process.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
conscientious, timely and detail-oriented work of the
Secretariat, in particular the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management and the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, whose
support has been key to the entire process.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/75/L.134, entitled “United Nations Pledging
Conference for Development Activities”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/75/L.134?
Draft
decision
A/75/L.134
(decision 75/511 B).

was

adopted

The President: I would like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Julio Arriola Ramírez
of Paraguay, the facilitator of the intergovernmental
21-24685

09/09/2021

consultations, who so ably conducted the discussions
and complex negotiations. I am sure the members
of the Assembly join me in extending to him our
sincere appreciation.
May I take it that is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 19 and 76 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/75/L.130)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/75/L.130, entitled “2022 United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft decision A/75/L.130?
Decision A/75/L.130 was adopted (decision 75/578).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 19.
May I take it that it is wish of the General Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 76 and of agenda item 76, as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
Draft resolution (A/75/L.111/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guinea to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.111/Rev. 1 on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.

A/75/PV.102

Mr. Diane (Guinea): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77)
and China.
We would first like to stress that the countries
of Africa have strengthened their commitments and
actions in the area of socioeconomic development and
have continued to undertake the actions and efforts
necessary for achieving a sustainable and resilient
recovery from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In that regard, it is very important to highlight their
crucial role in transforming the development agenda
through the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD).
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
represents the rock-solid commitment of leaders of all
countries to multilateralism, the central role of the United
Nations and the promotion of sustainable development.
In that context, draft resolution A/75/L.111/Rev.1,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”,
is a shared pledge by Africa and all its partners, based
on a common vision and their firm and shared belief
that they have a pressing duty to eradicate poverty in
Africa and put the continent on a path to sustainable
growth and development.
The G-77 and China, which endorses the draft
resolution, has always supported the ambition of the
Group of African States to encourage international
cooperation with Africa in a spirit of mutual benefit
and international solidarity. We would like to extend
our thanks and appreciation to the African Group,
represented by the coordinators, Ms. Meriem El Hilali
of Morocco and Ms. Lily Mwanjila of Kenya, for
revitalizing, streamlining and reinforcing the text of
the annual draft resolution and for the excellent work
representing the G-77 and China during the negotiation
process. In addition, we want to thank the facilitator,
Mr. Ahmed Sahraoui of Algeria, for his outstanding
leadership and stewardship of the process. We would also
like to thank all partners for their active commitment,
which enabled us to arrive at a consensus text.
In the past few years, this important annual
resolution for Africa has been adopted by a recorded
vote, which has adversely affected global solidarity and
partnership. The G-77 and China has made tremendous
efforts to address the concerns of all parties and has
shown the greatest possible flexibility in formulating

21-246853/23

A/75/PV.102

09/09/2021

alternative language for the NEPAD resolution in order
to arrive at a consensus on the text.

with the African Union’s 2063 Agenda. Its value cannot
be overstated.

We must reiterate that international cooperation
in a spirit of mutual benefit is of great significance
to developing countries, including African countries.
Bearing that in mind, we will step up our efforts
to cooperate with all partners around the world
in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in synergy with the African Union’s
Agenda 2063, for the shared development and prosperity
of all African countries.

The NEPAD resolution provides a crucial space in
which to focus on the areas that require support in the
implementation of the SDGs, areas that need greater
attention because they have been heavily affected by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In that
regard, we welcome the reaffirmation of the importance
of international support for Africa’s development,
as stated in the resolution. The African Group would
also like to emphasize the specific call in paragraph
9 for global solidarity with regard to equitable access
to vaccines in Africa. Immediate action is urgently
required to enable global, equitable, affordable and
timely access to safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines,
diagnostics and health-care services. The African
Group also emphasizes that international cooperation in
a spirit of mutual benefit is extremely significant for all
developing countries, including those in Africa. With
that in mind, the African Group remains committed
to stepping up its efforts and cooperating with all its
development partners.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.111/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management):I would like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in document,
Turkey has also become a sponsor of draft resolution
A/75/L.111/Rev.1.
The President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.111/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/75/L.111/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 75/322).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position following adoption, I would
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Hamdouni (Morocco): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of African
States. I would like to align my remarks with the
statement just made by the Permanent Representative
of Guinea on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The African Group values and welcomes the
consensus adoption of resolution 75/322 on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). The
resolution lies at the heart of Africa’s priorities and
is considered a milestone in highlighting the progress
that African countries have made in the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in synergy
4/23

This year, despite the effects of COVID-19 on
our methods of work, the African Group, with the
valuable support of the Group of 77 and China, made
tremendous efforts to submit a text that is streamlined,
concise and fit for purpose, and that delivers better on
the key messages of the annual resolution. It has indeed
been a successful endeavour. I want to express our
sincere thanks and appreciation to the coordinators,
who on behalf of the G-77 and China conducted
the negotiations on the draft resolution brilliantly.
We would also like to thank all delegations for their
constructive engagement and valuable input throughout
the negotiation process. The African Group welcomes
the remarkable collective effort this year to consider
the views and concerns of all parties and the flexibility
shown in formulating consensus language throughout
the text of the resolution. We also thank the facilitator
for his tireless work and efforts to move the process
towards a consensus.
Lastly, we would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa
for its support throughout the preparation and
negotiation process.
Ms. Wyeth (Canada): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Australia, New Zealand and
my own country, Canada. We would like to thank the
21-24685

09/09/2021

facilitator, the representative of the Permanent Mission
of Algeria, as well as all the delegations that took
part in the negotiations on resolution 75/322, on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD),
for their active and constructive engagement. Our
countries’ delegations are very pleased that the annual
resolution has returned to a path of consensus after
years of divergence. We would like to congratulate our
colleagues from the African delegations on ensuring
that the resolution remained focused on the issues that
are most critical to their continent.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
This resolution is important for Africa, as well
as for Canada, Australia and New Zealand. We
support the overall goals and aspirations of NEPAD
and Agenda 2063, including the need for balanced,
integrated, economic, social and environmental
development. We also firmly support commitments
to promoting peaceful and inclusive societies and
empowering all girls and women, as both are essential
to sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
and sustainable development. Today Canada, Australia
and New Zealand are pleased to join the consensus and
thereby lend their strong support for the internationally
agreed principles of development, cooperation and
sustainable development for all.
Mr. Choffat (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
welcome the adoption by consensus of resolution 75/322
on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development. The
resolution contains crucial elements and we fully support
its content. The return to a consensus-based and balanced
text does justice to the resolution’s importance. We also
hope that draft resolution A/75/L.112/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa”,
will be adopted by consensus tomorrow.
Ms. Zalanyi (Hungary): Hungary would like
to express its appreciation to the facilitator and
coordinators for their tireless work and commitment
in formulating resolution 75/322, which we have just
adopted. At the same time, we would like to add the
following remarks in our national capacity.
We would like to remind the Assembly of the fact
that Hungary voted against the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration at its adoption (see
A/73/PV.60) and is not involved in its implementation

A/75/PV.102

in any way. That is why Hungary cannot accept any
reference to it in the resolution, especially considering
the Compact’s reference to migration as the best
solution for the labour market and demographic
problems of destination countries. Hungary believes
in the effectiveness of on-site support for developing
countries, guaranteeing local populations peaceful and
prosperous lives in their home countries, and not in
promoting their migration. The Hungarian Government
therefore works to implement development programmes
establishing lasting solutions locally for those in
need and improving the living conditions of people
in vulnerable situations. That is why we are unable
to accept the reference to the Compact in resolution
75/322 and would like to dissociate ourselves from its
eighteenth preambular paragraph.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): I would like to start
by thanking the facilitator and the negotiators for
their hard work in this year’s negotiations on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development.
The United Kingdom attaches great importance to
Africa’s sustainable development. We support Africanled efforts to unlock inclusive economic growth,
strengthen security and stability, build resilience to
the effects of climate change and invest in education,
health and job creation, including through the African
Union. We are pleased to see the consensus this year
on this important resolution (resolution 75/322) and
want to express our appreciation for the flexibility and
good faith that members have shown in order to reach
that milestone. The text focuses on critical issues for
Africa’s future, and our ability to reach a consensus
demonstrates that past challenges do not preclude
future cooperation.
Mr. Fogarty (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to see consensus on the text of
resolution 75/322 today.
We are committed to our partnership with the
African Union (AU) and strongly support the AU’s
efforts to realize the goals and aspirations of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development. We are pleased
with the constructive engagement and consensusfocused approach demonstrated by all parties throughout
the course of the negotiations, aimed at achieving a
more stable and prosperous Africa. I would like to take
this opportunity to clarify the position of the United
States on some of the language in the resolution.

21-246855/23

A/75/PV.102

Regarding the references to the Debt Service
Suspension Initiative in operative paragraph 18, the
Group of 20 has been clear that the extension of the
Debt Service Suspension Initiative through December
2021 is the final one and that countries requiring
additional debt relief should seek debt treatments
under the common framework. The fact that only
three countries have requested common framework
treatments suggests that broad-based deferrals of debtservice payments under the Debt Service Suspension
Initiative are not needed beyond 2021, particularly
in the light of other important international financial
institution initiatives to support developing countries.
We must therefore dissociate ourselves from operative
paragraph 18.
The United States reaffirms its explanation
of position on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as delivered on 1 September 2015 (see
A/69/PV.101), which continues to guide United States
engagement on the 2030 Agenda today. Specifically,
the 2030 Agenda recognizes that each country must
work towards achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals in accordance with its own national policies and
priorities, and does not prejudge or serve as precedent
for its decisions and actions under way in other forums,
including the World Trade Organization, in accordance
with paragraphs 18 and 58 of the 2030 Agenda.
On technology transfer, the United States reaffirms
and appreciates other delegations recognizing in the
resolution that references to the transfer of, or access
to, technology refer to technology transfer on voluntary
and mutually agreed terms and conditions. In addition,
all references to access to information or knowledge are
to information or knowledge that is made available with
the authorization of the legitimate holder.
While the United States acknowledges that the
United Nations system increasingly uses the term
“illicit financial flows”, we continue to be concerned
about the fact that the term lacks an agreed-upon
international definition.
With regard to paragraph 13, the United States
recognizes that mobilizing finance on a scale required
to tackle the climate crisis requires financing
and investment from a wide variety of public and
private sources and channels. The United States also
underscores the critical importance of article 2.1 (c)
of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which
establishes a goal of “making finance flows consistent
6/23

09/09/2021

with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions
and climate-resilient development”, which is pivotal
to global efforts to keep a limit of 1.5°C of warming
within reach. We also recognize the importance of the
$100 billion mobilization goal and are committed to
working with other donors to meet that goal as soon
as possible. We note that the language of describing
the $100 billion mobilization goal in paragraph 13
includes language not reflected in the goal itself, as
adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We underscore that that goal is to be understood as
it was adopted in that forum and that nothing in the
language should be understood as altering it. With
those clarifications, the United States is pleased to join
consensus on the resolution.
I would like to conclude by extending our sincere
thanks to Algeria for its role as facilitator and for its
leadership, which has helped us to reach a consensus
for the first time in four years.
Mr. Liu Liqun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Guinea on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
China’s firm support for the cause of peace and
development in Africa has been consistent. We stand
united with Africa in seeking common development
and will continue to engage in South-South cooperation
and joint development of the Belt and Road Initiative
in order to support African countries on a development
path that aligns with their own national conditions and
accelerates their implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063.
Since the onset of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, China has delivered multiple
shipments of emergency supplies and medical aid
to African countries. We have provided COVID-19
vaccines to more than 30 African countries in need
and launched the construction of the headquarters of
the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention
ahead of schedule. We have fully implemented the
Group of 20 Debt Service Suspension Initiative and
have signed agreements with 16 African countries
for debt relief. Within the framework of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation, we cancelled the interestfree loans due to mature at the end of 2020 for 15
African countries. At the end of this year, China and
21-24685

09/09/2021

A/75/PV.102

Africa will jointly convene another Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation summit and begin the next chapter
of friendly cooperation between China and Africa.

on behalf of the European Union and its member States
and would like to make some brief remarks in its
national capacity.

Recently, China and Africa jointly launched the
Initiative on Partnership for Africa’s Development,
calling on the international community to redouble
its support to Africa in areas such as COVID-19
response and recovery, trade and investment, debt
relief, food security, poverty reduction, climate action
and industrialization. We look forward to seeing more
countries and international organizations join that
initiative.

The Czech Republic is pleased to join consensus on
today’s important resolution (resolution 75/322), entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”. We fully
recognize the importance of the implementation of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development. Through its
development cooperation, the Czech Republic assists
partner countries in Africa in promoting democracy,
human rights and good governance, as well as in building
resilience and achieving sustainable development.

China has always supported the General Assembly’s
adoption by consensus of its annual resolution on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development. Regrettably,
a few countries have been in denial about the important
consensus reached by all Member States in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and have been
determined to focus on their political manipulation of
the relevant development concepts, which has forced the
Assembly to conduct a recorded vote on the resolution
for the past few years.
This year China responded actively to African
countries’ desire to see the resolution adopted by
consensus. We participated constructively in the
consultations on the draft text, showed the greatest
possible flexibility and made tremendous efforts to
reach a consensus. We also want to stress that win-win
cooperation is a consensus that is integral to the 2030
Agenda and other important United Nations documents.
It represents an important principle and a successful
practice for the international community in its efforts
to eliminate the development gap and help developing
countries, especially African States, to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Efforts to negate that
consensus and politicize development concepts seriously
undermine Member States’ unity and cooperation and
do not help the implementation of the 2030 Agenda or
the achievement of post-COVID-19 recovery.
As a reliable partner for Africa’s development,
China will not cease in its efforts to deepen its
cooperation with African countries in various areas,
take concrete action, stay committed to win-win
cooperation and inject new and greater impetus into the
realization of China and Africa’s common development
and a community with a shared future for humankind.
Mrs. Kafková (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statement to be delivered

The Czech Republic did not join the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration or participate
in the Intergovernmental Conference in Marrakech and
voted against resolution 73/195, by which the General
Assembly endorsed the Global Compact, for reasons
we made clear in our explanation of vote delivered
on 19 December 2018 (see A/73/PV.60). In recalling
those facts, the Czech Republic cannot accept the word
“reaffirm” in the eighteenth preambular paragraph of
the resolution and must therefore dissociate itself from
the paragraph. The Czech Republic reaffirms its full
support for multilateralism, the rule of law and human
rights, and recognizes that multilateral cooperation
is indispensable in finding global solutions to global
challenges such as migration.
Ms. Ruiz Tello (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): With
reservations, the Government of Chile voted in favour
of adopting the text of the eighteenth preambular
paragraph of resolution 75/322, entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”, because
Chile is currently updating its migration legislation,
which seeks to legally establish a foundation for its
adequate management of migration in order to ensure
that it is safe, orderly and regular.
Mr. Nakano (Japan): Japan is pleased to join the
consensus on resolution 75/322, and appreciates the
tireless efforts of the facilitator and coordinators, the
Permanent Missions of Algeria, Kenya and Morocco,
respectively, to find mutually agreeable solutions
to bring this important annual resolution back to a
consensus-based outcome. We would also like to thank
all our colleagues for their constructive engagement in
a difficult negotiation process.

21-246857/23

A/75/PV.102

Japan applauds the resolution’s reaffirmation of our
collective commitment to advancing the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals in Africa, including
through quality infrastructure investment, poverty
eradication, the strengthening of health systems and the
furthering of African countries’ transition to universal
health coverage, good governance and the rule of law,
food security and nutrition, enhanced education, job
creation, digital development, respect for human rights
and the empowerment of women and girls. However,
we feel obliged to express our concern about the lack of
transparency we witnessed after the conclusion of the
informal consultations and during the silence procedure.
Transparent and inclusive consultations are an integral
part of the core values and principles of the General
Assembly. We hope that the informal consultations will
start earlier next year and that the whole process will be
carried out in a transparent manner.
Japan has been a long-standing partner and
supporter of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) since its establishment in
2001. As enshrined in the principles of both NEPAD
and the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD), African leadership and
ownership are essential to fostering more just and
sustainable results, as are international partnerships.
The TICAD 8 meeting will be held next year in
Tunisia, organized jointly by the United Nations Office
of the Special Adviser on Africa, the United Nations
Development Programme, the African Union and the
World Bank. Its aim is to chart a path for African
development in the post-coronavirus era, making full
use of the unique dynamism created by the private
sector. TICAD 8 will also serve as an avenue for
contributing to sustainable and inclusive development
in Africa aligned with the African vision contained in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063.
Mr. Cho Seung-Jun (Republic of Korea): We
welcome the Assembly’s consensus adoption of
resolution 75/322, entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support”. We greatly appreciate the tireless
efforts of the facilitator to yield that constructive result
in a spirit of multilateralism, and we hope and expect
a similarly satisfactory outcome for the forthcoming
session of the General Assembly as well.
We take note of the resolution’s significance in
driving sustainable development across the African
8/23

09/09/2021

continent in cooperation and partnership with the
United Nations. The Republic of Korea will also remain
committed to furthering development cooperation with
its African partners. Our cooperation will proceed
in accordance with the spirit of our legislation under
our Framework Act on international development
cooperation, which defines its basic objectives as
reducing poverty; improving the human rights of
women, children, people with disabilities and youth;
achieving gender equality; realizing sustainable
development
and
humanitarianism;
promoting
economic cooperation with partner countries and
pursuing peace and prosperity everywhere.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position. I now give the floor
to the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer, to make a statement after adoption.
Mr. De La Maisonneuve (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as
the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.
At the outset, I would like to express the EU’s
gratitude to Algeria, as the facilitator of the negotiation
process on resolution 75/322, and to Kenya and
Morocco, as coordinators for the Group of 77, as well as
to our colleagues representing the groups and Member
States that participated in informal consultations. I
would also like to direct special thanks to the Group of
African States. We know how important the resolution
is for them. Regrettably, the EU was not able to vote in
favour of last year’s resolution, owing to the inclusion
of controversial language that does not enjoy universal
support. This year we welcome the fact that we were
able to find alternative language that everyone could
support. We know that the African Group worked hard
to achieve that consensus. We also appreciate the efforts
to update the resolution and make it more focused and
action-oriented. That is something we have long called
for, and we will continue to work to echo that positive
step in all relevant resolutions. However, I too would
like to express our disappointment with the way the
process ended, as one delegation decided to question
the facilitator’s proposal and introduce changes that
were not discussed during meetings. We would like to
re-emphasize that the European Union has shown the
greatest possible flexibility in order to ensure that we
could return to a consensus this year, and we urge all
21-24685

09/09/2021

Member States to adhere to the established principles
and standards when negotiating these documents
in future.
Africa and the EU have a close and long-standing
partnership in both security and development. The EU
is Africa’s biggest development, investment and trading
partner. Deepening our partnership with Africa is at
the very top of the EU’s priorities. In 2020 alone more
than €10 billion in investments in Africa was leveraged
through one of EU’s instruments, the External
Investment Plan, in addition to directly disbursed funds.
Those investments are aimed at generating sustainable
growth and jobs by supporting small businesses, the
self-employed, women entrepreneurs and businesses
led by young people and migrants. They will support
a roll-out of broad infrastructure and the development
of innovation for digital green growth, as well as the
expansion of capacity for renewable and sustainable
energy. They are aimed at strengthening Africa’s health
sector, among many others. In that regard, the EU has
provided more than 1 billion vaccines through the
COVAX facility, and as Team Europe intends to donate
at least 200 million vaccine doses globally until the end
of the year. The EU has been a committed partner in
assisting African countries in dealing with the health
emergency but also in addressing the socioeconomic
fallout of the crisis, including by supporting debt-relief
efforts for African countries.
Peace and security issues also remain at the core
of the African Union-EU Partnership, based on mutual
responsibility, national ownership and reciprocal
commitment. The EU’s support to Africa is both
financial and political. We believe that Africa should
have an even stronger voice in multilateral forums. Our
daily work in the United Nations to promote sustainable
development and conflict prevention and resolution
on the African continent bears witness to the priority
we give those issues. That is why resolution 75/322 so
important to us.
In conclusion, let me reassure the Assembly of our
ongoing and unwavering support to the African Group.
The EU and its member States will continue to work
for enhanced and strengthened cooperation with our
African partner countries.
The Acting President: May I take is that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 66?
It was so decided.

A/75/PV.102

Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Draft resolution A/75/L.132
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.132.
Ms. Miguel (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
On behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.132, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”, under sub-item (h) of agenda
item 130.
In addition to the main sponsors, the following
Member States have become sponsors of the draft
resolution since it was submitted: Angola, Argentina,
Australia, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Equatorial Guinea, Georgia, Guatemala, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Morocco, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea,
Portugal, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Ukraine and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The members of the Caribbean Community chose
to present a succinct yet substantive text, building on
its predecessor resolutions 71/329 and 73/347, adopted
during the seventy-first and seventy-third sessions, and
on the discussions from the virtual eleventh general
meeting between the Caribbean Community secretariat
and associated institutions and the United Nations and
its agencies, and the joint statement issued thereafter.
Apart from providing the rollover of the agenda
item to the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly, the draft resolution ensures that the strong
foundation of partnership between CARICOM and the
United Nations can continue to be vigorously pursued
and deepened while acknowledging the region’s inherent
vulnerabilities to external economic and financial
shocks, and given the urgency of the needs of our
small island developing States with regard to achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
recovering from the coronavirus disease pandemic. It
emphasizes CARICOM’s commitment to implementing

21-246859/23

A/75/PV.102

the 2030 Agenda and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, empowering women and
girls, promoting education and vocational training for
all, maintaining peace and security and addressing
communicable and non-communicable diseases.
Moreover, it encourages further collaboration to
combat poverty and unemployment, terrorism and
onerous debt, and to address financing for development
issues, blacklisting, de-risking and the withdrawal of
correspondent banking relations in the region.
Our region continues to be hammered by the adverse
effects of climate change and natural disasters, notably
the passage of Tropical Storm Grace and Hurricane
Ida across our region last month; the earthquake that
struck Haiti on 14 August; and the eruption of La
Soufrière volcano in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Such events reinforce the importance of scaling up
our efforts to address the interconnected and systemic
nature of the risks that have disrupted our societies
throughout the region. It is therefore imperative to
fast-track the development of critical initiatives to
advance socioeconomic transformation in CARICOM,
including the debt swap initiative of the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and
the Caribbean Resilience Fund, as well as the ongoing
work by the international system on the development of
a multidimensional vulnerability index.
Lastly, CARICOM underscores the commitment
of the United Nations to Haiti’s long-term stability
and socioeconomic development as an important
cornerstone of the Organization’s engagement with the
region. As such, we reiterate the critical role played by
the United Nations in assisting the Haitian Government
and its people through the United Nations country team
and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express our special appreciation to the delegation
of Trinidad and Tobago for its role as facilitator of the
draft resolution. Their open and collaborative approach
throughout the consultative process contributed
enormously to the broad support that the draft
resolution enjoys, which will send a strong signal from
the international community to both organizations and
strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations
and CARICOM in achieving more concrete solutions
and results for our peoples.
I would also like to express CARICOM’s gratitude
to all the delegations that took an active part in drafting
10/23

09/09/2021

the text before us today and whose spirit of solidarity
and consensus will, I hope, enable us to adopt the draft
resolution by consensus. We express our appreciation
to the delegations that have sponsored draft resolution
A/75/L.132 and encourage those that have not done so
to lend their support and become sponsors of a draft
resolution that is so important for our region, the United
Nations system and the international community.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.132, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.132 and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.132: Angola,
Argentina, Australia, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Botswana, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial
Guinea, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Malta, Malawi, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Morocco, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Papua
New Guinea, Portugal, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uruguay and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.132?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/323).

A/75/L.132

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position after adoption.
Mr. Fogarty (United States of America): We would
like to thank the delegation of Trinidad and Tobago for
its work on this resolution (resolution 75/323).
The United States supports the work of the
Caribbean Community in enhancing economic
development and prosperity in the Caribbean region.
The United States is supportive of the act of cooperation
between the Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean and the Caribbean Community.
21-24685

09/09/2021

However, debt swaps are not appropriate for countries
with unsustainable debt and are unlikely to serve as a
major tool for addressing debt vulnerabilities or climate
challenges. We believe that other approaches with
higher potential to deliver success at scale should be the
primary focus of efforts to address climate objectives.
Regarding concessional finance, the proper forums
for discussing eligibility measures are the boards of
multilateral development banks and the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (h)
of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/75/L.131)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.131.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of Turkmenistan, on behalf of the
10 members of the Economic Cooperation Organization
(ECO), has the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.131, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization”.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
is the most serious test that the world has faced for
many generations. Many peoples and communities
continue to be severely affected both by the disease
and its economic and social consequences. Against
the backdrop of the global changes related to the
COVID-19 pandemic and the complex socioeconomic
issues arising from it, regional economic cooperation is
becoming ever more vital and indispensable.
Cooperation between neighbouring countries and
countries in the region in the context of institutional
frameworks such as the Economic Cooperation
Organization has proved its value in terms of economic
development and to the benefit of the countries
concerned. The Economic Cooperation Organization
is globally recognized as a major and authoritative
international body that has evolved into a dynamic

A/75/PV.102

and open regional organization that has succeeded in
developing a broad range of cooperation mechanisms,
economic and non-economic. Over the years of the
Economic Cooperation Organization’s activity, its
members have concluded various agreements and taken
decisions on priority issues concerning inter-State
partnerships. As one of the world’s major groups, the
Economic Cooperation Organization encompasses 10
countries in West and East Asia as well as Central Asia
and the Caucasus, thereby linking Europe to China and
Russia together with countries of the Persian Gulf.
The Economic Cooperation Organization is
expanding its partnership connections and cooperation
mechanisms with potential partners. The United
Nations system has always been a focus of ECO’s
informational and awareness-raising work aimed at
facilitating the implementation of the global agenda in
our part of the world. In that context, we believe that
the relations between the United Nations and ECO,
as enshrined in draft resolution A/75/L.131, which is
before us today, are mutually beneficial to both parties.
They help ECO to use the capacities, resources and
knowledge of United Nations agencies in the interests
of its member States and give the United Nations the
opportunity to make use of the potential of the regional
networks and platforms that have been developed by
the Economic Cooperation Organization.
The international community has entered the
Decade of Action for achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. However, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further
complicated the task of achieving the SDGs on time.
At this time, when we are all particularly focused on
their timely implementation, the member States of the
Economic Cooperation Organization, working from
ECO’s prospective development plan for the period
up to 2025, which aligns with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, are making major efforts
to ramp up their implementation of the SDGs. Our
development plan was formulated to take into account
regional needs and demands and based on the global
development agenda.
The draft resolution submitted for the Assembly’s
consideration is based on resolution 73/330 and consists
of four preambular paragraphs and 39 operative
paragraphs. It encompasses various aspects of the
relationship between the United Nations and ECO,
provides a basis for further cooperation with the United
Nations system, including its specialized agencies,

21-2468511/23

A/75/PV.102

09/09/2021

funds and programmes, and covers a broad range of
areas that are relevant to ECO, such as trade, transport,
energy, agriculture, industry, the development of
human resources, tourism, dealing with the COVID-19
pandemic and achieving the SDGs in the area of health
care. The draft resolution also notes the specific
development needs of landlocked countries and calls
on United Nations agencies and international financial
bodies to provide assistance to ECO and to work with it
to help landlocked countries solve their problems.
We are confident that the draft resolution expands
the opportunities for strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization. I would like to thank
delegations for their constructive approach and support
to the draft resolution, as well as the delegations that
have become sponsors, and urge all members to join
them in supporting and sponsoring it. We hope to see it
adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.131, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/75/L.131,
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.131?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/324).

A/75/L.131

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position after adoption, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mrs. Ponikvar Velázquez (Slovenia): I have the
honour to deliver this explanation of position on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
12/23

The European Union and its member States
will continue to support resolution 75/324, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization”, and to encourage
further cooperation between the two organizations, in
line with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. However, it contains problematic language
that has made it very difficult for the EU and its
member States to join the consensus on it in previous
years. Considering how constructive our approach has
been despite our concerns, we might have expected
more thorough consultations and attempts to address
those concerns when considering the draft resolution.
Unfortunately, that has not happened. In addition, new
language has been introduced, in operative paragraph
6, that has exacerbated our concerns. With regard to the
resolution’s language concerning the Baku Declaration
and the outcomes of the fourteenth summit meeting
of the Heads of State and Government of the member
States of the Economic Cooperation Organization,
the EU stresses that the references to Cyprus in those
documents are not consistent with existing Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on that issue
and therefore also run counter to international law and
the Charter.
We therefore dissociate ourselves from the
references to those documents in operative paragraph 3
and the new operative paragraph 6 and once again urge
the Economic Cooperation Organization to refrain from
adopting positions that undermine international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. The adoption of this
resolution does not amount to the General Assembly’s
endorsement of those documents. The EU trusts that its
position will be taken into account in future so that it
can continue to support this resolution.
Mr. Fogarty (United States of America): We thank
Turkmenistan for its work in facilitating resolution
75/324, on the Economic Cooperation Organization.
The United States notes that this resolution is a
technical rollover and does not take into account any
recent developments or circumstances in particular
Member States. The United States therefore does not
consider that the historical previously agreed language
in operative paragraphs 13 and 33 reflects any view
on the part of the General Assembly on the current
situation in any particular Member State or future
activities involving any reference to a Member State.
21-24685

09/09/2021

It is our view that the United Nations must respect
the independent mandates of other processes and
institutions, including trade negotiations, and must not
involve itself in decisions and actions in other forums,
including at the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The United Nations is not the appropriate venue for
those discussions, and there should be no expectation
or misconception that the United States would
understand the recommendations made by the General
Assembly or the Economic and Social Council on such
issues to be binding. That includes invitations to the
WTO to develop strategies on trade liberalization,
the promotion of foreign direct investment or the
integration of global and regional economies, as well
as calls for the WTO to support United Nations efforts
to develop trade facilitation strategies and agreements
or to take other actions to enhance regional trade or
invitations for the WTO to extend technical assistance
for the implementation of trade agreements. With those
clarifications, the United States is pleased to join the
consensus on the resolution.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I am taking the floor
to explain Armenia’s position on resolution 75/324,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization”.
Operative paragraph 3 of the resolution refers to a
document adopted in 2012 that contains formulations
blatantly distorting the essence and principles of the
resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. The
formulations in the Baku Declaration run counter to
the principles and elements of the conflict settlement
reflected in the documents of the co-chairship of the
Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the internationally agreed
mediation format mandated to deal with the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. The Declaration, as well as other
documents adopted by the Economic Cooperation
Organization and referred to in the resolution, contains
selective references to the principles of international
law in the context of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict,
while specifically omitting the principles of the equal
rights and self-determination of peoples enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. We call on the member
States of the Economic Cooperation Organization to
reject the attempts by some to abuse their organization’s
platform in order to propagate ill-conceived conflict
narratives and distorted views.
The delegation of Armenia therefore dissociates
itself from operative paragraph 3, as well as other

A/75/PV.102

paragraphs where references are made to documents
containing formulations on the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict that contradict well-known principles regarding
the resolution of the conflict.
Mr. Cosentino (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina is pleased to join the consensus on resolution
75/324, based on its support for strengthening
international cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. In that regard, Argentina
is in favour of harnessing the resources and advantages
of regional organizations in order to address specific
situations in their respective geographic areas. In the
case of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO),
Argentina would like to welcome its new Secretary
General, Khusrav Noziri, and wish him every success
in his work.
Without prejudice to that, my country would like
to point out that Hadi Soleimanpour, Mr. Noziri’s
immediate predecessor as Secretary General of ECO,
is subject to a national and international arrest warrant
issued by the Argentine courts in 2006, charged in the
case of the terrorist attack on the headquarters of the
Asociación Mutual Israelita Argentina in 1994. In that
connection, Argentina is grateful for any cooperation
that member States of the Economic Cooperation
Organization may be able to provide with regard to the
warrant, which is currently still in force.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
I would like to remind members that statements in the
right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and five minutes for the second, and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): Before I reply
to an issue raised in the explanation made by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European
Union (EU), I would first like to welcome the adoption
of resolution 75/324, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization”. As a founding member of the Economic
Cooperation Organization (ECO), Turkey attaches
great importance to it as a platform that contributes
to the development of its member States and as an
important tool for strengthening cultural and historical
ties within its region. Turkey also strongly supports
enhancing the cooperation between the United Nations

21-2468513/23

A/75/PV.102

and ECO in order to maximize the synergies between
their activities.
We regret that the explanation of position delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the approach it
reflects are neither objective nor constructive. As with
other disputes involving Cyprus, only a freely negotiated
settlement that is based on dialogue and diplomacy can
be sustainable. That requires a genuine and serious
stance accompanied by open-mindedness, which the
Turkish Cypriot side has clearly demonstrated, most
recently in April during the informal 5+UN meeting
in Geneva. It is important that all the relevant parties,
including the EU, contribute to the efforts to settle
the Cyprus issue without bias or prejudice. As long as
the EU’s positions reflect only the interests of Greek
Cypriots and do not acknowledge even the existence
of Turkish Cypriots, it will continue to disqualify itself
from playing the role of an objective contributor in
the work of finding a solution. Turkey will continue to
support a just, realistic and sustainable settlement to
the Cyprus issue based on the realities on the island.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Our delegation has
requested the floor in exercise of our right of reply in
connection with the statement made by the representative
of Armenia in his explanation of position on resolution
75/324, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization”.
Armenia’s long-standing record of confrontation
regarding the united position of the international
community is well known. It is therefore no coincidence
that in his statement the representative of Armenia
made selective references, while deliberately omitting
to mention the four resolutions of the Security Council
on the matter (resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874
(1993) and 884 (1993)). The representative of Armenia
also passed over in silence even the most recent related
document, signed by his Prime Minister, namely,
the statement of 9 November 2020 that ensured the
cessation of all military hostilities and the withdrawal
of Armenia’s armed forces from the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan. Obviously, all the more, no
commitments arise from the working papers discussed
within the peace process, and none of those papers
create any obligation to the United Nations or any other
international organization.
The comments of the representative of Armenia with
regard to self-determination are equally ill founded, as
they have nothing in common with that principle as it
14/23

09/09/2021

is set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s
Helsinki Final Act of 1975 and other international
documents. As has been noted before with regard to
the Security Council resolutions on the issue, what
Armenia calls self-determination was qualified by the
Council as the unlawful use of force against Azerbaijan
in violation of the fundamental norm of respect for the
territorial integrity of States.
As the current situation offers real prospects
for building peace, consolidating stability, restoring
peaceful coexistence, advancing the reconciliation
agenda and investing in economic development and
cooperation, we will be stressing over and over again
that there exists no alternative to the normalization of
inter-State relations between the two countries based
on mutual recognition and respect for each other’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity within their
internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Today I am taking the floor to exercise my right of
reply with regard to the statement by the representative
of Argentina, which left my delegation with no choice
but to briefly touch on his nonsensical comment
regarding the status of the Secretary General of the
Economic Cooperation Organization. We deeply regret
the fact that this forum has been used as an opportunity
to make reference to such falsehoods, and we reject
such desperate efforts to take advantage of this body to
resolve any issues for political ends.
Mr. Chrysostomou (Cyprus): I am taking the floor
to exercise my country’s right of reply to the statement
made by the representative of Turkey.
First, with regard to the way the representative of
Turkey referred to my country, let me stress that it is
imperative that we all respect one another and address
each State Member of the United Nations using its
correct name.
Secondly, the Turkish statement today demonstrates
once again that Turkey itself, and its long-standing
agenda for partitioning Cyprus, is the source of the
references to Cyprus in the documents of the Economic
Cooperation Organization. The argument that such
references are in line with international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly is a very easy one to defeat if one simply reads
Security Council resolutions 541 (1983) and 550 (1984).
21-24685

09/09/2021

In the past year, Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot
leadership have overtly supported the partition of
Cyprus by proposing a two-State solution outside the
long-established United Nations parameters within
which the Security Council has entrusted a good-offices
mission to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
This serves the strategic objectives of Turkey, but not
of Cyprus or the Cypriots. We urge Turkey to return
to the Cyprus peace negotiations instead of focusing
on undermining the sovereignty of the Republic of
Cyprus and perpetuating the island’s division, thereby
consolidating its interference in Cyprus, in violation of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the commitment
of the Cyprus Government to finding a just, functional
and viable solution to the Cyprus question — one that
ensures respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all Cypriots and entails the withdrawal of
foreign troops and the abolition of the anachronism of
the guarantees, reuniting the country as a bicommunal,
bizonal federation, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I am taking the floor
in exercise of our right to reply to the delegation
of Azerbaijan.
There was no reference in our statement to
Azerbaijan. However, we take note that the delegation
of Azerbaijan recognized itself as the country abusing
the platform of the Economic Cooperation Organization
for propagating its distorted conflict narratives. We
resolutely refute the allegations and the usual distortions
just expressed by the delegation of Azerbaijan, which
are aimed at misleading the Assembly with regard
to the underlying causes, essence and principles of
the resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict and
concealing Azerbaijan’s responsibility for unleashing
its largest escalation during a pandemic.
In view of the time constraints, I will limit my
intervention to the following points. All attempts to
misrepresent the Nagorno Karabakh conflict as an
inter-State and territorial conflict, including through
the selective invocation of certain provisions of Security
Council resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993)
and 884 (1993) while conveniently omitting others, are
nothing short of a deliberate distortion of the causes and
consequences of the conflict and its historical context.
For many years, in fact, Azerbaijan has been ignoring
the Security Council’s requests to refrain from the use

A/75/PV.102

of force and commit to a political settlement within
the framework of the co-chairship of the Minsk Group
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), the only international format mandated
to deal with the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
The inalienable right to self-determination
of the people of Nagorno Karabakh represents
the fundamental principle in the settlement of the
conflict, as acknowledged by the OSCE Minsk Group
co-chairship and reflected in the OSCE documents.
By exploiting various international platforms for
fabrications and distortions, mediation shopping and
other procrastination tactics, Azerbaijan has refused
for decades to engage in good faith in the negotiations
on the peaceful settlement of the conflict under the
auspices of the Minsk Group co-chairship, instead
opting for military aggression. The pre-planned, wellprepared, large-scale military offensive against the
people of Nagorno Karabakh launched by Azerbaijan
on 27 September 2020 led to massive violence and
destruction and gross violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
I agree that we should reflect on the long-standing
position of the international community that is
reflected in the joint statement of 3 December 2020 by
the OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chairs, who recalled their
firm commitment to refraining from the use or threat
of use of force to settle disputes and reiterated their
consistent and united position in favour of a negotiated,
comprehensive and sustainable settlement of all the
remaining core substantive issues of the conflict, in line
with the basic principles and elements. Azerbaijan’s
attempts to impose unilateral solutions by the use of
force against Armenia, or by incendiary rhetoric,
territorial claims, constant military provocations on
the ground and the instigation of anti-Armenian hatred,
undermine the possibility for a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): In numerous
communications circulated as documents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, our delegation has
comprehensively addressed similar allegations from
Armenia. I see no need to repeat them today, but I
would like to briefly point out the following.
What the representative of Armenia called a
pre-planned military aggression was the exercise
by Azerbaijan of its inherent right to self-defence in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United

21-2468515/23

A/75/PV.102

09/09/2021

Nations and customary international law. Specifically,
Azerbaijan used a legitimate counter-force to end the
occupation of its territories and the violation of its
territorial integrity, and to protect its people and allow
internally displaced persons to return to their homes.
Indeed, it was a war of salvation after 30 years of
aggression and occupation.

internationally agreed term used regarding the issue in
the documents of the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
international organizations. I hope the representative
of Azerbaijan was not making allegations against the
entire international community when he referred to
them as fake names.

In accordance with the Constitution of Azerbaijan,
the territory of Azerbaijan is unitary, inviolable and
indivisible. The references by Armenia to localities
within the internationally recognized territory of
Azerbaijan under different fake names are invalid, as
they are clearly inconsistent with international law and
the Constitution and legislation of Azerbaijan.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (i) of agenda item 130?

Apart from the duties arising from the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, the specific
obligations to which both Armenia and Azerbaijan are
now committed are those laid down in the statements
of 9 November 2020 and 11 January 2021. Armenia
must come to terms with its glaring misdeeds, learn
its lessons and realize that the objectives of durable
and lasting peace — if it is genuinely interested in
that — can in no way be achieved through insults
and hatred of neighbouring countries and peoples and
contempt for their legitimate right to live in their own
homeland. Post-conflict realities have paved the way
for Armenia to release itself from mythology and racist
prejudices. Compliance with international law and
good-neighbourly relations are the main objectives to
which Armenia should finally be aspiring. We hope it
will not miss the opportunity.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I feel compelled to
react to certain points just made by the delegation of
Azerbaijan. The representative of Azerbaijan’s attempts
to whitewash his country’s aggressive policies and
responsibility for the large-scale war unleashed against
the people of Nagorno Karabakh are futile for one very
simple reason — the leader of Azerbaijan has himself
recognized that Azerbaijan was responsible for starting
the war. In a recent interview, on 14 August, he stated,
“Azerbaijan started the war of salvation.” I hope that
next time the representative of Azerbaijan will check
his records more accurately to make sure that they
correspond to the official statements of his leadership
and relieve us of the unpleasant duty of refuting his
allegations by quoting his own leader.
As for the references to fake names, I would like
to stress that the Nagorno Karabakh conflict is an
16/23

It was so decided.
Agenda item 29
Space as a driver of sustainable development
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
General Assembly decided to include this item on the
agenda of the seventy-fifth session. In connection with
that, I have received a letter dated 25 September 2020
from the Chair of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space requesting that the consideration of the
item be deferred to the seventy-sixth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it on the draft agenda of its seventy-sixth session?
It was so decided (decision 75/579).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it is
the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 29?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 34 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020,
the Assembly decided to include this sub-item on the
agenda of the seventy-fifth session.
In connection with this item, the President of the
General Assembly has received a letter dated 16 June
2021 from the Permanent Representatives of Finland
and Turkey to the United Nations, as the Chairs of the
21-24685

09/09/2021

Group of Friends of Mediation, requesting the inclusion
of the sub-item on the provisional agenda of the seventysixth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this sub-item
and to include it on the draft agenda of its seventysixth session?
It was so decided (decision 75/580).
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 34?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 41
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
Assembly decided to include this item on the agenda
of the seventy-fifth session, with the understanding
that there would be no consideration of the item by the
Assembly. In connection with this item, the President
of the General Assembly has received a note verbale
dated 7 April 2021 from the Permanent Mission of the
Comoros to the United Nations requesting the inclusion
of this item on the provisional agenda of the seventysixth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
include this item on the draft agenda of the seventysixth session?
It was so decided (decision 75/581).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 41?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 65 (continued)
The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine
Letter dated 23 July from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine addressed to the

A/75/PV.102

Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly (A/75/974)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
Assembly decided to include this item on the agenda
of the seventy-fifth session. In connection with the
item, an identical letter dated 23 July 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly has been issued as
document A/75/974, in which it is requested that the
item be retained on the agenda of the General Assembly
and therefore included on the draft agenda of the
Assembly at its seventy-sixth session.
I now call on those members who wish to make
statements before the voting.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With regard to Ukraine, we are unfortunately
once again witnessing an unacceptable situation in
which the General Assembly has become hostage to
destructive methods. It is deplorable to see the world’s
most representative platform for dialogue used by the
Ukrainian delegation and its sponsors not for dialogue,
but to promote a position that has nothing in common
with reality and even less to do with finding solutions
to pressing problems.
We are seeing an alternative reality imposed on
Member States in which an aggressor that has attacked
its own people in eastern Ukraine presents itself as a
victim of external factors. The civil conflict between
Kyiv and the Ukrainian citizens in Donbas who refused
to recognize the country’s 2014 coup d’état has now
lasted six and a half years. That is something of which
the Security Council — which in its resolution 2202
(2015) endorsed specific parameters for resolving the
situation back in 2015, the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements — is well
aware. It is just that Kyiv is in no hurry to implement it,
or, rather, is openly sabotaging it.
Here at the United Nations, we know that the key
to resolving any internal disagreement is broad internal
dialogue. That holds true for Asia, America, Africa
and Europe. Yet only in Ukraine do the authorities
continue to ignore the just demands of the people of
Donbas. Instead, as we see, in its attempts to disguise
its unwillingness to negotiate with its own people,
Kyiv throws around accusations about Russia in the
General Assembly as though there were no civil

21-2468517/23

A/75/PV.102

conflict in Ukraine, just Russian aggression. That is
quite convenient, especially as these fairy tales are
supported by its Western allies, which are willing to
turn a blind eye to Kyiv’s obvious efforts to sabotage
the Minsk agreements.
That is why the Russian Federation is resolutely
opposed to the continuation of this pernicious practice.
We would like to request a vote on the proposal to
include the Ukrainian delegation’s politicized agenda
item, and we will vote against it. We hope that everyone
in this Hall will at last give Ukraine’s destructive
methods what they deserve and refuse to support its
proposal. Instead of indulging the provocations of the
Kyiv authorities, let us concentrate on finally calling
on Ukraine to heed the voice of its compatriots in the
eastern part of the country.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): This is the fourth time
that the Russian delegation has demanded a recorded
vote on the decision to retain agenda item 65, entitled
“The situation in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine”, on the agenda of the General Assembly
session and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-sixth session . We were not taken by surprise,
but we very much regret the sustained disrespectful
attitude of the Russian delegation to the Member States
and the General Assembly.
As a party to the inter-State conflict, the Russian
Federation’s position is quite predictable. The Russian
Federation is an occupying Power, and I remind
everyone that the General Assembly has declared it as
such. It has not ceased its illegal actions in temporarily
occupied Crimea, in contravention of international
law, including international humanitarian law and the
relevant General Assembly resolutions. It is continuing
its militarization of the peninsula in violation of the law
of the sea. The human rights situation in the temporarily
occupied territories continues to deteriorate, as is
clearly reflected in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, entitled “Situation of human rights
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine” (A/HRC/47/58), which will be
presented to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
session pursuant to resolution 75/192.
I would like to highlight the holding of the inaugural
summit of the Crimea Platform, which took place
in Kyiv on 23 August, with the broad cross-regional
participation of Member States and representatives of
NATO, the European Union, the Council of Europe
18/23

09/09/2021

and the Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova
group. The Crimea Platform is a new international
consultation and coordination forum designed to
increase the effectiveness of the international response
to the temporary occupation of Ukraine’s peninsula,
end that occupation and restore peaceful control of
Crimea to Ukraine.
It is nevertheless regrettable that after the Crimea
Platform summit, the Russian occupation authorities
only worsened their repressive practices against
Ukrainian citizens seeking to enjoy their human
rights and fundamental freedoms in full. On 3 and
4 September, the Russian Federal Security Service
conducted house searches and detained five Crimean
Tatars, including Mr. Nariman Jalal, the First Deputy
Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar people.
The fact that Mr. Jalal has publicly supported the
Crimea Platform and took part in its inaugural summit
is clearly the real reason for his persecution. The fate of
Ukrainian citizens in Crimea, including those detained
since 2014 and deprived of their rights and freedoms
by the Russian Federation, is of profound concern.
We are grateful to all the Member States that have
condemned the Russian Federation’s illegal actions and
call on the occupying Power to immediately release all
Ukrainian citizens.
I will not start a substantive discussion on this
agenda item right now, as I am confident that the
Assembly will rightly decide to retain the item on its
agenda, despite the fact that problems related to the
coronavirus disease pandemic have prevented some
States from participating in today’s vote. Nevertheless,
I hope that all Member States will have a chance to
debate the issue later in the session, as we did during
the last three sessions. At the same time, for the sake
of clarity in the proceedings, I would like to highlight
the following.
First, my delegation is anxious to see the General
Assembly respond positively to Ukraine’s request for
the inclusion of the item on the provisional agenda
for the seventy-sixth session, and calls on all Member
States to vote in favour of it.
Secondly, as the Acting President has already
informed the Assembly, the Assembly decided to include
the item on its agenda for the current session. I would
like to point out that the decision at the beginning of the
session was adopted by consensus, both in the General
Committee and in plenary meetings. We therefore
21-24685

09/09/2021

consider the demand for a recorded vote today as yet
another attempt to undermine the special authority of
the Assembly, as the most representative main organ
of the Organization, to continue its consideration of an
issue of practical importance.
Thirdly, I would like to underline that the continuing
foreign occupation in Ukraine is not a new topic for the
General Assembly. All Member States are well aware
that in 2014, in view of the Russian armed aggression
being conducted against Ukraine, the General Assembly,
in its resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial integrity of
Ukraine”, affirmed its commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders.
Since then, the Assembly has condemned Russia’s
ongoing temporary occupation of parts of the territory
of Ukraine in numerous subsequent resolutions.
The Assembly’s retention of this item on its agenda
establishes a much-needed framework and venue for
the consideration of the situation in the temporarily
occupied territories. The consideration of the item
in plenary meetings for three years in a row has
demonstrated the international community’s growing
attention to the issue of the ongoing flagrant military
actions against Ukraine. In that regard, I would also like
to take this opportunity to inform the Assembly that
43 Member States and the European Union have joined
the Crimea Platform summit’s declaration, which, in
addition to safeguarding Ukraine’s territorial integrity
and independence, includes important commitments
for the protection of the international order based on
the rule of law, including a legal regime for seas and
oceans, as well as on compliance with international
humanitarian law and the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
I would like to call on all the States Members of
the United Nations that could not participate in the
inaugural summit to consider joining the declaration,
which remains open, and to vote in favour of today’s
procedural decision of the General Assembly. In so
doing, they are investing in their own future security.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
will vote in favour of the inclusion of this item on
the agenda of the General Assembly at its seventysixth session and we encourage others to do the same.
The position of the United Kingdom is clear. We do
not recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea
and remain concerned about the situation in the

A/75/PV.102

non-Government-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine.
As long as that situation continues, the United Kingdom
believes that the item should remain on the General
Assembly’s agenda. Let me reiterate that the United
Kingdom stands with the international community in
its unwavering support for Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the European
Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this explanation of vote.
The European Union reaffirms its resolute support
for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We reiterate that we do not recognize and continue to
condemn the illegal annexation of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by the
Russian Federation, which is a violation of international
law. It remains a direct challenge to international
security, with grave implications for the international
legal order, which protects the unity and sovereignty
of all States.
The EU continues to call for full compliance with
international human rights standards on the Crimean
peninsula. All pending cases of human rights violations
and abuses, such as enforced disappearances, torture
and killings, should be thoroughly investigated.
International human rights observers must be granted
full, free and unhindered access to the whole territory
of Ukraine, including the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol.
The EU recalls all the resolutions that have been
adopted on the topic during the past few years and calls
for their full implementation, including the Russian
Federation’s obligations under applicable international
humanitarian law. We reaffirm our full support to the
endeavours of the Normandy format, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
including the work of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine and the OSCE Observer Mission at
the Russian checkpoints at Gukovo and Donetsk, and
the Trilateral Contact Group.
The EU stresses the importance of enhancing
negotiating efforts aimed at a sustainable and

21-2468519/23

A/75/PV.102

peaceful resolution of the conflict through the full
implementation of the Minsk Agreements by all sides,
and through measures aimed at rebuilding confidence,
while underlining the responsibility of the Russian
Federation in that regard. For all those reasons, the
member States of the European Union and aligned
countries have decided to vote in favour of the inclusion
of the item “The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine” on the regular agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic and Baltic countries — Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden
and my own country, Latvia.
Today we reaffirm our strong support for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
within its internationally recognized borders. The
situation continues to deteriorate and the issue must
remain high on the international agenda. We do not
and will not recognize the illegal annexation of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol by the Russian Federation, which constitutes
an ongoing and serious breach of international law.
We reaffirm our full support to the endeavours
of the Normandy format and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), including
the work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine and the OSCE Observer Mission at the
Russian checkpoints of Gukovo and Donetsk, as well
as the Trilateral Contact Group. Together with our
international partners, including the members of the
recently created Crimea Platform, we will continue to
implement measures aimed at avoiding any direct or
implicit recognition of the illegal annexation. We call
on other Member States to adopt similar measures.
We support Ukraine in its request that the item
entitled “The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine” be retained on the agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session. We will
vote in favour of its inclusion and call on other Member
States to do the same.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I am taking the floor to explain our position on the
inclusion of agenda item 65, entitled “The situation in
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine”, on
the agenda of the General Assembly at its upcoming
session. We would like to reiterate our previous position
that debating multifaceted issues of a highly political
20/23

09/09/2021

and controversial nature will be of little, if any, use in
furthering the efforts to achieve a workable solution to
an issue that has already been agreed on in the Minsk
agreements of 2015, which were endorsed in Security
Council resolution 2202 (2015).
As long as there is an agreed international
mechanism in place that is supported by the Security
Council, inserting the dispute in question into the
agenda of the General Assembly each year risks sowing
division among Member States and exacerbating
differences rather than bridging them. It could even
undermine the internationally recognized agreed
framework for a settlement of the situation in Ukraine.
Iran’s principled position is to support a peaceful
resolution to the Ukrainian-Russian dispute. We firmly
believe that the issue should be addressed primarily by
the two States concerned. A solution reached outside
that framework will not work unless it is endorsed by
both of them.
The General Assembly, as a representative organ,
should not prematurely engage in a debate on an item
that has already been on the agenda of the Security
Council. The Islamic Republic of Iran therefore does
not support its inclusion on the agenda of the General
Assembly at its upcoming session and will vote against
the decision to include it.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): The
United States supports the retention of agenda item 65
on the provisional agenda of the General Assembly at
its seventy-sixth session. It is entirely appropriate for
the General Assembly to continue its deliberations
on Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, including
its ongoing violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity in Donbas and occupied Crimea.
We urge all delegations to vote in favour of the decision.
Mr. Inashvili (Georgia): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
Georgia supports Ukraine’s request for the
inclusion of item 65, entitled “The situation in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine”, on the
agenda of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
session. We reiterate our unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. We do not and
will not recognize the Russian Federation’s illegal
annexation of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, which
21-24685

09/09/2021

constitutes a grave violation of international law and
infringes on fundamental principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act, including the principles of territorial integrity,
the sovereign equality of States, the non-use or threat
of use of force and the inviolability of internationally
recognized borders. At the same time, we remain
gravely concerned about the humanitarian and human
rights situation in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine.
These are questions that directly affect the
maintenance of regional, as well as international, peace
and security. Maintaining the General Assembly’s close
attention to this issue during its seventy-sixth session
is therefore of vital importance. In that connection,
Georgia will vote in favour of the inclusion of item 65
on the agenda of the General Assembly at its seventysixth session and encourages others to do the same.
The Acting President: In view of the objection
that has been raised, the General Assembly will now
proceed to a recorded vote on the proposal that agenda
item 65, entitled “The situation in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine”, be included on the
provisional agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Barbados, Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran

A/75/PV.102

(Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Nicaragua,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Djibouti, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Gambia, India, Iraq, Israel,
Kenya, Kuwait, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mongolia, Nauru, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Paraguay, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Yemen
By 71 votes to 12, with 45 abstentions, the General
Assembly decided to include agenda item 65,
entitled “The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine”, on the provisional agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session
(decision 75/582).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to make
a statement.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I do not wish to distract the General Assembly
as we move on to the other agenda item, but I asked
for the floor simply to thank the 122 delegations that
did not wish to vote in favour of the proposal by the
Ukrainian delegation to include this item on the agenda
of the General Assembly at its next session. We are
sincerely grateful to all of them.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 65?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 91
Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
Assembly decided to include this item on the agenda for
its seventy-fifth session. In connection with the item, the
President of the General Assembly has received a letter

21-2468521/23

A/75/PV.102

dated 24 June 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of Mauritius to the United Nations requesting that the
consideration of the item be deferred to the seventysixth session of the Assembly.
May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to include agenda item 91 on the provisional
agenda of its seventy-sixth session?
It was so decided (decision 75/583).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of agenda item 91.
Agenda item 129
Multilingualism
Letter from the Permanent Representatives of
Andorra, Colombia and Côte d’Ivoire to the
United Nations (A/75/1009)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
Assembly decided to include this item on the agenda of
the seventy-fifth session. In connection with the item,
the President has received a letter dated 1 September
2021 from the Permanent Representatives of Andorra,
Colombia and Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations,
issued as document A/75/1009, requesting the deferral
of the consideration of this item, as well as of the
reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/798) and the
Joint Inspection Unit (A/75/960 and A/75/960/Add.1),
and the inclusion of the item on the provisional agenda
of the Assembly at its seventy-sixth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item, as
well as the reports of the Secretary General and the
Joint Inspection Unit, and to include the item on the
provisional agenda for its seventy-sixth session?
It was so decided (decision 75/584).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of agenda item 129.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
Assembly decided to include this item on the agenda
22/23

09/09/2021

for its seventy-fifth session. It is my understanding that
it would be desirable to include it on the provisional
agenda of the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include agenda item 125 on the provisional
agenda for its seventy-sixth session?
It was so decided (decision 75/585).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of agenda item 125.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
countries
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020,
the Assembly decided to include this sub-item on its
agenda for the seventy-fifth session. In connection with
the item, I have received a letter dated 5 September
2021 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations requesting that the consideration
of the sub-item be deferred to the Assembly’s seventysixth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer its consideration of sub-item (r)
of agenda item 130 and include it on the provisional
agenda for its seventy-sixth session?
It was so decided (decision 75/586).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (r) of agenda
item 130.
Agenda item 160
Financing of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
Assembly decided to include this item on its agenda for
the seventy-fifth session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item to
the Assembly’s seventy-sixth session.
21-24685

09/09/2021

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer its consideration of agenda item
160 and to include it on the provisional agenda for its
seventy-sixth session?

A/75/PV.102

It was so decided (decision 75/587).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 160.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

21-2468523/23
