S/2015/303

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 April 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK,
and developments related thereto, from 16 January to 15 April 2015.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all co mmunities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues to be present in Kosovo,
in line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political developments
3.
The major political developments in Kosovo during the reporting period
centred on the consolidation of the new Kosovo government and the resumption of
the high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, which was facilitated by the
European Union. Although the overall trends continued to be generally positive,
both processes faced challenges. Other challenges faced by the new government in
Pristina included the violent protests orchestrated by the opposition groups in
Pristina, the suspension of the participation of the Serbian Civic Initiative in the
government and Assembly of Kosovo following the announcement that the Minister
for Communities and Returns, a Kosovo Serb, was no longer part of the
government, and continuing irregular migration attempts from Kosovo. The
agreement on the integration of judiciary structures in northern Kosovo, reached on
9 February in Brussels, was a new important step in the European Union -facilitated
dialogue, although its implementation has been marked by delays. However, the
government has remained focused on its ambitious plans for reform and

15-06523 (E)

070515

*1506523*

S/2015/303

development across the range of fundamental matters relating to the economy and
the rule of law. Its programme of activities for the period 2015 -2018, adopted on
25 February, focused on five priorities: sustainable economic development,
employment and social welfare, the rule of law, the fulfilment of all criteria linked
to Kosovo’s European Union integration agenda, and reforms in the education and
health-care systems. In addition, and albeit belatedly, the Assembly of Kosovo has
taken key actions on property matters, on a future specialist court to try cases
investigated by the European Union Special Investigative Task Force, and on
measures to prevent the participation of persons from Kosovo in foreign conflicts.
4.
On 14 January, the President of the Assembly of Kosovo presented a draft law
on the amendment and supplementation of the Law on Publicly Owned Enterprises.
The Government of Serbia and 2,000 Kosovo Serb employees protested against the
draft law, which was subsequently withdrawn. The law would have affected the
status of the Trepca industrial enterprise, a major mining complex with facilities and
employees in southern and northern Kosovo, which is subject to ongoing ownership
disputes. On 19 January, an alternative law was adopted, which exte nded the legal
deadline for the reorganization of the Trepca industrial enterprise for an 18 -month
period, extendable to 36 months, effectively preventing its liquidation and granting
time to all parties concerned to address the issue.
5.
In my previous report, I informed the Security Council of the stoning of a bus
bringing Kosovo Serb internally displaced persons to Gjakovë/Ðakovica for
Orthodox Christmas on 6 January. Following public condemnation of the incident
by the Minister for Communities and Returns and leader of the Serbian Civic
Initiative, Aleksandar Jablanović, the opposition parties launched a sustained public
campaign demanding his dismissal as Minister. Both the above -mentioned issue and
the handling of the Trepca draft law by the government led the opposition parties, in
particular Vetëvendosje supported by the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, to
organize public protests against the government on 24 and 27 January. Parts of the
protesting crowds became violent and caused significant damage to public and
private buildings in the centre of Pristina. The protest on 27 January was particularly
violent, with 170 people requiring medical attention, including 107 police officers.
The Kosovo police responded well in the face of determined and viole nt protestors;
160 persons were arrested and subsequently released. On 3 February, the Prime
Minister, Isa Mustafa, announced that Mr. Jablanović was no longer part of the
government.
6.
In addition to the above-mentioned events, members of the Serbian Civic
Initiative officially suspended their participation in both the coalition government
and the Assembly of Kosovo. As at the end of the reporting period, they had not yet
returned, although some had participated individually in a limited number of officia l
meetings and had held frequent informal consultations throughout the period with
leaders in Pristina.
7.
On 18 March, the first joint meeting of Serb-majority municipal assemblies
was convened in Graçanicë/Gračanica. Around 200 Kosovo Serb representatives
from the central and local institutions of Kosovo, members of the interim municipal
councils funded by Belgrade and the Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija
of the Government of Serbia participated. The conclusions adopted expressed
general dissatisfaction with the situation in Kosovo, and demanded the
implementation of agreements reached between Belgrade and Pristina in the

2/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue, as well as between the
Serbian Civic Initiative and other members of the coalition government.
8.
On 9 February, the Prime Minister of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, and the
Kosovo Prime Minister, Mr. Mustafa, met in Brussels for the first time. The meeting
was facilitated by the European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Federica Mogherini, and marked the resumption of the high-level
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. The discussions achieved concrete results, the most
important of which was an agreement on the integration of the Kosovo judiciary
(see section V of the present report). In the context of further normalization of
relations, on 26 March Mr. Vučić initiated a direct telephone conversation with
Mr. Mustafa, marking a new level of cooperation between the two leaders. The call
was the first time the two had made contact without the presence of an international
mediator since they both took office in 2014. On 26 and 27 March, the High
Representative Mogherini visited Pristina and Belgrade to discuss the state of play
and next steps in the European Union-facilitated dialogue and in their respective
European paths.
9.
The major spike in irregular migration from Kosovo to Western Europe during
the previous reporting period continued until early February. On 5 February, the
Assembly of Kosovo adopted a resolution on illegal migration in which it outlined
measures to be taken by the Kosovo government to address the root causes and
implications of the phenomenon. Such measures included promoting economic
development, establishing a fund to prevent illegal migration, enacting chang es in
fiscal policy, concluding agreements with European Union countries on seasonal
employment, and combating the criminal networks of human traffickers. A number
of measures were taken subsequently at the regional level, under the coordination of
the European Police Office and the judicial cooperation unit of the European Union,
that led to the dismantling of criminal networks smuggling migrants from Kosovo.
The measures included meetings in Belgrade with the participation of police
officials from a number of European countries and Kosovo. The disruption of the
criminal networks, in conjunction with information campaigns conducted in Kosovo
and affected Western European countries, has significantly decreased migration
since February. On 11 March, the European Parliament adopted a resolution in
which it stressed the need for the Kosovo authorities to step up actions against
criminal groups that smuggle migrants and to address the root causes of the
problem.
10. On 12 March, the Assembly of Kosovo adopted a law on the prohibition of
joining armed conflicts outside the State territory, marking a significant step
forward in efforts to counter the recruitment of individuals from Kosovo to fight in
conflicts abroad, primarily in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq. The Law provides
for strong penalties for the organization, management of, recruitment for and
training in any activities for that purpose, as well as for incitement to fight in
foreign conflicts. On 25 March, the President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, sign ed the
Law, which then entered into force. The Kosovo authorities also established an
inter-agency task force for the prevention of violent extremism and radicalization.
11. On 25 March, alongside Western Balkan countries, Serbia participated in a
ministerial conference hosted by Kosovo in Pristina on regional economic
cooperation under the so-called Gymnich Formula. High-level European Union
officials, including the Commissioner for European Neighbourhood Policy and

15-06523

3/20

S/2015/303

Enlargement Negotiations, Johannes Hahn, also attended and reiterated the
commitment of the European Union to continue to invest in road and rail
infrastructure throughout the region. The ministers agreed on a joint statement
referring to further acceleration of the “Berlin process”, in referenc e to the first
Conference on the western Balkans, held in Berlin on 28 August 2014, and a list of
specific projects.
12. On 7 March, the government of Kosovo adopted the draft constitutional
amendments required to establish a specialist court to try cases arising from the
findings of the European Union Special Investigative Task Force. On 9 March, the
President of the Assembly of Kosovo referred the proposed amendments to the
Kosovo Constitutional Court for a preliminary review. On 15 April, the Court
concluded that the amendments were admissible and in conformity with the Kosovo
Constitution. The President of Kosovo has called on the Assembly to complete the
remaining steps required from Kosovo for the establishment of the specialist court.

III. Northern Kosovo
13. In northern Kosovo, the political focus continued to be centred on the
disagreement between the authorities in Pristina and the four municipal authorities
of northern Kosovo over the finalization of the municipal budgets. There were also
a number of largely peaceful protests related to political and socioeconomic issues.
14. The stand-off between Pristina and the four municipal authorities continued
because Pristina’s requirement that the northern municipalities readopt their
municipal budgets in line with Kosovo legislation remained unmet. The key point of
contention regards the inclusion of expenditures for health and education, which
have hitherto been funded by Belgrade. Full agreement over the issue is likely to be
contingent on the establishment of the association/community of Serb
municipalities. On 26 February, the Ministry of Local Government Administration
sent a letter to each of the four mayors requesting that the municipal assemblies
approve the Pristina-revised budgets by 1 March or face dissolution. Although the
municipal assemblies have not been dissolved, in spite of their failure to meet the
deadline, the accounts of the four northern municipalities have been frozen.
15. As in past years, the resumption of house construction wor ks in the Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani neighbourhood in North Mitrovica was marked by inter -ethnic
tensions. On 18 and 20 March, attempts by Kosovo Albanians to resume housing
construction in the area triggered Kosovo Serb protests, leading to the erection of
roadblocks and a confrontation between the two communities. The Kosovo police
intervened and defused the situation. The mayors of North and South Mitrovica
subsequently reached an agreement to temporarily halt all construction in the area,
establish working groups, and explore, in coordination with the central authorities,
options for a sustainable solution to the long-standing issue.
16. The prevailing socioeconomic situation in northern Kosovo has also amplified
the concerns of the 762 employees of the Serbian civil protection service on their
integration into Kosovo institutions. So far, Pristina has offered 550 posts in
government ministries and agencies and public companies in northern Kosovo,
which would be financed from the development fund established for northern
Kosovo in line with the First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013.

4/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

17. On 4 March, the Belgrade-operated electricity provider, Elektrokosmet,
commenced collective power cuts in certain areas of northern Kosovo in which the
majority of consumers had accumulated outstanding bills since 1 January 2015. The
collective cuts were discontinued on 25 March. However, individual consumer
power cuts began on 6 April, affecting businesses and consumers without meters.
18. UNMIK continued to facilitate meetings of the United Nations Development
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and a
Serbian forestry company on the integration of its employees into the Kosovo
system.

IV. Security
19. The overall security situation in Kosovo remained stable, with the exception of
the violent protests in Pristina referred to in paragraph 5 of the present report, and a
series of violent incidents in North Mitrovica as described below.
20. On 16 January, a EULEX monitoring, mentoring and advising team resumed
its activities, which had been suspended since April 2014 for security reasons, at the
Zubin Potok police station.
21. On 19 January, an estimated 2,000 Kosovo Serbs staged protests by blo cking
roads in Leposaviq/Leposavić, Zvečan/Zveçan and Zubin Potok, over fears that the
Trepca mining complex would be privatized or nationalized by the government of
Kosovo. On 20 January, around 300 Kosovo Albanian miners in South Mitrovica
staged a two-day strike, demanding clarification from the management of the
mining complex on the amendments made to the Law on the Reorganization of
Certain Enterprises and Their Assets, adopted by the Kosovo Assembly on
19 January. The strike ended after intervention by the municipal and the Pristina
authorities.
22. On 18 and 23 March, around 250 protestors from across Kosovo, including
former officers of the Ministry of the Interior of Serbia, demonstrated peacefully in
North Mitrovica, calling for their integration into the Kosovo police or
reinstatement into the Ministry of the Interior. On 9 March, around 500 people,
including the mayors of the four northern municipalities and the Kosovo Minister
for Local Government Administration, protested peacefully in North Mit rovica
against the alleged plans of the Kosovo government to introduce rotations for the
commanding staff of the Kosovo police in northern Kosovo.
23. On 9 April, a 16-year-old Kosovo Serb was stabbed at the main bridge in
North Mitrovica. On 10 April, a Kosovo Albanian male disappeared in North
Mitrovica after reportedly falling into the Ibër/Ibar River in unclear circumstances.
At the request of the Kosovo police, KFOR authorized Kosovo Security Force
divers to conduct a search and rescue operation in the river, which, however, has not
been successful thus far. On 13 April, in North Mitrovica, three Kosovo Serbs
suffered firearm injuries as a result of shooting by an unknown suspect. In another
incident, shots were fired at a Kosovo police vehicle parked a t the North Mitrovica
hospital, causing material damage. In Zubin Potok, a hand grenade was thrown into
a parking lot of the Kosovo police station, damaging three police vehicles. A note
accusing EULEX, the Kosovo police and “domestic traitors” was found a t the crime
scene. The Kosovo President condemned the violent incidents, as did senior

15-06523

5/20

S/2015/303

officials of the Government of Serbia. The mayors of North and South Mitrovica
met on 11 April to discuss the security situation. They called for calm and restraint
among the local population and agreed to call an urgent meeting with the Kosovo
police and international representatives to discuss the security situation.
24. Although the number of potentially ethnically-motivated incidents has
decreased from that of the previous reporting period, there has been an increase in
the number of incidents affecting unoccupied properties owned by non -majority
communities.

V. Rule of law
25. UNMIK continued to monitor activities and exercise some responsibilities in
the area of the rule of law, and maintained technical cooperation with relevant
institutions in Pristina and Belgrade. UNMIK continued to facilitate requests for
mutual legal assistance from countries that have not recognized Kosovo and to
provide document-certification services both to Kosovo residents and at the request
of non-recognizing States, primarily for the certification of civil status and for
academic and pension documents. A total of 498 such documents were processed
from 16 January to 14 March 2015.
26. UNMIK also continued to facilitate communications between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and its
member countries. During the reporting period, UNMIK received 14 requests for
international wanted notices and issued 32 INTERPOL red notices. The Kosovo
Minister for Internal Affairs participated in the Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism in Washington, D.C. in February 2015, where he met with the Secretary
General of INTERPOL.
27. On 25 March, the Kosovo authorities issued a call for applications for judicial
positions in the Basic Court of Mitrovica to be established in accordance with the
European Union-facilitated agreement of 9 February on the integration of judiciary
structures in northern Kosovo. The agreement, which was based on the principles
agreed during talks in Brussels on 12 February 2014, provides for a single Basic
Court of Mitrovica presided over by a Kosovo Serb judge, with one building in
North Mitrovica and another in South Mitrovica. On 26 February, the Assembly of
Kosovo elected three new members of the Kosovo Judicial Council for a five -year
mandate. The election ended a deadlock in the Judicial Council that had lasted six
months owing to the lack of a quorum. One of the selected candid ates, however,
subsequently came under investigation for alleged professional misconduct. The
investigation is ongoing.
28. During the reporting period, concerns were expressed about the transparency
of procurement activities by Kosovo institutions. The annual report for 2014 of the
procurement review body, which was published on 9 March, cited 537 cases of
violation of the law, including irregularities in bid evaluations, decisions on bid
winners, tender dossiers and technical requirements, as well as uneq ual treatment of
bidders. An annual report issued by the independent Kosovo Anti -Corruption
Agency also indicated an increase in criminal charges, attributable largely to the
non-declaration or false declaration of property. The Kosovo Minister of Finance
stressed the need for amendments to the Law on Public Procurement and measures
to ensure stricter adherence to professional ethics by public officials.

6/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

29. On 4 February, the Kosovo Memory Book database was presented by the
Humanitarian Law Center in Pristina. The database, which aims to document all
casualties from the conflict from the period 1998 -2000, contains the names of
13,535 persons, civilian and military, who were allegedly killed during the conflict.
The Memory Book was also presented in Belgrade.
30. As at 15 March, a total of 1,655 persons remained listed as missing from the
Kosovo conflict, and UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress on the
issue. On 29 January, the Pristina and Belgrade delegations in the Working Group
on Missing Persons held a meeting in Rudnica, central Serbia, at Belgrade’s
initiative. They discussed next steps with regard to two possible mass grave sites in
Serbia at Kozarevo (Novi Pazar) and in Rudnica.
31. In April, an independent expert who had been appointed i n November 2014 to
review the implementation of the mandate of EULEX with a particular focus on the
handling of recent allegations (see S/2015/74, para. 28), submitted his report to the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
The report, which is publicly available, was transmitted to the European Parliament
and European Union member States. Although the report points out management
shortcomings, among other things, it also states that there was no cover-up attempt
as had been alleged.

VI. Returns and communities
32. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
registered 36 individual voluntary returnees to Kosovo during January, February and
March 2015, including 25 Kosovo Serbs, 8 Kosovo Roma and 3 Kosovo Gorani. As
at March, the total number of voluntary minority returns since 2000 was 25, 896, and
the total number of Kosovo internally displaced persons was 17,0 86 according to
estimates by UNHCR. Of the latter figure, 571 were living in 34 collective centres
in Kosovo. UNHCR continued to provide support to individual community members
in obtaining personal documentation and resolving issues relating to their civil
status. During January, February and March, 199 individuals were assisted by
UNHCR in obtaining civil documentation.
33. During the reporting period, efforts continued to advance voluntary returns to
Kosovo, including through local mechanisms. In a number of municipalities,
including Pejë/Peć, Obiliq/Obilić, Istog/Istok and Klinë/Klina, municipal working
groups and task forces on returns reviewed and approved lists of potential
beneficiaries within the framework of the fourth phase of the European Union
Return and Reintegration housing project, which is co-financed by the European
Union and the Ministry of Communities and Returns and is being implemented by
the International Organization for Migration.
34. Unresolved property rights remained a key impeding factor to progress in
voluntary returns and intercommunity relations in Kosovo. According to the OSCE
report, entitled “Review of illegal reoccupation cases in Kosovo”, more than 95 per
cent of the 326 cases referred to the prosecution offices by the Kosovo Property
Agency between 2008 and 2013 involved properties owned by Kosovo Serbs and
illegally reoccupied by Kosovo Albanians following evictions. The report outlined
serious shortcomings in the response of the authorities to the cases, including by the
Kosovo Property Agency, the offices of public prosecutors and the courts.

15-06523

7/20

S/2015/303

35. On 3 April, the Kosovo government approved a draft concept document
concerning the application procedures for members of non-majority communities
seeking employment in Kosovo institutions. The document is aimed at preparing the
ground for the implementation of legal provisions concerning the university in
North Mitrovica, including the establishment of a legal framework for the validation
of diplomas issued by the university for the purpose of employment in Kosovo
public institutions.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
36. On 30 January, two years after the adoption of a law calling for its
establishment, the council for the protection of the historic village of Hoçë e
Madhe/Velika Hoča, in the Rahovec/Orahovac municipality, was finally established.
On 5 March, the OSCE Mission in Kosovo facilitated a meeting of members of the
newly established council and members of the Council on the Cultural Heritage of
the Historic Centre of Prizren to share experiences and discuss achievements and
challenges regarding the functioning of the councils.
37. The Implementation Monitoring Council, which is co -chaired by the European
Union and the Kosovo authorities and includes representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Spatial Planning, the Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sport, the
Serbian Orthodox Church, the European Union and OSCE, continued to meet duri ng
the reporting period. On 5 March, the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning
informed the municipality of Deçan/Dečani that the Serbian Orthodox Church had
agreed to regularize the ongoing illegal construction in the special protective zone
around the Visoki Dečani Monastery, provided that no new structures were added to
the existing ones.
38. On the basis of a joint inspection and recommendation by members of the
Implementation Monitoring Council on 27 February, the Church of Christ the
Saviour, adjacent to the University of Pristina campus, was again sealed off in order
to prevent dwelling by squatters and further abuse by others.
39. The number of incidents affecting religious sites increased slightly during the
reporting period, with a total of 23 incidents. Serbian Orthodox Church and Islamic
religious and cultural heritage sites were targeted in 14 and 2 incidents respectively,
while such sites of other religions were targeted in the remaining seven incidents.

VIII. Human rights
40. On 19 February, the Agency for Gender Equality of the Office of the Prime
Minister presented a study on the participation, role and position of women in
central and local institutions and political parties in Kosovo. Published with support
from the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women), the study was produced within the framework of the Kosovo
action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
Among other measures, the study recommended the i mprovement of the
representation of women at the decision-making level. The Agency also hosted, on
the occasion of International Women’s Day on 8 March, a round -table discussion on
women’s property rights with a focus on a new draft administrative instruct ion for
the registration of property in the name of both spouses. According to the Kosovo

8/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

Cadastral Agency, property ownership among women in Kosovo, at approximately
8 per cent, remains significantly lower than in other parts of the region. On 1 April,
UNMIK organized a televised round-table discussion in South Mitrovica on women
and entrepreneurship, with the participation of Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb
women. The event, which was broadcast by TV Mitrovica, highlighted women’s
concerns related to corruption, difficulties in accessing financial credit and
achieving property ownership and the need to foster an entrepreneurial spirit among
the new generation of women.
41. On 20 March, the Kosovo President announced a decision to extend the oneyear mandate of the national council for the survivors of sexual violence during the
war for an unspecified duration. Established in March 2014 and led by the
President, the national council provides support for the implementation of the
amendments to the Law on the Status and the Rights of the Martyrs, Invalids,
Veterans, Members of Kosovo Liberation Army, Sexual Violence Victims of the
War, Civilian Victims and Their Families which were adopted by the Assembly of
Kosovo in March 2014.
42. On 12 March, the Office of the Language Commissioner in the Office of the
Prime Minister presented the key findings of a comprehensive study on the status of
the implementation of the Law on the Use of Languages in Kosovo. The study
concluded that limited financial, technical and human resources and the lack of
awareness of the legal framework continued to hinder the full implementation of the
Law in public institutions. The study also noted an increasing trend towards
monolingualism among civil servants employed within Kosovo in stitutions.
43. Owing to financial constraints, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) closed its only office in Kosovo on
28 February 2015. As at 1 March, OHCHR is continuing its engagement through the
participation of a local human rights officer in joint human rights programmes with
other United Nations entities in Kosovo, with the support of OHCHR headquarters.
44. During the reporting period, UNMIK liaised with the Committee on Enforced
Disappearances on issues related to the respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Kosovo, as set forth in the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and in the follow-up to a visit to
Kosovo by the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances from
24 to 26 June 2014.
45. The Human Rights Advisory Panel, which was established in 2006 to
investigate individual allegations of human rights violations committed by UNMIK,
continued its activities and issued its annual rep ort for 2014 in March. As at the end
of March 2015, the Panel has closed 454 cases, while 73 cases remain outstanding.

IX. Observations
46. I welcome the resumption of high-level meetings in Brussels in the context of
the European Union-facilitated dialogue between the Prime Minister of Serbia,
Aleksandar Vučić, and the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Isa Mustafa. The spirit of
constructive cooperation and the emphasis on common interests remain
encouraging, and the agreement on the integration of the judiciary in northern
Kosovo, reached on 9 February, demonstrates the commitment of both sides to the
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013 and to the continuation of the dialogue. Both Belgrade

15-06523

9/20

S/2015/303

and Pristina should take all necessary steps to faithfully implement the entirety of
the agreements reached thus far.
47. I note the steps taken by the Kosovo authorities towards the establishment of
the specialist court to try cases arising from the findings of the European Union
Special Investigative Task Force. It is essential that the next steps in the process,
which are crucial to the future of Kosovo, proceed expeditiously, and I urge the
political leaders in Kosovo to redouble their efforts to that end . In spite of the many
challenges presented to the new Kosovo government during its first 100 days,
I commend the clear determination it has shown to pursue a course of necessary
economic reform, respect for the rule of law and respectful engagement to pro mote
reconciliation among Kosovo’s communities. I strongly urge all political actors in
Kosovo to refrain from the use of violence as a means to pursue political objectives,
and to resolve their differences through peaceful means.
48. Just as importantly, it is crucial that both Belgrade and Pristina move forward
in the implementation of the outstanding provisions of the Agreement of 19 April
2013. The core issue in this respect remains the establishment of the
association/community of Serb municipalities. I urge political leaders in both
Belgrade and Pristina to address the matter with urgency in consultation with the
Kosovo Serbs and their political leaders, whose interests will be directly affected by
the creation of the association/community. It is also essential that the issue of the
resumption of Kosovo Serb participation in the Kosovo government and Assembly
of Kosovo is resolved expeditiously.
49. Efforts should also continue towards the consolidation of stability in northern
Kosovo and the promotion of strengthened institutional relations and cooperation
between the local municipal authorities and the authorities in Pristina. To that end,
both the Kosovo authorities and municipal leaders in northern Kosovo should
engage constructively with one another to resolve the dispute over the municipal
budgets and ensure continued delivery of basic community services. It also remains
important that security incidents, such as those in North Mitrovica in April, are
addressed promptly and do not affect intercommunity relations. Sustained efforts to
promote respect for the rule of law and genuine long-term reconciliation among
Kosovo’s communities should also continue.
50. I welcome the enhanced regional cooperation to address the worrying trend of
irregular migration from Kosovo in recent months. The concerted efforts by law
enforcement authorities from a number of European countries, in cooperation with
Belgrade and Pristina, are of particular note. However, further and longer -term
efforts should be undertaken to improve the socioeconomic conditions in Kosovo
and to address other causes of the recent population outflow.
51. I also welcome the legal initiatives taken by the Kosovo authorities to address
the complex issue of radicalization and violent extremism.
52. I express my gratitude to my Special Representative, Farid Zarif, for his
commitment to and effective leadership of the Mission, and to all UNMIK staff for
their dedicated service. I also thank our partners on the ground, including KFOR,
EULEX, OSCE, the European Union and members of the United Nations Kosovo
Team, for their cooperation and valuable contribution.

10/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the
Secretary-General on the activities of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo covering the period from
16 January to 15 April 2015
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued to
undertake monitoring, mentoring and advising activities and to impl ement its
executive functions in line with its mandate regarding the rule of law. Verdicts were
pronounced in cases relating to corruption and the smuggling of migrants through
Serbia to Hungary and other European Union member States. In addition, a number
of organized crime trials started, including one involving an alleged international
narcotics kingpin. The strike action taken by local first instance judges in March
blocked the processing of many cases during that month, including for panels with
EULEX judges.
In terms of monitoring, mentoring and advising activities, the Mission
continued to advise the authorities in Kosovo on irregular migration. The
phenomenon peaked during January and February but, following actions taken by
the Kosovo authorities the number of irregular migrants has decreased drastically.
EULEX continued to monitor the recruitment process for a new Chief State
Prosecutor and has expressed its concern over the delay in the appointment of the
selected candidate. The lack of a quorum at the Kosovo Judicial Council, which
lasted for almost six months, was finally resolved through the election of three new
members.
In northern Kosovo, the security situation remained relatively calm. The
Kosovo police responded professionally to the instances that threatened to
destabilize the relative calm (tensions in the ethnically mixed neighbourhood of
Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani in Mitrovica North, protests by some former members of the
Ministry of the Interior of Serbia who had not been integrated). EULE X continued
its outreach activities to increase the familiarity of the local population and
leadership with the Mission’s mandate and activities.
Significant progress was achieved in the European Union-facilitated dialogue;
agreements were reached on justice integration and on the integration of the Serbia sponsored civil protection service. Other positive developments included the first ever meeting of the Serbian Police Director and the Kosovo Police Director, held in
Belgrade, and the third central level meeting on the implementation of the
agreement on the integrated management of crossing points, held at the Kosovo
Police Headquarters in Pristina, both of which were facilitated by EULEX.

15-06523

11/20

S/2015/303

2.

EULEX activities, January to April 2015

2.1

Executive
War crimes
During the reporting period, panels of three EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic
Court continued trials in three ongoing war crimes cases. All cases are led by
EULEX prosecutors from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
Main developments in organized crime and corruption
On 16 January, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges started the trial
against an alleged narcotics kingpin at Pristina Basic Court amid significant press
interest. The defendant is charged with organized crime, drug trafficking and
aggravated murder. The case is led by a EULEX prosecutor from the Kosovo
Special Prosecution Office.
On 16 January, a EULEX prosecutor from the Special Prosecution Office filed
an indictment against seven defendants for alleged corruption i n a tender process for
security services at the public utility company then named Kosovo Energy
Corporation (KEK). The alleged value of the damage to KEK exceeds €6 million.
On 19 January, a EULEX prosecutor from the Special Prosecution Office filed
an indictment against five persons, of whom three are officials within the Ministry
of Internal Affairs and two are engaged in business. The defendants are charged
with various offences including organized crime and abuse of official position or
authority. The allegations concern a tender process for the supply of arms,
ammunition and surveillance equipment to the Kosovo police. There is, however,
nothing to suggest that the Kosovo police is implicated.
On 22 January, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges pronounced the
judgement in a case against eight defendants charged with smuggling of migrants
from Albania and Kosovo through Hungary to other European Union member
States. All defendants pleaded guilty. Seven persons received suspended sentences
ranging from one year and six months to two years, while one was sentenced to two
years and four months imprisonment.
On 1 April, the trial started against six defendants charged with organized
crime, smuggling of migrants and money-laundering. The case is led by a EULEX
prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
Other serious crimes cases
On 21 January, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge sentenced a
bank director to three years of imprisonment for fraud, abuse of official position and
falsification of documents. A suspended sentence of 10 months was imposed against
another defendant. The defendants were also ordered to pay €200,000 and €5,000
respectively in compensation.
On 23 January, a EULEX prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution
Office filed an indictment on terrorism-related charges against five defendants. The
defendants were arrested as a result of a Kosovo police investigation for aggravated
assault committed against two Christian missionaries in Pristina in 2013.

12/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

On 4 February, a EULEX majority panel at Pristina Basic Court sentenced two
defendants to one year and three months of imprisonment respectively for trading in
influence. They were also obliged to pay €200,000 as compensation. In 2009, they
had received €200,000 for exerting influence over the decision -making of officials
from the privatization agency in a tendering process. The case was led by a EULEX
prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
On 6 February, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at
Gjilan/Gnjilane Basic Court started the trial against a defendant who is suspected of
having shot and seriously injured several police officers in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia during two attacks in 2004, which resulted in grievous
bodily harm, as well as of illegal possession of a large quantity of weaponry. The
case is led by a EULEX prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
On 19 March, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at the Court
of Appeals finalized the verdict in a migrant smuggling case. The Court of Appeals
found substantial violations of the criminal procedure in the verdict of Prizren Basic
Court in 2013 and ordered a retrial.
On 25 March, Kosovo police arrested 10 suspects during searches at six
locations in the municipality of Vushtrri/Vučitrn, during a joint Kosovo
police/EULEX operation. The searches relate to an ongoing investigation by
EULEX prosecutors at Mitrovica Basic Prosecution Office into extortion, usury, tax
evasion and prohibited trade. The following day, a EULEX judge held a detention
hearing of the suspects and three of the defendants were ordered detained on remand
for one month.
On 2 April, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at Prizren Basic
Court sentenced a defendant to seven years’ imprisonment and ordered him to pay a
fine of €25,000 for unauthorized possession, distribution and sale of dangerous
narcotics and psychotropic substances.
Allegations found in the report of the Special Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal
Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe
The allegations made in the 2011 report of the Special Rapporteur for the
Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Dick
Marty, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human organs
in Kosovo”, continued to be investigated during the reporting period by the Special
Investigative Task Force. The inquiry conducted by the Task F orce, which was
formed in 2011, seeks to determine the individual criminal liability of those most
responsible for the actions alleged in the report.
Engagement is ongoing with injured parties, victim advocacy groups and
individuals in order to gather information relevant to the investigation. Cooperation
with judicial and law-enforcement authorities in the region and beyond remains
satisfactory. The Task Force looks forward to sustained cooperation from all parties
as investigative and operational activities continue to make progress.
The Kosovo government adopted the necessary constitutional amendments, on
7 March. The draft amendments were then transmitted by the Speaker of the Kosovo
Assembly to the Kosovo Constitutional Court. On 15 April, the Constit utional Court
issued its assessment of the amendments and found them in compliance with

15-06523

13/20

S/2015/303

constitutional safeguards for the protection of human rights. The build -up of the
planning team for the specialist chambers continues.
Department of Forensic Medicine
On 9 February, EULEX forensic experts at the Department of Forensic
Medicine executed an order of the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office and exhumed
a body in Mitrovica North. In March, EULEX forensic anthropologists at the
Department started delivering practical training in anthropology to two local
medical doctors. EULEX is also training local forensic doctors in performing
autopsies in missing persons’ cases. Two graves were exhumed and both autopsies
were performed jointly with local doctors. EULEX also conducted field operations
in the Suhareka/Suva Reka area and a site visit in the Pejë/Peć region to explore a
possible grave site. EULEX sent 104 bone samples for DNA analysis to the
International Committee on Missing Persons, based in Bosnia and Herz egovina,
which currently only has a budget to process around 20 of these. On 2 April, the
Department met the families of 28 victims found in Raška, Serbia, in 2014 to
officially inform them about the identification of their relatives and hand over
documents.
Property rights
At the end of March, the Kosovo Property Claims Commissioners terminated
their work after finalizing draft decisions stemming from their last formal session in
December 2014 and reprocessing 23 claims because of processing errors. F rom
16 January to 15 April, the Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel received 80 new
appeals and adjudicated 12 appeals.
During the reporting period, the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for
privatization matters rendered 514 decisions in trial panel cases and finalized
60 cases at the appellate panel level.
Other important developments
Local first instance judges were on strike from 3 to 27 March. This hampered
the processing of cases throughout Kosovo, including for panels with EULEX
judges. Trials throughout Kosovo were delayed, with the exception of Mitrovica
Basic Court, where cases continue to be adjudicated by panels composed of EULEX
judges only.
2.2

Strengthening
In January and February, irregular migration from Kosovo towards the
European Union reached its peak. There are strong indications that numbers have
since decreased. EULEX continuously monitored the phenomenon and advised
Kosovo Border Police on the matter. The biggest challenge for the Border Police is
to strike the right balance between facilitating the freedom of movement while
recognizing travellers who have the intention to proceed to the European Union
without proper documentation. Once recognized, the only legal possibility for the
Border Police is to persuade those individuals not to leave Kosovo by informing
them of the associated risks and consequences. In line with the advice of EULEX to
the Border Police, there has been an improvement in the flow of information
targeting those intending to travel through Serbia to European Union countries

14/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

without a visa (for example, informing them about financial, legal and personal
risks and possible consequences). Upon the advice of the Mission, the Border Police
started to perform checks of the licences of bus and taxi companies jo intly with the
Kosovo police Traffic Unit and inspectors of the Ministry of Infrastructure. The
Border Police were further advised to improve the collection of intelligence from
repatriated irregular migrants.
Furthermore, the Mission provided strategically targeted advice to the Ministry
of Internal Affairs on measures to reduce the migration phenomenon. This advice
included a comprehensive public information campaign, better utilization of the
border management system to keep track of people entering or exiting Kosovo,
improved information-sharing with Serbian counterparts at the crossing points and a
review of the National Migration Strategy 2013-2018.
The lack of a quorum at the Kosovo Judicial Council, which lasted for almost
six months, was finally resolved through the election of three new members
(including one from a non-majority community) for five-year mandates by the
Assembly of Kosovo. In addition, the Judicial Council has opined that the mandate
of the remaining three former members of the Ind ependent Judicial and
Prosecutorial Commission (precursor to the Kosovo Judicial Council and the
Kosovo Prosecutorial Council) still serving in the Judicial Council should be
extended as there was an option of serving one additional year. In addition, the
Mission advised the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council with regard to the extension of
the mandate of a member of that Council who had been appointed by the
Independent Judicial and Prosecutorial Commission. The Kosovo Prosecutorial
Council followed the same line as the Kosovo Judicial Council. EULEX advised
that the extension in the mandate of the member of the Prosecutorial Council could
contribute towards ensuring institutional stability.
The Kosovo Prosecutorial Council finalized the repeated selection proce ss for
the Chief State Prosecutor on 20 February by nominating the only remaining
candidate for the position after the final interview. The proposal was forwarded to
the Kosovo President for formal appointment. The Mission continues to monitor
developments and has expressed concern over the delay in the finalization of the
appointment, which is still pending in the President’s office.
EULEX designed and conducted a specialized seminar for the Kosovo Anti Corruption Agency in order to strengthen capacities of staff in conducting effective
preliminary investigations as well as preparing substantiated investigation reports
for the prosecution offices.
Since the beginning of the year, the Kosovo police had to deal with several
high-profile and mass events. The performance of the police in providing VIP escort
and protection as well as in crowd and riot control indicates that there has been
significant improvement in its operational capacity and EULEX assessed the
police’s performance as competent and in accordance with European best practices.
In February, Kosovo Customs announced an increase in revenue of 4.14 per
cent from 2013 to 2014, despite a significant decrease in imports. Customs revenue
collection amounts to around 80 per cent of Kosovo’s gross domest ic product. The
success of Kosovo Customs is attributed mainly to improved work practices and
enhanced compliance measures. EULEX provided advice for their introduction and
implementation. The 2015 revenue collection target set by the Kosovo authorities is

15-06523

15/20

S/2015/303

even higher and more challenging in the light of decreasing imports and staff
shortages. EULEX also met the Ministry of Finance to discuss plans and concerns.
In order to address the recurring issue of shortages of Kosovo Correctional Service
staff in prisons, the Mission proposed a more efficient use of staff resources.
Finally, the preferential treatment of some prisoners has been flagged as an issue of
concern by EULEX on a number of occasions.
In March, the Kosovo Correctional Service granted humanitarian leave to a
high-profile prisoner for four consecutive days following the death of a person that
was not a first degree relative. This is against Service regulations, not in accordance
with the common practice of the Service and therefore considered to be preferential
treatment. The Mission advised the Service to conduct an internal investigation and
to take adequate measures as deemed appropriate.
2.3

The north
The Mission continued to meet regularly with political representatives, civil
society, Kosovo Police Regional Command North, the Kosovo Correctional Service
at the Mitrovica Detention Centre and others as part of its outreach in the north.
The political and security situation remained relatively calm with the
exception of a few notable incidents. On 19 January, miners and municipal
employees held a peaceful demonstration in response to the announced intention of
Kosovo authorities to nationalize the Trepca mining complex, which was later
postponed. Former employees of the Serbian Ministry of the Interior who did not
integrate into the Kosovo police staged a series of peaceful protests in Mitrovica
North in February and March, demanding integration of remaining staff or
reintegration into the Serbian Ministry of the Interior.
Among other security incidents, on 28 February, there was an explosion in
Mitrovica North, causing minor material damage. On 9 March, the northern mayors
organized a protest against the announced intention of the Director General of the
Kosovo police to reshuffle staff to match ranks with appropriate positions in Kosovo
police north. On 18 and 20 March, tensions flared up again in the ethnically mixed
residential area of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani. EULEX monitored the events while being
ready to intervene as second responder. However, this was not necessary as the
Kosovo police contained the situation. In addition, the joint political message sent
by the Mayors of Mitrovica South and Mitrovica North calling for mutual
compromise and further talks helped to ease tensions. On 29 M arch, Kosovo
Albanian football supporters gathered from the south side on the main bridge in
Mitrovica to cheer the results of a football game. The Kosovo police was able to
contain the situation thus averting the potential of conflict with Kosovo Serbs on the
north side of the bridge. On 2 April, there were two cases of suspected arson,
involving the private vehicles of Kosovo police officers. On 4 April, a car owned by
a private firm was set on fire in Zvečan/Zveçan. On 10 April, a Kosovo Albanian
juvenile was reported missing. The Kosovo police initiated a search and rescue
operation which was led by the Kosovo Security Force and supported by KFOR and
the Mitrovica North fire brigade and coordinated with EULEX and the mayors in
Mitrovica North and South. EULEX exercised its executive functions in a number
of judicial cases that continue to attract wide attention. On 10 -11 April, a number of
potentially inter-ethnic incidents involving youth were recorded near the main
bridge in Mitrovica North. The Kosovo police, together with EULEX and KFOR,

16/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

and in coordination with the mayors of Mitrovica South and Mitrovica North,
contained the situation and prevented further escalation. On 13 April, a hand
grenade exploded at the car park of the Kosovo police station in Zubin Potok,
causing material damage. On the same day, a police vehicle parked in Mitrovica
North came under fire by unknown perpetrators. The police officers who were
manning the vehicle were, at the time of the incident, interviewing the victims of a
shooting that took place in a local nightclub the night before.
EULEX exercised its executive functions in a number of judicial cases that
continue to attract wide attention. On 19 January, the main trial started against two
defendants in a case involving the murder of Kosovo police officer Enver Zymberi
in 2011. In parallel, the hearings continued in another case involving the same
crimes and events but two other defendants. On 12 February, a EULEX prosecutor
interviewed two Kosovo police officers from Zubin Potok in this case and the police
executed searches in their houses.
Also on 12 February, a panel of three EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic Court
sentenced a defendant to 14 years’ imprisonment for sexual abuse of persons under
the age of 16, attempted facilitation of prostitution, attempted sexual assault and
rape.
The main trial in the case relating to a Kosovo Serb politician accused of war
crimes continued throughout the reporting period; the hearing of all prosecution
witnesses was finalized by the end of March. On 20 March, EULEX prosecutors
issued 13 summonses for interviews in relation to the ongoing investigation into the
murder of the EULEX customs officer Audrius Šenavičius in 2013. Ten of the 13
individuals summoned presented themselves for the interviews. EULEX prosecutors
are assessing the follow-up to the non-appearance of the three remaining
individuals.
The Mission continued to provide advice to the Kosovo police through its
monitoring, mentoring and advising efforts, including on inter-ethnic crime, on
principles of intelligence-led policing and on community policing, and supported
the police in establishing four local public security committees. On 16 January,
EULEX resumed its monitoring, mentoring and advising role in the Municipality of
Zubin Potok after the withdrawal of its staff from there in April 2014 because of
security concerns. EULEX helped Kosovo police north to understand the
importance of improved cooperation with Kosovo police centralized units and
Kosovo police in Mitrovica South, EULEX and KFOR for a more efficient response
to incidents.
2.4

Dialogue implementation
There were positive developments with regard to justice integration, for which
an agreement was reached on 9 February in the framework of the European Union facilitated dialogue. In this context, on 25 March, the Kosovo Judicial Council and
the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council issued vacancy notices for 15 judges and
48 prosecutors in Kosovo judicial institutions for the process of integration. The
vacancies were published on the institutions’ websites as well as in four Kosovo
newspapers, with an application deadline of 25 May.
On 10 March, EULEX facilitated the first-ever meeting of the police directors
of Serbia and Kosovo, which took place in a friendly atmos phere. The parties

15-06523

17/20

S/2015/303

discussed security along the crossing points with Serbia, the integration of former
officers of the Ministry of the Interior of Serbia, arrest warrants for Serbian citizens
and irregular migration. Both sides reiterated their interest in intensive cooperation
and agreed that direct operational contacts are urgently needed.
On 12 March, the third central level meeting on the implementation of the
agreement on the integrated management of crossing points was held at the Kosovo
police headquarters in Pristina. This was the first meeting between the two parties
hosted outside European Union premises and signifies yet another positive step
forward in the implementation of the agreement. The meeting produced a number of
positive agreements including on cooperation on irregular migration and entry/exit
forms.
On 27 January, the transfer of administrative responsibility of crossing point
Bërnjak/Tabalije from EULEX to the Kosovo police was finalized. Besides the
communication link, all other services are now the responsibility of the Kosovo
police.
On 26 March, the parties reached an agreement on the process of integration of
the civil protection staff in northern Kosovo. EULEX will support the
implementation of the agreement in the coming months.
EULEX continued to monitor the use of certified copies of civil registry books
with visits to 125 field offices in southern Kosovo. Furthermore, the Mission
provided advice to the Civil Registration Agency in order to help prepare or
improve its cooperation agreements on information-sharing with law enforcement
agencies.
The Kosovo Food and Veterinary Agency informed EULEX that it has issued
licences to all 30 companies importing controlled food products through crossing
point Rudnica/Jarinjë that had applied for licences before the 31 December
deadline.

3.

Other key issues
Mr. Jean Paul Jacqué, the independent and experienced legal personality
appointed by the High Representative on 10 November to review the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate with a particular focus on the handling of
recent allegations presented his report to the High Representative early in April.
In his report, Mr. Jacqué clearly refers to the willingness and desire of the
Mission to “find out the truth” in this entire matter and to ensure the allegations are
fully investigated. Mr. Jacqué has found no evidence of an attempt at a cover -up by
the Mission, as previously alleged.
The report also contains 21 recommendations, each of which will be carefully
considered to identify how to best implement it.

18/20

15-06523

S/2015/303

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 April 2015)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

7

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 April 2015)
Country

15-06523

Number

Czech Republic

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

19/20

S/2015/303

20/20

15-06523
