A /75/PV.44

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

44th plenary meeting

Monday, 14 December 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arriola Ramírez
(Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.14/
Rev.1?

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 9 (continued)

Draft resolution A/75/L.14/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 75/128).

Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/75/L.14/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I have been informed
that the delegation of Guyana will not introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.14/Rev.1. Would the representative of
Guyana please confirm that?
Ms. Edwards (Guyana): That is correct, we will
not introduce draft resolution A/75/L.14/Rev.1.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.14/Rev.1, entitled
“Graduation of Vanuatu from the least developed
country category”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

Canada, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Palau and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/75/L.14/
Rev.1 and in addition to the delegations listed in the
document, namely, the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/75/L.14/Rev.1: Australia, Belgium,

The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of the United States, who wishes to speak
in explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank Fiji for its leadership on
resolution 75/128, which is an important resolution, and
to congratulate Vanuatu on this milestone achievement.
Vanuatu’s graduation from the least developed
country category is an accomplishment to celebrate,
especially given the unprecedented social and economic
impact that Vanuatu faced as a result of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and Cyclone Harold. We are proud
that the United States, through the Millennium
Challenge Corporation’s compact of $65 million, was
able to partner with Vanuatu on its path to development.
Regarding the text of resolution 75/128, the United
States dissociates itself from paragraph 3 owing to
its trade-related language. The United Nations is
not the appropriate forum in which to comment on

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-36028 (E)

*2036028*

A/75/PV.44

offering, extending or ending trade preferences, and
such language shall have no standing at the World
Trade Organization (WTO). The United States does
not consider recommendations made by the General
Assembly on trade-related issues to be binding or have
relevance at the WTO.
Our position on the trade-related language of
paragraph 3 is unrelated to Vanuatu’s graduation from
the least developed country category. The United States
strongly supports Vanuatu’s graduation. With that
clarification, we joined the consensus on resolution
75/128.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 9.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Report of the International Court of Justice
Draft resolution (A/75/L.48)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.48.
Mr. Khng (Singapore): I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/75/L.48, entitled “Trust
fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the
International Court of Justice”, on behalf of Argentina,
the Netherlands, Romania, Senegal and my own
country, Singapore.
The Judicial Fellowship Programme of the
International Court of Justice is an initiative of the
Court that enables universities to nominate recent
law graduates with a special interest in international
law to pursue their training in a professional context
at the Court for a period of nine months. Since its
establishment in 1999, the Programme has provided
193 law graduates with the opportunity to enhance
their knowledge and understanding of international law
and its practice under the supervision of members of
the Court.
The success of the Programme is unquestionable.
However, given that universities are responsible for
providing the necessary financial resources to their
candidates for the period of their fellowship, only
universities with sufficient financial resources have
2/19

14/12/2020

been able to participate in the Programme. In order to
enable less-endowed universities based in developing
countries to nominate their law graduates and thereby
promote diversity in the Programme, the President of
the Court proposed that a trust fund be created for
the Programme. Draft resolution A/75/L.48 seeks to
establish that trust fund.
The draft resolution contains seven preambular
paragraphs and five operative paragraphs. The draft
terms of reference of the trust fund are annexed to the
draft resolution.
In paragraphs 1 to 3 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral to establish and administer a trust fund for the
Programme, in accordance with the terms of reference
as set out in the annex; decide that the resources of
the trust fund should be utilized to provide fellowship
awards to eligible nationals of developing countries
nominated by universities based in developing
countries; and call for voluntary financial contributions
to be made promptly and generously to the trust fund.
On behalf of Argentina, the Netherlands, Romania,
Senegal and my own country, Singapore, I would like
to sincerely thank delegations for their strong support
and flexibility during the negotiations on the draft
resolution. We would also like to thank Mr. Philippe
Gautier, Registrar of the International Court of Justice,
and his team from the Registry of the Court for their
support and contributions.
In conclusion, I wish to state our hope that the
General Assembly will adopt draft resolution A/75/L.48
without a vote.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.48, entitled
“Trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of
the International Court of Justice”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 4 and 5 of
draft resolution A/75/L.48, the General Assembly
would request the Secretary-General to establish and
administer a trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship
20-36028

14/12/2020

Programme of the International Court of Justice, in
accordance with the terms of reference as set out in
the annex to the draft resolution, through which States,
international financial institutions, donor agencies,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations and natural and juridical persons can
make voluntary financial contributions in support of
the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the International
Court of Justice; request the Secretary-General to
continue to publicize the Programme and periodically
to invite States, international financial institutions,
donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and
juridical persons to make voluntary financial
contributions to the new trust fund or otherwise assist
in the implementation and possible expansion of the
Programme; and request the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
session on the implementation of the draft resolution.
With regard to the establishment and administration
of the proposed trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship
Programme of the International Court of Justice, as well
as the publicizing of the Programme and the reporting
to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session
on the implementation of draft resolution A/75/L.48,
as per its paragraphs 1, 4 and 5, it is understood that
all related activities in support of the administration of
the proposed trust fund and the reporting thereon to
the General Assembly would be funded by voluntary
contributions. Accordingly, the adoption of draft
resolution A/75/L.48 would not entail any budgetary
implications with regard to the programme budget.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.48 and in addition to those delegations listed
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.48: Albania,
Australia, Austria, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brazil, Cameroon, Chile, the Congo, Croatia, Cyprus,
Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Gabon, Guinea, Honduras,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Kiribati, Lithuania,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, New
Zealand, Palau, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
the Russian Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
States of America, Viet Nam and Zambia.

A/75/PV.44

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/75/L.48?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/129).

A/75/L.48

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 131
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.41 and A/75/L.47)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.41.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Today I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.41, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy: strengthening health system
resilience through affordable health care for all”,
on behalf of the seven core members of the Foreign
Policy and Global Health Initiative — Brazil, France,
Norway, Senegal, South Africa, Thailand and my own
country, Indonesia.
The Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative
was established in 2006, and since 2008 we have
introduced annual draft resolutions on health-related
matters in the General Assembly to advocate strong
interlinkages between foreign policy and global health,
which are even more relevant during the current global
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is
affecting everyone, everywhere.
At the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly
and under Indonesia’s chairmanship, the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Initiative has the honour to introduce
a draft resolution on global health and foreign policy
with a focus on affordable health care for all. It is an
essential priority for international development that
everyone, everywhere should have access to quality
and affordable health care. Unfortunately, half of the
world’s population is still waiting to exercise their right
to that access.
According to the World Health Organization, every
year some 100 million people around the world are
impoverished by catastrophic health-care expenses,

20-360283/19

A/75/PV.44

in particular in remote areas. Even when health care
is available, it often fails to cover the full spectrum
of human suffering, including of those with mental
health conditions, which have become worse during the
current pandemic.
The pandemic is therefore a sobering reminder
for all of us that health is a precondition, outcome and
indicator of sustainable development and one of the
foundations of social, economic and political stability.
Health issues should not be politicized to merely
entertain the interests of political parties. It is much more
important for us to address the viability, accessibility
and affordability of health care for all. Two days ago,
on International Universal Health Coverage Day, we
were reminded once again of the need for strong and
resilient health systems and universal health coverage
in cooperation with multi-stakeholder partners.
With that in mind, the draft resolution that I
have the honour to introduce today strongly urges
all of us to strengthen national health systems by
ensuring affordable health care for all, with a focus on
primary health care. It also reiterates our commitment
to providing access to affordable, quality health
services and to quality, safe, effective, affordable
and essential medicines, vaccines, diagnostics and
health technologies.
Access to affordable health care is an essential
component of responding to, and recovering from,
the COVID-19 pandemic and other public health
emergencies, which are clearly addressed in the draft
resolution. During this unprecedented pandemic, which
is predicted to be far from over and might not be the
last of its kind, global solidarity and unity are more
important than ever in meeting fundamental human
needs. Let us take this opportunity to set politics aside
and focus on addressing this humanitarian crisis for the
benefit of everyone.
The draft resolution was prepared through
continuous engagement in an open and transparent
manner, resulting in a well-balanced and strong
message. We are also pleased that the draft resolution
has been welcomed by almost all Member States and
observers in the General Assembly. I would like to
thank those Member States that co-sponsored and
supported the draft resolution, as well as the World
Health Organization, the Office of the President of
the General Assembly and the Secretariat for their
cooperation throughout the entire process.
4/19

14/12/2020

In conclusion, I call on all Member States to support
this very important and timely initiative and to join
us in adopting draft resolution A/75/L.41 as it stands.
Full support for the draft resolution means supporting
global health, dignity and respect for human rights. In
the time of COVID-19, now more than ever it is time
for us to enhance global solidarity for the sake of the
human race and humankind.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Chile to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.47.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile): On behalf of Japan and
my own country, Chile, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.47, entitled “United Nations
Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030)”.
Populations around the world are ageing at a faster
pace than in the past, and that demographic transition
will have an impact on almost all levels of society. By
the end of the Decade of Healthy Ageing 2021-2030, the
number of people aged 60 years and older will be 30 per
cent higher, having increased from 1 billion in 2019
to 1.4 billion in 2030. By 2050, the global population
of older people will have more than doubled to
reach 2.1 billion.
The world has united around the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. All countries and
stakeholders have pledged that no one will be left
behind and are determined to ensure that every human
being can fulfil their potential in dignity and equality
and in a healthy environment.
A decade of concerted global action on healthy
ageing is urgently needed. Many of the people over the
age of 60 in low- and middle-income countries do not
have access to even the basic resources necessary for
a life of meaning and dignity. Many others confront
multiple barriers that prevent their full participation in
society.
The Decade of Healthy Ageing, which was
endorsed by the World Health Assembly, seeks to
improve the lives of older persons, their families and
communities through collective action in changing the
way we think, feel and act towards age and ageism,
helping to develop communities that foster the abilities
of older persons, deliver integrated care and primary
health services responsive to older persons and provide
access to quality long-term care for older persons who
need it. The Decade fills the gap in health and well20-36028

14/12/2020

A/75/PV.44

being by strengthening multisectoral approaches to
healthy ageing.

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

Like the Madrid International Plan of Action on
Ageing, the Decade supports the realization of the
2030 Agenda and its 17 Sustainable Development
Goals, reflecting the pledge to leave no one behind
and emphasizing that every human being will have
the opportunity to fulfil his or her potential in dignity
and equality. The Decade also recalls the political
declaration of the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage, in which Governments committed to
scaling up their efforts to promote healthy and active
ageing, maintain and improve the quality of life of
older persons and respond to the needs of the rapidly
ageing population.

I give the floor to the representative of the United
States of America.

The proposal for the Decade of Healthy Ageing was
developed through multi-stakeholder consultations with
almost 90 Member States, 19 United Nations agencies
and international organizations and 300 non-State
actors. The purpose of the draft resolution, which is a
procedural one, is to endorse a proposal for the Decade
of Healthy Ageing that provides a work programme
with voluntary policy options and strategies for use by
Governments and other stakeholders.
The proclamation of the Decade by the General
Assembly would bring together many sectors of
stakeholders, such as Governments, academia, civil
society, the private sector and other professional groups.
That collaboration would build on existing networks
and contribute to older persons realizing their right to
health and to the social and economic opportunities
that they deserve.
In conclusion, we are very pleased that the text
successfully passed the silence procedure and is
now ready for the consideration of the Assembly. We
would like to take this opportunity to express our
sincere appreciation to all delegations for their active
participation in the negotiating process and to thank
those delegations that have become co-sponsors of
the draft resolution. We hope that all Member States
will continue to support draft resolution A/75/L.47 by
adopting it by consensus.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolutions A/75/L.41 and A/75/L.47.
Delegations wishing to make a statement in explanation
of vote or position on either of the draft resolutions are
invited to do so now in one intervention. May I remind

Mr. Mack (United States of America): The first
portion of my statement pertains to the draft resolution
on global health and foreign policy contained in
document A/75/L.41, while the second portion pertains
to the draft resolution on healthy ageing contained in
document A/75/L.47.
All of our countries are struggling with the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the
resulting death and economic destruction across the
globe. However, the United States cannot accept draft
resolution A/75/L.41, which ignores fundamental
questions about the origin and spread of COVID-19.
Furthermore, the draft resolution dilutes the purported
focus on global health by including unrelated issues that
do not enjoy consensus or are not properly addressed by
this organ. In a year when global health security matters
so much to so many, we are also deeply concerned about
the lack of inclusivity in the drafting and consultation
processes for the draft resolution.
During the recent special session of the General
Assembly convened in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, numerous Member States called for greater
transparency and progress in the investigation into
the origin of the virus, yet the draft resolution fails
to include any language on that critical demand. It is
simply unconscionable that we are not focusing global
attention on an issue at the core of both global public
health and preventing the next pandemic, namely, the
origin of the COVID-19 outbreak and how it spread
beyond Wuhan and then outside the People’s Republic
of China.
This month we passed the one-year mark since the
reported emergence of COVID-19, and it is unacceptable
that we still have very little information on how it
began and spread so quickly among the population
in Wuhan, China. The overwhelming consensus of
the States members of the World Health Organization
(WHO) in adopting World Health Assembly resolution
WHA73.1 was to call for scientific and collaborative
field missions to investigate the origin of the virus.
International experts have yet to be dispatched
to the People’s Republic of China to conduct a fair,
complete and transparent investigation. The terms

20-360285/19

A/75/PV.44

of reference for the investigation were not developed
with transparency or in full consultation with Member
States. WHO has not confirmed the date for the visit
of international experts. The international team needs
immediate, direct and unfettered access to areas of the
outbreak in order to answer the fundamental question:
How could this pandemic have been prevented? That
answer is critical to our success in reducing the risk of
future pandemics.
We are not inventing allegations unsupported
by science or fact. Today we are simply asking the
international community to act responsibly and
asking the People’s Republic of China to share
vital information about the origin and spread of the
COVID-19 virus, which has not yet been provided to
Member States. Put simply, the draft resolution does not
make even the minimum effort to address the questions
to which our citizens deserve and demand answers
at this critical moment. We need to get to the bottom
of how COVID-19 was able to spread so quickly and
with such a devastating impact if we are to strengthen
global health around the world, as the draft resolution
claims to do.
As in the past, the draft resolution also continues
to be fundamentally flawed owing to the inclusion of
issues entirely unrelated to public health. The United
States has raised its objections to those issues in
other venues, and our concerns are well known. The
problematic issues included in the draft resolution
include the following.
The United States does not believe that
Governments are responsible for the fair distribution
of income; State efforts to enforce fair distribution
result in lower productivity, slow or no growth and
diminished prosperity.
The Global Strategy and Plan of Action on Public
Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property was
carefully negotiated at the World Health Organization.
We urge Member States and WHO to focus on areas of
consensus in the Global Strategy and Plan of Action
and to prioritize policies that will promote access
to medicines while also strengthening the global
innovation system. States members of WHO should
also intensify its trilateral cooperation with the World
Intellectual Property Organization and the World Trade
Organization (WTO) to foster a better understanding
of the linkage between public health and intellectual
property policies.
6/19

14/12/2020

The term “sexual and reproductive health, and
reproductive rights” has accumulated connotations that
inaccurately promote abortion or the right to abortion.
As affirmed in the Geneva Consensus Declaration on
Promoting Women’s Health and Strengthening the
Family by countries representing every region of the
globe, each nation has the sovereign right to implement
related programmes and activities consistent with
their laws and policies, without external pressure or
interference. We fully support the provision of quality
health care to women and girls around the world without
promoting abortion.
The United Nations must respect the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
trade negotiations, and must not involve itself in
decisions and actions in other forums, including at
WTO. The United States welcomes the human rights
references in the draft resolution, but it is regrettable
that the final text does not contain even one mention of
human rights defenders.
In addition, the United States works to counter
racial discrimination, xenophobia and all other forms
of intolerance. Rather than seeking restrictions on
expression as a means of addressing intolerance or hate
speech, the United States advocates robust protections
for speech as well as the enforcement of appropriate
legal regimes that deal with discriminatory acts and
hate crimes.
Finally, with regard to the draft resolution’s
references to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030, we addressed our concerns
in our general statement delivered in the Second
Committee on 18 November 2020.
While draft resolution A/75/L.41 is deeply flawed,
we nevertheless thank the core group for its work on
it. We continue to be concerned, however, by the lack
of inclusivity inherent in the drafting and consultation
processes. We note that they were particularly rushed
this year and seemed to favour a specific adoption date
rather than a properly negotiated text.
We would strongly encourage reflection by core
group members, in particular by next year’s Chair,
to ensure more appropriate timelines that allow for
truly meaningful consultation with the wider United
Nations membership in both New York and Geneva. For
example, we recommend taking advantage of the text
being a General Assembly plenary draft resolution by
20-36028

14/12/2020

beginning the negotiations in early December in order
to avoid overlap with the adoption processes of the
Second and Third Committees and provide adequate
time for meaningful negotiations rather than being tied
to a fixed date of adoption.
In the context of COVID-19, the stakes are too
high for the draft resolution not to reflect important
aspects of the international response or the voices of
all States Members of the United Nations. That will
continue to be the case in 2021, and we look forward
to improved working methods next year and in the
years to come. While I speak on behalf of the United
States, I know we are not alone in our concerns about
the need to urgently address fundamental questions
about the origin and spread of COVID-19. We will vote
against draft resolution A/75/L.41 and strongly urge all
parties involved to commit to greater transparency and
progress in the origin investigation.
In relation to draft resolution A/75/L.47 on the
United Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing, the United
States is pleased to join the consensus. We would like
to thank Chile and Japan for ensuring a constructive
process throughout the negotiations and to note that the
United States submitted a notice of withdrawal from the
World Health Organization that will become effective on
6 July 2021. As such, we dissociate from the references
to the World Health Organization in paragraph 5 of draft
resolution A/75/L.47. With regard to the references to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development contained in
the draft resolution, we expressed our concerns in our
general statement delivered in the Second Committee
on 18 November 2020.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.41, entitled “Global health and
foreign policy: strengthening health system resilience
through affordable health care for all”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.41, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.41: Angola,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,

A/75/PV.44

Botswana, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile,
Costa Rica, Côte D’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ecuador,
Finland, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Iceland, India, Jordan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, Spain, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Timor-Leste, Turkey, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zambia.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian

20-360287/19

A/75/PV.44

Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Draft resolution A/75/L.41 was adopted by 181
votes to 1 (resolution 75/130).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.47, entitled
“United Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021–
2030)”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce that,
since the submission of draft resolution A/75/L.47, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.47: Andorra, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Côte
D’Ivoire, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Romania, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Uruguay, Viet Nam and Zambia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.47?
8/19

14/12/2020

Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/131).

A/75/L.47

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position or vote on either of
the resolutions just adopted, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): I make this
statement on behalf of Australia, Canada, New Zealand
and my own delegation, the United Kingdom.
Let me start by saying that we welcome resolution
75/130, entitled “Global health and foreign policy:
strengthening health system resilience through
affordable health care for all”. We are very grateful to
the facilitators and the core group for their leadership.
This year more than in others, it is important that as
States Members of the United Nations we emphasize the
criticality of strong health systems as the foundation for
achieving universal health coverage and health security
and protecting those most left behind. We are pleased to
see that the resolution demonstrates support for the key
factors that contribute to effective health systems, such
as addressing financial hardship, One Health, a focus
on protecting the rights of women and girls and respect
for human rights. We thank the facilitators and other
Member States for their ambition and commitment
to drafting a resolution that adequately reflects the
challenges we face this year as we continue to tackle
the pandemic.
We welcome the acknowledgement of the need
for sustained international leadership and multilateral
collaboration in order to address the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and future health
threats. In particular, we appreciate the reference to
the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator initiative
and the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility,
which reflects the importance of those international
initiatives to realizing the goal of supporting global
equitable access to vaccines.
However, we are disappointed by the removal of
a paragraph that called on Member States to take into
account the evaluation process of the World Health
Organization (WHO). WHO is pivotal to achieving an
effective global COVID-19 response, and it should not
be controversial to recognize the lessons learned and
enhance global preparedness for future pandemics.
20-36028

14/12/2020

The COVID-19 pandemic has also shown us all the
importance of taking a One Health approach to tackling
global health threats, which recognizes the importance
of collaboration and coordination across human, animal
and environmental interfaces. As such, we welcome the
recognition of the role of the United Nations Tripartite
Secretariat in combating health risks across human,
animal, plant and other relevant sectors, but we are
perplexed and disappointed by the lack of reference
to the pivotal role of the United Nations Environment
Programme in informing a One Health approach.
Furthermore, we remain concerned about the impact
that the pandemic is having on antimicrobial resistance.
We must act now if we are to avoid putting at risk up
to 10 million lives per year by 2050, at a cumulative
cost to the global economy of $100 trillion. We are
therefore disappointed at the absence of action-oriented
paragraphs on antimicrobial resistance in the text of
the resolution.
Finally, in a year in which global health mattered
so much to so many, we continue to be concerned
about the lack of inclusivity inherent in the drafting
and consultation processes for the resolution. We
would strongly encourage reflection by the core
group members, in particular next year’s Chair, to
ensure more appropriate timelines that allow for truly
meaningful consultation with the wider United Nations
membership in both New York and Geneva.
In the context of COVID-19, the stakes are too
high for the resolution not to reflect important aspects
of the international response or the voices of all States
Members of the United Nations. That will continue to
be the case in 2021, and we look forward to improved
working methods next year and in the years to come.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala is pleased to have supported
resolution 75/130, entitled “Global health and foreign
policy: strengthening health system resilience through
affordable health care for all”.
Guatemala recognizes the importance of the
adoption of the resolution and is deeply grateful to
the delegations that introduced that valuable text. The
resolution specifically recognizes the importance of
access to health systems and the provision of medical care
to all, in line with article 93 of the political Constitution
of the Republic of Guatemala, which stipulates that the
enjoyment of health care is a fundamental human right,
without discrimination of any kind.

A/75/PV.44

We also wish to take this opportunity to underscore
our reservation to paragraph 13 of resolution 75/130,
given that the term “reproductive rights” could be
misinterpreted since Guatemala’s national legislation
provides for sexual and reproductive health policies
and not sexual and reproductive rights, which could be
interpreted as a right to abortion, thereby contravening
my country’s national legislation.
Ms. Zalányi (Hungary): Hungary joins the
consensus on resolution 75/131 and thanks the main
sponsors for introducing the initiative this year.
At the same time, Hungary regrets that consensus
could not be achieved on resolution 75/130 and thanks
the main sponsors for introducing the initiative.
Hungary is proud of its long-standing achievements
in the area of health care and its scientific contributions
to advancing global public health. We have always been
committed to ensuring the achievement of the highest
attainable health standards for our citizens, and those
efforts have also guided the country’s fight against the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
At the same time, we would like to take this
opportunity to recall Hungary’s concerns regarding
certain aspects of the political declaration of the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage, which we
clearly voiced when it was adopted last year. Therefore
in the fifth preambular paragraph of resolution 75/131
and the eighth preambular paragraph of resolution
75/130, Hungary would have preferred a neutral
reference to the declaration.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): At the outset, I would like to extend my gratitude
to the co-facilitators of the informal consultations,
especially the delegations of Indonesia, Japan and
Chile, on resolutions 75/130 and 131, which were just
adopted. In the spirit of constructive engagement, my
delegation participated in the negotiations with a view
to ensuring that the resolutions were balanced, inclusive
and reality-based.
While the title of resolution 75/130 is “Global
health and foreign policy: strengthening health
system resilience through affordable health care for
all”, there is scepticism as to whether the resolution
has been successful in achieving its goal. According
to the framework introduced by the World Health
Organization, affordable prices, sustainable financing

20-360289/19

A/75/PV.44

14/12/2020

and reliable health and supply systems are among the
factors that affect access to medicine.

aid is on hold as banks, insurance and logistics
companies await clarification.”

However, all of those factors have been severely
affected in a number of developing countries owing to
the imposition of illegal unilateral coercive measures
taken by a few countries, based on their political agenda
In fact, the resolution deliberately avoids calling on
those States to refrain from imposing illegal unilateral
measures that impede access to affordable health care
and medicine, which is especially critical during this
challenging time. At the same time, the resolution
specifies a significant level of commitment by
Governments in order to ensure the rights of everyone
in that regard.

The adverse consequences of such measures are
far-reaching and serious, especially in the context of
the current difficult situation that is affecting all human
rights, in particular the right to life. In that sense, the
continuation of those measures is simply criminal. The
international community should therefore take all the
necessary measures to reject, condemn and eliminate
any unilateral coercive measures in order to protect and
uphold human values and moral principles, especially
during such a catastrophic crisis.

Given the severe negative impact of sanctions
on health-care systems and the health of ordinary
people, during the negotiations process my delegation
and several others proposed the inclusion of an
action-oriented paragraph so that realities on the ground
would be reflected in the adopted resolution. However,
the proposal was rejected by those who seek to continue
to impose illegal sanctions on innocent people as an
indispensable part of their political agenda.
Most of us have been affected by the spread of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and my
country is among the worst-affected countries to date.
The most devastating impact of sanctions is the human
toll, which in this case has been further magnified by
the severe shortage of critical medicine and medical
equipment for millions of Iranians, including children
battling grave diseases such as cancer and epidermolysis
bullosa. My country is now fighting on two fronts:
first, the COVID-19 outbreak; and secondly, the United
States-imposed economic and health sanctions, with
the latter adversely affecting Iran’s ability to combat
the former.
It has been baselessly alleged that the unilateral
coercive measures do not relate directly to medical
supplies, but the reality is that the exclusion of a country
from international trade and international banking
systems deprives it of the ability to acquire such supplies
through existing commercial mechanisms. It is worth
noting the statement made by Mr. Idriss Jazairy, former
Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights,
who detailed the ongoing situation as follows:
“While United States sanctions included
humanitarian exemptions, there were reports that
10/19

My delegation would like to dissociate itself
from paragraph 13 of resolution 75/130, as we believe
that that paragraph does not enjoy consensus among
all delegations.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Secretariat
for preparing the reports on this agenda item, including
on an inclusive approach to strengthening health
systems (A/75/577) and on combating tuberculosis
(A/75/236).
The Russian Federation attaches top priority
to health care, both at the national level and in the
framework of international cooperation. In order to
combat the coronavirus disease pandemic, a number of
innovative medicines have been developed and registered
in our country, including two vaccines: Sputnik-V
and EpiVacCorona. We placed special emphasis on
combating the disease during our presidency this
year of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the BRICS group of countries — Brazil, the Russian
Federation, India, China and South Africa.
We support the adoption of resolution 75/130, on
global health and foreign policy. We thank the delegation
of Indonesia for coordinating the consultations on that
resolution amid the current challenging circumstances.
We greatly appreciate the resolution’s emphasis on the
importance of universal health coverage, with a focus
on primary health care and creating the conditions
for socioeconomic development, including at the
international level.
We agree with the provisions of the resolution on the
fight against non-communicable diseases, tuberculosis
and antimicrobial resistance, as well as the need to
implement the International Health Regulations. We
commend the clearly defined leadership role of the
20-36028

14/12/2020

A/75/PV.44

World Health Organization to guide our work in the
area of international health care.

incompatible with our beliefs, culture, national policy
and the true Islamic religion.

However, as was the case last year, we are obliged
to express our concern at the expedited format of the
negotiating process and the unbalanced content of
the initial draft resolution on which consultations
were held. We underscore the need for the negotiating
document to focus specifically on health care, without
unduly shifting the emphasis to marginal related issues
such as human rights issues, for which the United
Nations has specifically designated resolutions and
working formats.

Mr. Nakano (Japan): Japan welcomes resolution
75/130, entitled “Global health and foreign policy:
strengthening health system resilience through
affordable health care for all”. We are grateful to the
facilitators and the core group for their leadership and
dedicated work.

We are therefore obliged to dissociate ourselves
from the nineteenth preambular paragraph of resolution
75/130, which uses controversial terminology and
provides a liberal interpretation of the Secretariat’s
objective data on the increase in the cases of violence
against women during the pandemic. We believe that
the twentieth preambular paragraph lacks a reference
to landmark resolution 46/182, on the strengthening of
the coordination of humanitarian emergency assistance
of the United Nations.
With respect to paragraph 13 of resolution 75/130,
we reaffirm that the language it contains cannot apply
to the so-called regional reviews of the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development, which ended without a consensus
adoption of outcome documents that have been adopted
in intergovernmental format. With respect to the
provisions of paragraph 27 of the resolution, on the
Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, we note that
funding for that important mechanism is voluntary,
as is the provision of support for other initiatives to
counter the disease.
We look forward to constructive engagement in the
preparation of future drafts of this annual resolution so
as to jointly arrive at consensus decisions on a unifying
health agenda.
Mr. Alshames (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): We voted
in favour of resolution 75/130, entitled “Global health and
foreign policy: strengthening health system resilience
through affordable health care for all”, and we are
aware of the importance of its adoption. Nevertheless,
our position remains unchanged on some of the
controversial issues it refers to, including reproductive
health. We therefore reiterate our reservation regarding
operative paragraph 13 of resolution 75/130, as it is

This year, in particular after facing the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we recognize the
importance of strong health systems as the foundation
for achieving universal health coverage and health
security. In that context, we value resolution 75/130,
which was just adopted, given that it adequately reflects
the challenges we face this year as we continue to address
the pandemic. We welcome the acknowledgement
of the need for sustained international leadership
and multilateral collaboration in order to address the
COVID-19 pandemic and future health threats.
In particular, we appreciate the references to the
Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator initiative and
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility, which
reflect the importance of those international initiatives
to realizing the goal of supporting global equitable
access to vaccines.
However, we are greatly disappointed at the
removal of a paragraph that called on Member States
to contribute actively and to give due consideration to
the results of the ongoing evaluation process. Given
the critical role that the World Health Organization
plays in ensuring an effective global COVID-19
response, it should not be controversial to recognize the
lessons learned and enhance global preparedness for
future pandemics.
Moreover, we are disappointed that there is
no specific reference to the elderly as a vulnerable
population in resolution 75/130. As we all know, elderly
people were among the first and the hardest hit by the
pandemic. The unfortunately high burden suffered by
older persons during the current pandemic should be
addressed, as emphasized by the Secretary-General’s
policy brief on the impact of COVID-19 on older
persons, which was supported by 146 Member States.
Finally, with regard to the procedure, we felt that
there was insufficient time this year for consultations
to be held among Member States so as to achieve
consensus. In particular, we should have spent more

20-3602811/19

A/75/PV.44

14/12/2020

time discussing important issues, including the removal
of the aforementioned paragraph. We urge members of
the core group, especially next year’s Chair, to consider
a more appropriate timeline that allows for meaningful
consultations among a wider range of Member States.

Mr. Reisle (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland joins others in welcoming the commitment
and efforts of the international community with a view
to guaranteeing quality health care for all, especially in
this time of pandemic.

Ms. Kim Yoonhye (Republic of Korea): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 75/130, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy: strengthening health
system resilience through affordable health care for all”.

Switzerland would like to clarify its position on
certain aspects of resolution 75/130. We believe in a
broad approach to all of the factors that contribute to
access to medical products. With respect to the thirtyfirst preambular paragraph of resolution 75/130, the
reference to prices does not seem relevant given that the
pricing of medicines depends on several other factors.
It is necessary to keep in mind that the system of
intellectual property protection is a crucial element of
researching and developing new and improved medical
products. That is particularly important in the context
of the current crisis. It is also thanks to that framework
that unprecedented collaboration was made possible
among all stakeholders in 2020.

While health preparedness is the responsibility
of all countries, it requires global cooperation based
on solidarity on a much greater scale in terms of
resources, expertise and experiences. Preparedness is
a global common good. In that regard, we welcome the
fact that resolution 75/130 acknowledges the need for
multilateral commitment and collaboration in order
to address the pandemic and future health threats. As
part of our multilateral approach, we support the role
of the World Health Organization, robust governance
structures and independent reviews of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) response, so that lessons can be
learned and global preparedness enhanced.
We take note of the efforts exerted by the facilitators
to accommodate the concerns of the widest possible
membership on an issue of such great importance at this
critical time for the world. However, we wish to register
our disappointment regarding this year’s drafting and
consultation processes. We note that it was particularly
rushed and seemed to favour a specific adoption date
rather than a properly negotiated text. It was regrettable
to see that the facilitators made the decision to
submit resolution 75/130 for adoption without further
discussion and that we could not reach a consensus on
it in a year in which resilient health systems and global
health security mattered so much to so many.
We continue to be concerned by the lack of inclusivity
inherent in the drafting and consultation processes on
resolution 75/130. We strongly encourage reflection
on the part of core group members, in particular next
year’s Chair, so as to ensure more appropriate timelines
that allow for truly meaningful consultations among
the widest possible United Nations membership in both
New York and Geneva. In the context of COVID-19, the
stakes are too high for resolution 75/130 not to reflect
important aspects of the international response or the
voices of all States Members of the United Nations. We
look forward to improved working methods next year
and in the years to come.
12/19

Switzerland also takes this opportunity to reaffirm
its support for the World Health Organization as the
leading and coordinating authority of international
efforts on health and we recognize its key role in
combating the pandemic. Important work is ongoing
at the global level in the areas covered by resolution
75/130. In that regard, we encourage all stakeholders
to contribute to the work being carried out, in
particular by the World Health Organization, the
World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual
Property Organization.
It is also important to avoid duplicating discussions
within these forums.
Ms. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
My Country’s delegation would like to thank the core
group for presenting resolution 75/130, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy: strengthening health system
resilience through affordable health care for all”, and the
delegation of Indonesia for facilitating the negotiations
that led to its adoption. Aware of its importance,
my delegation was pleased to vote in favour of the
resolution. I would like to make the following remarks.
Foreign policy and international relations must be
guided not only by the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, but also by international solidarity,
humanity and cooperation. The current attention
given to global health, which is one of our foreign
policy concerns, provides many such opportunities.
As interlinkage and interdependence among States are
20-36028

14/12/2020

A/75/PV.44

on the rise, health issues have become increasingly
international in scope. More incentives are available to
Governments and other stakeholders to work together
on health issues that transcend national borders at a
time when epidemics, emerging diseases and biological
terrorism are considered to be direct threats to national
and global security. Health issues also remain important
in other essential areas of foreign policy, such as
pursuing economic growth, promoting development
and supporting human rights and human dignity. There
is no doubt that health is an integral component of
several Sustainable Development Goals, in particular
Sustainable Development Goal 3.

would make reference to the impact of those sanctions
on the countries affected, given their unjust effects on
health and the efforts made to improve the situation in
my country and other countries.

My delegation reaffirms the importance of national
ownership and the primary role and responsibility of
Governments at all levels in defining the path towards
achieving universal health coverage, in line with
national contexts and priorities. That is critical to
reducing public-health threats and vulnerabilities and
to providing effective prevention, monitoring, early
warning, response and recovery in health emergencies,
while also emphasizing the essential role of resilient
national health systems in reducing the risks of disasters.

I give the floor to the observer of the European Union.

My country, Syria, believes that strong health
systems are extremely important. To that end, it is
imperative for the international community to join
hands in confronting the challenges before it, the
latest of which is the spread of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. However, it is unfortunate that we continue
to see strong cases of provocation pertaining to the
coordinated global response against the pandemic.
The Governments of the United States of America and
some other Western countries are imposing unilateral
coercive measures on several countries and their
peoples, including Syria, causing a humanitarian crisis
with consequences beyond the economic and social
spheres and at times paralysing health systems, as is the
case in my country. As we hold this meeting, patients
and newborn babies are dying or suffering as a result of
power cuts to incubators and operating rooms in certain
hospitals and health centres, or as a result of the ban
on importing basic medical equipment and supplies,
such as surgical sutures, anticoagulants or plastic
bags needed to store and preserve blood, in addition
to medical testing devices and magnetic resonance,
radiography and other equipment. At the same time,
those countries claim to be granting humanitarian and
medical exemptions from the coercive measures. This
is completely untrue. We had hoped that the resolution

In conclusion, my delegation renews its call on all
Member States to strengthen global efforts to ensure
that no one is left behind and build a healthier world
for all.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position or vote on the
resolutions just adopted. We will now hear statements
after the adoption of the resolution.
Ms. Ludwig (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
27 member States.
I would like to deliver an initial statement on
resolution 75/130, entitled “Global health and foreign
policy: strengthening health system resilience”,
followed by a second, shorter statement on resolution
75/131, entitled “United Nations Decade of Healthy
Ageing (2021-2030)”.
The candidate countries Turkey and Albania align
themselves with this first statement.
We would like to thank Indonesia and the entire
core group team for their sustained efforts and
engagement on resolution 75/130. The resolution
traditionally covers a very broad span of health issues
of high importance, and this year again clearly serves
to highlight the political relevance of health for the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the overall
work of the United Nations and the importance of
engagement at every level. We believe that the principle
of leaving no one behind is central to those efforts. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic crisis has
clearly demonstrated our vulnerability as we face a
tiny enemy with disastrous effects in terms of human
suffering and economic decline.
Overall, we consider that resolution 75/130
constitutes an agreeable compromise. It includes a couple
of important elements, such as a clear commitment to
human rights and to sexual and reproductive health
and reproductive rights in the context of the Beijing
Platform for Action and the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD). We are also delighted to see that

20-3602813/19

A/75/PV.44

there is consensus on the importance of the One Health
approach, which fosters cooperation among human,
animal and environmental health, which is particularly
important if we are to be effective in preventing future
epidemic diseases of zoonotic origin and addressing
microbial resistance.
Nevertheless, we had to make a number of difficult
compromises to be able to join consensus and vote
in favour of resolution 75/130. We are convinced that
the text would have benefited from integrating new
elements, such as acknowledging that the effects of
climate change are increasingly affecting people’s
health, as is the case with other environmental changes,
such as the loss of biodiversity and water and air
pollution. The World Health Organization global
strategy on health, environment and climate change
clearly points to that being the case, and there is reliable
data on the growing importance of those changes for
our health.
The EU remains committed to the promotion,
protection and fulfilment of all human rights and to
the full and effective implementation of the Beijing
Platform for Action and the Programme of Action of
the ICPD and the outcomes of their review conferences.
We also remain committed to sexual and reproductive
health and rights in that context. We would have
welcomed that being reflected in resolution 75/130.
Most importantly, we deeply regret that the important
ongoing evaluation process of the international health
response to COVID-19 could not ultimately be reflected
in the resolution.
We are highly concerned that the text of paragraph
24 was deleted, despite the existence of agreed
language in World Health Assembly (WHA) resolution
WHA73.1, which was adopted by consensus. Given that
that process is the basis of taking account of the lessons
learned in order to better protect the world in the future,
we feel that that omission constitutes a significant
gap. We would have also strongly supported a clear
understanding that our actions should be in line with
the spirit of not undermining incentives for innovation.
Finally, with regard to the process, we echo other
delegations in thanking the core group for their work
on resolution 75/130. We continue to encourage that
the process be more inclusive in the drafting and
consultation procedures of the resolution. This year
we note that the procedure was particularly rushed and
seemed to favour a specific adoption date rather than
14/19

14/12/2020

being a properly negotiated text. We strongly encourage
reflection by the core group members, in particular next
year’s Chair, so as to ensure more appropriate timelines
that allow for truly meaningful consultation with the
widest possible United Nations membership in both
New York and Geneva. We also recommend taking
advantage of this being a General Assembly plenary
resolution so as to avoid overlap with adoptions in the
Second and Third Committees and to provide adequate
time for meaningful negotiations to take place. We are
looking forward to improved working methods next
year and in the years to come, and we will of course
engage constructively.
I now wish to deliver a short statement on resolution
75/131, entitled “United Nations Decade of Healthy
Ageing (2021-2030)”. Here, I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union and its States members, as well as
the candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, who
align themselves with this statement.
We once again wish to thank the facilitators for
their work on this important resolution.
We recognize that healthy ageing is about enabling
citizens to lead a healthy, active and independent life in
older age. The EU attaches high attention to that topic, and
in October the Council of the European Union adopted
conclusions on the human rights, participation and
well-being of older persons in the era of digitalization,
committing ourselves once again to promoting active
and healthy ageing and an age-integrated approach,
including through a rights-based and life-cycle
perspective to ageing. We see that as a key element in
the fight against multiple non-communicable diseases,
such as dementia, diabetes, cardiovascular and chronic
respiratory diseases and cancer.
Healthy ageing stretches beyond the limits of the
health sector. It is a typical multisectoral issue affecting
all parts of society, including our environment, labour
and gender issues, health equity, social participation,
digital technology, education and recreation, to name
a few. Healthy ageing is about creating opportunities
that enable people to enjoy well-being and to do what
they value, even in older age. The common goal must
be to deliver ageing policies that contribute to active,
healthy, inclusive and independent lives. Therefore, the
20-36028

14/12/2020

United Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing is rightly
more encompassing than to look only at health-related
issues. It is about not only added years in life but also
the quality of life added to those years. In that context,
we need to be looking to age-friendly environments
adapted to the elderly and an assured equal participation
within society, as well as health promotion and disease
prevention as key elements.
The Decade of Healthy Ageing will succeed only
through full cooperation in every sector. We feel that
that is well reflected in resolution 75/131 and lend our
full support to the United Nations Decade of Healthy
Ageing. Nevertheless, we are of the opinion that the
resolution would have benefited from not shying away
from the challenges of gender-based violence, which
we deem important for all ages alike. The European
Union has committed itself to preserving human rights,
which are indivisible from and inherent of all human
beings, regardless of age. We also regret that it was not
possible to include the issue of addressing age-based
stigmatization, as that is a problem in a number of
societies worldwide and poses incredible challenges
for individuals.
We also would have preferred to see an endorsement
of the proposal for a Decade of Healthy Ageing, as
requested by the World Health Assembly, instead of
just welcoming it. Pursuant to the adoption of decision
WHA73(12) just four months ago in the WHA, member
States decided unanimously to endorse the proposal
for a Decade of Healthy Ageing and requested to
transmit that decision to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations in order for it to become a United
Nations Decade.
In conclusion, the United Nations stands firmly
united in this endeavour, and we are ready to engage
constructively in this Decade of Healthy Ageing.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): The Holy See
would like to thank the delegation of Indonesia and
other members of the core group of the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Initiative for their commitment to
the consultation process on resolution 75/130.
The theme of strengthening health-system resilience
through affordable health care for all has never been so
timely. It reminds us that we share a duty to care for one
another, especially the poorest and the most helpless.

A/75/PV.44

Ensuring that all people have access to the medical
care they need is a concrete expression of solidarity,
social justice and the common good. Reflecting on the
current historic moment marked by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, Pope Francis recently stated that the
fragility of world systems in the face of the pandemic
has demonstrated that not everything can be resolved
by market freedom. Health is not a consumer good
but rather a universal right, and therefore access to
health-care services cannot be a privilege. The right
to health is universally recognized as a basic human
right and is understood to comprise the health of the
person as a whole and of all persons during all stages
of development.
The Holy See strongly encourages common efforts
aimed at ensuring that proper medical care and effective
vaccines free from ethical concerns are affordable and
promptly available in sufficient quantities, including in
developing countries. Most low-income countries need
the support of the international community in order to
overcome funding shortfalls and ensure the well-being
of their respective populations.
Resolution 75/130 sets out important commitments
to supporting the most vulnerable and engaging all
relevant stakeholders in designing better health systems.
It represents a significant step forward in our common
effort to provide every man, woman and child with
health care. The Holy See has never failed to support
universal access to health care, and neither has it failed to
provide health care, through the approximately 100,000
Catholic health-care institutions around the world, the
majority of which serve vulnerable populations living
under adverse conditions.
The Holy See considers it most unfortunate,
however, that resolution 75/130 includes the divisive and
deeply problematic reference to sexual and reproductive
health and reproductive rights as a component of
universal health coverage. In line with our reservations
expressed at the International Conference on Population
and Development held in Beijing and Cairo, the Holy
See reiterates that it considers the phrase “reproductive
health” and related terms as applying to a holistic
concept of health that embraces the person in the
entirety of his or her personality, mind and body. The
Holy See also rejects the interpretation that considers
abortion or access to abortion as a dimension of those
terms or of universal health coverage. The inclusion of
that troublesome phrase not only weakens resolution
75/130 but in fact contradicts it.

20-3602815/19

A/75/PV.44

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and five minutes for the second
intervention, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I call on the representative of China.
Mrs. Daizhu Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is exercising its right of reply in response to the
statement made by the representative of the United
States of America.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
is the most severe challenge facing countries today.
The urgent task before the international community
is to uphold multilateralism, strengthen solidarity and
cooperation and fight together against the virus. That is
also the common expectation of States Members of the
United Nations. Therefore, with 181 countries voting
in favour, we adopted resolution 75/130. However, the
representative of the United States once again projected
a jarring voice, once again abused this United Nations
platform to distort the facts and once again blatantly
provoked confrontation with a view to causing clashes,
which China firmly opposes and categorically rejects.
The remarks made by the representative of the
United States completely depart from the facts. From
the outset of the pandemic, China has acted in an
open, transparent, scientific and responsible manner in
fighting the pandemic together with the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the international community.
We were the first country to report the outbreak of the
virus to the WHO and the international community,
including the United States. We were steadfast in
publishing critical information, including with regard
to the genetic sequence of the virus, and we have
been a staunch supporter of the leading role played by
the WHO.
China brought the virus under control very
quickly and provided anti-COVID-19 support to other
countries, thereby making important contributions to
the global fight against COVID-19. The timeline is
clear and the facts and data speak for themselves. Those
cannot be denied or repudiated by anyone. On the other
hand, the United States chose to defy the scientific
recommendations owing to its self-serving political
16/19

14/12/2020

interests, as a result of which the country with the most
advanced medical technologies in the world is also the
country suffering the most serious outbreaks of the
disease. The international community is currently most
concerned about the out-of-control virus outbreaks in
the United States. We urge the United States to respect
the facts and truly focus its attention on fighting the
pandemic and protecting the lives and health of the
American people.
Tracing the origin of the novel coronavirus disease is
a complex scientific operation and requires collaborative
scientific research from scientists worldwide, under the
leadership of the WHO. There have been many reports
of outbreaks in multiple locations around the world last
year. In an open, transparent and responsible manner,
China took the lead in conducting scientific cooperation
through the WHO. Meanwhile, the WHO updated
China on the progress made in its global effort to trace
the origin of the virus. Cooperation continues to make
steady progress. Tracing the origin of the virus is an
ongoing process, which may involve multiple countries
and multiple locations. We hope that all countries will
adopt a positive approach and work together with the
WHO so as to advance global efforts to trace the origin
of the disease.
As the second wave of the pandemic rages across
the globe, fighting the virus remains the most pressing
task before the international community. People from
all over the world are calling for greater solidarity and
cooperation, which is also in the interest of the United
States. We hope that the United States will cease its
politicization of the pandemic and work together with
the international community in solidarity so as to play a
constructive role towards humankind’s ultimate victory
over the virus and building back better.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States takes the floor to underscore that it has not sought
to politicize this issue at all. We seek accountability
and transparency as well as genuine fulfilment of what
has been requested of the World Health Organization
(WHO) in investigating the origins of the coronavirus
disease. The peoples of all our countries who are
suffering deserve that.
During the recent thirty-first special session of the
General Assembly, held in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, States Members of the United Nations
explicitly called for greater transparency and progress
in the origins investigation. However, we have seen
20-36028

14/12/2020

A/75/PV.44

no progress. In addition, by adopting World Health
Assembly resolution WHA73.1, the overwhelming
consensus of member States was to call for scientific and
collaborative field missions to investigate the origins
of the virus. We have yet to hear anything about that.
International experts have yet to be dispatched to China
to conduct a fair, complete and transparent investigation.
The terms of reference for the investigation were not
developed with transparency or in full consultation with
Member States, and the World Health Organization still
has not confirmed the date for the visit of international
experts. The international team needs immediate, direct
and unfettered access to areas of the outbreak in order
to answer the fundamental question that I previously
posed: How could this pandemic have been prevented?
The answer will be critical to our success in reducing
the risk of future pandemics.

Secondly, the representative of the United States
mentioned vaccines. We wish to underscore that China
was the first country to publicize the genetic sequence
of the virus. It was precisely because China shared that
information in a timely and transparent manner that
the scientists in other countries benefited in terms of
undertaking vaccine research and development. We
will continue to work with experts in other countries so
as to advance the fair and accessible distribution of the
vaccine. Once available, the Chinese vaccine will be
distributed as a common good to other countries in the
world that need it.

We are looking for facts, and our previous statement
was based on facts. It is not based on politicization, as
has been purported by our Chinese colleagues. The
United States also underscores that as we sit here today,
vaccines are starting to roll out here in the United
States and in several other countries. However, to
date, we still have no information on the origins of the
virus. How is it possible that scientists have developed
vaccines in response to this virus yet we are still to
identify its origin?

Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections

Mrs. Daizhu Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to take the floor to respond to two points raised by the
representative of the United States.
First, as I said in my previous right of reply,
China was fully open, transparent and responsible
in implementing World Health Assembly resolution
WHA73.1. We implemented that resolution in earnest
while doing our work in terms of tracing the origin of
the virus. We took the initiative to invite World Health
Organization (WHO) experts to come to China to work
with us on tracing the origin of the virus and recently
worked with WHO experts in holding virtual meetings.
As we have already said, the tracing of the origin of the
disease is a very complex process. China was the first
to report the virus to WHO — that does not mean that
China was the source of the virus. It requires scientists
to conduct scientific and technological cooperation on
an international scale in order to trace the origin of the
virus. We will continue to work with other countries
and the WHO on this issue.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 131.
Agenda item 119 (continued)

(b) Election of members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180 of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission shall
comprise the following: seven members of the Security
Council, including permanent members; seven
members of the Economic and Social Council, elected
from regional groups; five top providers of assessed
contributions to United Nations budgets and of voluntary
contributions to United Nations funds, programmes
and agencies, including a standing peacebuilding fund;
five top providers of military personnel and civilian
police to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee. By the same
resolution, the General Assembly also decided that each
of the five regional groups shall have no less than three
seats in the overall composition of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Members will also recall that, at the 64th plenary
meeting of its seventy-third session, the Assembly
elected Egypt, Guatemala, Kenya, Mexico and Nepal
as members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term of
office, beginning on 1 January 2019, and that, at its
51st plenary meeting of its seventy-fourth session,

20-3602817/19

A/75/PV.44

the Assembly elected Peru and Slovakia as members
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning on
1 January 2020. Consequently, the General Assembly
will need to fill the seats to be vacated by Egypt,
Guatemala, Kenya, Mexico and Nepal, whose two-year
term of office expires on 31 December 2020.
By a letter dated 10 December 2020 addressed to
the President of the General Assembly, contained in
document A/75/640, the President was informed by the
facilitator of the group of troop-contributing countries
of their decision that Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India,
Pakistan and Rwanda will serve from among the troopcontributing countries category of membership for a
term of office beginning on 1 January 2021 and ending
on 31 December 2022.
By a letter dated 11 December 2020 addressed to
the President of the General Assembly, contained in
document A/75/641, the President was informed by
the facilitator of the group of the leading financial
contributors that, as decided by the financial
contributors, Canada, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands
and Sweden will serve a full two-year term from 2021
to 2022.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of the information contained in
documents A/75/640 and A/75/641?

14/12/2020

Members will recall that by its resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure
and established practice of the Assembly for the election
of members of its subsidiary bodies shall apply to its
election of members of the Committee. For this election,
rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable. Accordingly, the
election shall be held by secret ballot. I should like to
inform the Assembly that those candidates receiving
the required majority and the greatest number of votes
will be declared elected.
Also, consistent with past practice, if, due to a tie
vote, it becomes necessary to determine a candidate
that is to be elected or that will proceed to the next
round of restricted balloting, there will be a special
restricted ballot limited to those candidates that have
obtained an equal number of votes.
I should like to remind representatives that,
pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of procedure, “[a]fter
the President has announced the beginning of voting,
no representative shall interrupt the voting except on
a point of order in connection with the actual conduct
of the voting”. Any announcements, including those
concerning withdrawals of candidatures, should
therefore be made prior to the commencement of the
voting process, that is to say, before the announcement
of the beginning of the voting process.

The Acting President: The Assembly will
now proceed to the election of five members
of
the
Organizational
Committee
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission.

In accordance with resolution 71/323 of
8 September 2017, the names of the States that have been
communicated to the Secretariat at least 48 hours prior
to the election today have been printed on the ballot
papers. Also, additional blank lines corresponding
to the number of vacant seats to be filled have been
provided on the ballot papers for inscribing other names
as necessary.

By its resolution 60/261 of 8 May 2006, the Assembly
decided that the members of the Organizational
Committee shall serve for renewable terms of two
years, as applicable. Accordingly, Egypt, Guatemala,
Kenya, Mexico and Nepal are eligible for immediate
re-election. Regarding candidatures for the five vacant
seats, I should like to inform members that three
candidates have been communicated from among the
African States, namely, Egypt, Libya and South Africa.
From among the Asia-Pacific States, one endorsed
candidate has been communicated, namely, Lebanon.
From among the Latin American and Caribbean States,
two candidates have been communicated, namely,
Brazil and Costa Rica.

As indicated in my letter dated 9 December 2020,
all representatives were requested to pick up their ballot
papers from the East Documents Counter, located
towards the back of the General Assembly Hall, before
being seated. I request representatives to use only those
ballot papers. Representatives are requested to indicate
the five countries for whom they wish to vote by putting
an “X” at the left of the delegation’s name on the ballot
papers and/or by writing other eligible names on the
blank lines. If the box next to the name of a candidate
is checked, the name of that candidate does not have to
be repeated on the blank line. Ballot papers containing
more votes than the number of vacant seats indicated
will be considered invalid.

It was so decided.

18/19

20-36028

14/12/2020

If a ballot paper contains the names of Member
States that will be members of the Organizational
Committee next year, the ballot remains valid but the
votes for those Member States will not be counted. If
a ballot paper contains any notation other than votes in
favour of the specific candidates, those notations will be
disregarded. If a mistake is made in filling out the ballot
paper, delegations should request a new ballot paper
from the Secretariat at the East Documents Counter.
Representatives of the following States have kindly
agreed to serve as tellers: Australia, Cuba, Ghana,
Ukraine and Viet Nam. One ballot box has been placed
in front of the General Assembly Hall, where tellers will
be able to observe the box and the casting of ballots. For
the casting of ballots, the Secretary will call the name of
each delegation following the General Assembly seating
arrangement protocol, starting from the delegation of
Iceland, and will ask each delegate to proceed to cast
their ballot. Representatives are requested to practice
physical distancing of no less than two meters and to
proceed to cast their ballot only when the previous
representative has completed casting their ballot. This
will continue until the last representative has cast
their ballot. In order to minimize the risks posed by
prolonged exposure and crowding, representatives are
requested to leave the General Assembly Hall once they
have cast their ballot, through the exit on the west side.
Once all ballots are cast, the meeting will be
suspended and the tellers, accompanied by the
Secretariat staff, will proceed to the Trusteeship
Council Chamber to count the ballots. Upon receipt
of the results certified by the tellers, I will resume the
plenary meeting to announce the results.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: We shall now begin the
balloting process.

A/75/PV.44

The Secretary will now call on delegations in the
seating protocol order and invite them to come forward
to cast their ballots. Please proceed to the ballot box
only after the name of your delegation has been called.
Once ballots have been cast, I would ask delegates to
leave the General Assembly Hall and exit the building.
The results of the election will be seen on webcast.
At the invitation of the Acting President, Ms. Allan
(Australia), Mrs. Guerra Tamayo (Cuba), Ms. Abbey
(Ghana), Mr. Ludchak (Ukraine) and Ms. Quyen
Nguyen (Viet Nam) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 12.20 p.m. and
resumed at 1.15 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
191
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
191
Abstentions:
0
Number of members present and voting:
191
Required absolute majority:
96
Number of votes obtained:
Egypt:
170
Lebanon:
170
Brazil:
151
Costa Rica:
149
South Africa:
133
Libya:
120
The Acting President: I congratulate Brazil,
Costa Rica, Egypt, Lebanon and South Africa on their
election as members of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 119?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

20-3602819/19
