United Nations

S/PV.6442

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6442nd meeting
Friday, 10 December 2010, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-68565 (E)

*1068565*

S/PV.6442

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President: At this meeting, the Security
Council will hear a briefing by Ambassador Tsuneo
Nishida, Permanent Representative of Japan, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Nishida.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to deliver to
the Security Council the sixteenth 90-day report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of
resolution 1737 (2006). The report covers the period
from 16 September to 9 December 2010, during which
time the Committee held no meetings but conducted its
work using the silent procedure.
I would like to begin by noting that, on
5 November 2010, in consultation with the Committee,
the Secretary-General appointed the Panel of Experts
established under paragraph 29 of resolution 1929
(2010). The Committee welcomes this development
and is scheduled to hold informal consultations with
the members of the Panel today.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received communications from two Member States,
which reported two separate incidents of violations of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which imposes
a ban on the export and procurement of all arms and
related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran. In
the first case, a Member State informed the Committee
that, at one of its wharfs, its security authority had
inspected and seized 13 shipping containers of illegal
arms reportedly originating from Iran, and that a
comprehensive report on the results of its
investigations would be forthcoming. The Committee
responded, inter alia, by recommending that the
Member State retain and store the seized containers
until the Committee had concluded its consideration of
the matter, and encouraged the Member State to invite

2

the Panel of Experts, as appropriate, to visit and
inspect the seized containers.
In the second case, a Member State informed the
Committee that, at one of its harbours, its customs and
border authorities had inspected and seized a container
onboard the vessel MS Finland, originating from Iran
and destined for the Syrian Arab Republic, which
contained, a high-potential explosive known as T4 or
RDX. Further investigations were being carried out by
the Member State. As in the first case, the Committee
dispatched a response with appropriate guidance to this
State. It is a matter of grave concern that the apparent
pattern of sanctions violations involving prohibited
arms transfers from Iran, first highlighted publicly by
the Committee a year ago, is continuing.
In accordance with its work programme, on
1 November the Committee approved a hand-out
describing implementation by States of resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929
(2010); and on 15 November, a fact sheet explaining
the respective roles of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts in investigating and responding to reported
sanctions violations. It is hoped that these two
documents, which were subsequently dispatched to all
Member States under cover of a note verbale and are
also available on the Committee’s website, will assist
Member States in meeting their responsibilities.
The Committee considered and approved a
request submitted by a Member State for an exception
to the assets freeze, to the benefit of a listed entity,
under subparagraph 13 (b) of resolution 1737 (2006).
In addition, the Committee received three notifications
from two Member States in connection with the receipt
and/or unfreezing of funds in order to make payments
due under contracts entered into prior to the listing of
two entities, pursuant to paragraph 15 of the same
resolution. The Committee also responded to two
written queries on the assets freeze measure and on an
entity designated as subject to this measure.
Finally, the Committee is aware of a de-listing
request, submitted through the focal point process
outlined in the annex to resolution 1730 (2006),
concerning another listed entity and will be addressing
this request in accordance with the same resolution.
Allow me to conclude by noting the important
work that lies ahead of the Committee, including the
consideration of the forthcoming interim report of the
Panel of Experts as well as the conduct of a

10-68565

10/12/2010 16:33:21 — 20/12/2010 13:28:00

comprehensive review of the implementation reports
submitted by Member States under the four resolutions.
Thus far, the Committee has received 92 reports under
resolution 1737 (2006), 79 reports under resolution
1747 (2007), 68 reports under resolution 1803 (2008),
and 45 reports under resolution 1929 (2010).
Since this is the last 90-day report I shall deliver
to the Council in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee, on my behalf and on behalf of my
predecessor, Ambassador Takasu, I thank the members
of the Committee for their cooperation.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
share my personal observations on the activities of the
1737 Committee during Japan’s term in the Security
Council, since my mandate will come to end as of
31 December.
The most important event over the past two years
concerning the 1737 Committee was the adoption of
resolution 1929 (2010). Pursuant to this resolution, the
Panel of Experts was established, and its activities
have begun very recently. As the role of the Panel is to
assist the work of the Committee from an independent
point of view, ensuring an appropriate environment for
the Panel will serve in the best and long-term interests
of the Committee. The Committee and the Panel will
also need to jointly implement the programme of work
that was adopted on 23 July. As such, the Committee
and the Panel of Experts should work in a coordinated
fashion.
It cannot be overemphasized that the most
important work of the Committee is to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. This can be done only as long as all
Member States are fully informed of the work of the
Committee and the Panel, as well as their respective
roles in fulfilling the obligations of these resolutions.
Against that backdrop, I have stressed the importance
of ensuring transparency and sharing information with
Member States. We can now find on the website of the
1737 Committee such relevant documents as the fact
sheet, which explains the respective roles of the
Committee and the Panel, as well as the hand-out
describing the obligations of Member States under
relevant resolutions. I hope that Member States have
found such early dissemination of information helpful.

S/PV.6442
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\S6442001E.doc

carrying out their responsibilities under the resolutions.
As Chair, I have tried to respond to their sincerity by
expeditiously issuing acknowledgement letters so as to
express the strong interest of the Committee in
cooperating with their investigations. Speedy and
reliable communication between the Committee and
reporting States constitutes a crucial element of
fulfilling the mandate of the resolutions. In future cases,
the Committee should establish a means for the
Committee and the Panel to share information with
relevant parties in those cases and to closely coordinate
with them.
National implementation reports submitted by
Member States provide factual foundations for the
Committee to understand the situation surrounding the
implementation of the resolutions. It is therefore quite
unfortunate that the number of submissions remains
quite low. I would like to take this opportunity to
remind and request the Member States to submit the
reports required under all relevant resolutions.
In other Committees, I understand that analysis of
submitted implementation reports have helped them to
better understand approaches taken by Member States
in carrying out their obligations, and also to identify
challenges and difficulties Member States are faced
with. It is therefore important and necessary for the
Committee, with the assistance of the Panel of Experts,
to analyse the content of reports. In doing so, the
Committee can provide better guidance to the Member
States in submitting their reports and additional
information, and also in identifying any vulnerabilities
in fulfilling obligations under the resolutions.

Last but not least, I would like to emphasize that
the strong support of Member States is of critical
importance to the Committee in carrying out its work. I
have benefited greatly from the cooperation extended
by many Member States. More can be done by the
Committee, in my view, to gain even stronger support
from Member States. One effective tool that the
Committee can use in the future is to hold regular
briefings to the Member States. This can be
complemented by the active engagement of the Panel
of Experts in outreach activities. The Panel can also
support the work of the Committee and its Chair by
joining open briefings. It is essential for the Committee
to actively seek the support of Member States in
A number of Member States reported promptly carrying out its mandate. Such an active role played by
upon identifying violation cases under their jurisdiction. the Committee will strengthen not only its visibility but
These actions demonstrate their strong commitment to also its legitimacy in the long run.

10-68565

3

10/12/2010 16:33:21 — 20/12/2010 13:28:00

The President: I thank Mr. Nishida for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Allow
me to lead the chorus that I am sure will come from
colleagues in thanking Ambassador Nishida for his
final briefing as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). As he leaves, the
Committee is well equipped to continue to fulfil its
important mandate. Its role will be of vital importance
as we pursue the dual-track strategy to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue.
For the dual-track strategy to succeed, rigorous
implementation by States of the measures contained in
resolution 1929 (2010) and the Council’s previous
resolutions is essential, particularly in view of the two
new reported violations that have come to light
recently. They are correctly identified in today’s report
as part of a pattern of violations. The transfers of the
goods seized — illegal arms and RDX high
explosives — are both flagrant violations of paragraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007) by Iran. The latter is also a
violation of paragraph 8 of resolution 1737 (2006). We
encourage the Committee to consider making
additional designations to prevent further violations
and sanctions evasions.
These violations demonstrate the importance of
the 1737 Committee in ensuring implementation both
by monitoring implementation and advising States
when necessary. They also emphasize the vital role of
its newly appointed Panel of Experts. The Panel will
have a full agenda investigating reported violations and
travelling to various regions to focus on
implementation.
We also support the Committee’s wider outreach
efforts to promote implementation. The recently
produced hand-out and fact sheet will be helpful to
Member States seeking to implement measures more
effectively. In future, and with the Panel’s assistance,
the Committee might also consider organizing open
briefings to the wider United Nations membership,
setting out clearly what is expected of Member States.
While many Member States have acted promptly
to adjust their laws and procedures, we remind those
yet to report to the 1737 Committee on measures taken
to do so as soon as possible, as Ambassador Nishida

4

S/PV.6442
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\S6442001E.doc

has underlined again today. The Committee should
make a renewed push on this matter. More complete
reporting would help the Panel of Experts to identify
gaps as they prepare their comprehensive survey of
implementation.
Today’s briefing follows the publication on
24 November of the latest report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on Iran. That report
provides a clear benchmark by which to judge Iran’s
non-compliance with its international obligations.
First, the report states that Iran is not suspending
enrichment-related activities or heavy water-related
projects as required by Security Council resolutions
and as requested by the IAEA Board of Governors.
Secondly, it shows that the IAEA still awaits a
substantive response from Iran in relation to the
announcements that Iran also intends to construct
10 new nuclear enrichment facilities. Thirdly, the
report reiterates that there has been no Iranian
cooperation with the IAEA on possible military
dimensions to their programme since August 2008.
Fourthly, the report also indicates that Iran, contrary to
Security Council and Board resolutions, is continuing
heavy water-related activities and denying the IAEA
the access it would like to locations related to heavy
water production sites. Finally, the report concludes
that “Iran has not provided the necessary cooperation
to permit the Agency to confirm that all nuclear
material in Iran is in peaceful activities” and that
“Iran is not implementing the requirements
contained in the relevant resolutions of the Board
of Governors and the Security Council … which
are essential to building confidence in the
exclusively peaceful purpose of Iran’s nuclear
programme and to resolving outstanding
questions”.
We are meeting a few days after the talks in
Geneva between Baroness Ashton, the E3+3 and Mr.
Jalili. This was a welcome step, and the agreement to
meet again in Turkey in January is positive, but we are
clear that the next talks should include a candid
discussion of the many international concerns relating
to the Iranian nuclear programme, and that Iran needs
to show real progress in addressing these concerns.
We remain determined to resolve these matters
through dialogue and diplomacy. We hope that the
January meeting will help to achieve that goal.

10-68565

10/12/2010 16:33:21 — 20/12/2010 13:28:00

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Ambassador Nishida for his briefing on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) over the past 90 days. This will
be his last briefing to the Security Council in his
capacity as Chair of the Committee. Over the past two
years, under the leadership of Ambassador Nishida and
his predecessors, the Committee has done much
pragmatic and effective work. China wishes to express
its appreciation for the work of the Committee and its
chairs.
The Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010) is currently carrying out its
work. We wish to thank the Chair of the Committee,
the members of the Committee and the Secretariat for
all their efforts. We hope that the Panel of Experts, in
accordance with the mandate given by the resolution
and under the leadership of the Committee, will carry
out its work in a pragmatic and efficient manner and
play an important role in assisting the Member States
to comprehensively and earnestly carry out the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. During this process,
China wishes to provide all necessary support and
assistance to the Panel of Experts and will contribute
as always to the work of the Committee.
China
always
supports
maintaining
the
international non-proliferation regime and attaches
great importance to and strictly abides by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. All Member States
are required to implement the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council comprehensively and earnestly.
However, in this process there should be no wilful
interpretation or expansion of the scope the sanctions.
China always believes that sanctions are not ends
in themselves and cannot fundamentally resolve any
issue. The best choice with respect to Iran is to seek
peaceful diplomatic negotiations and a peaceful
settlement of the nuclear issue. We now have a new
opportunity to restart the dialogue on the Iranian
nuclear issue and negotiations on the matter. The
European Union and six countries have just carried out
a positive and useful dialogue in Geneva that enhanced
mutual understanding. We hope that the concerned
parties can maintain their efforts to seek a solution
through diplomatic negotiation and in a cooperative,
flexible and pragmatic spirit try to gradually establish
mutual confidence, seek common ground and promote
progress in the negotiations. China continues to hope
that the International Atomic Energy Agency can play a

10-68565

S/PV.6442
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\S6442001E.doc

constructive role in helping to find an appropriate
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
China will continue to work with all parties to
seize and make good use of the current opportunity to
step up diplomatic efforts and to continue to build
momentum for a solution of the Iranian nuclear issue
through dialogue and negotiation. We will continue to
do our part to find a comprehensive, lasting and
appropriate solution of the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first to thank Ambassador Nishida for his quarterly
report and for the outstanding work he has done as
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). His briefing has reminded us
of the reality of the Iranian nuclear dossier. It shows
the magnitude and diversity of Iranian practices to
evade sanctions.
Serious violations are on the increase. After the
Monchegorsk, the Hansa India, the Francop and the
neighbouring case of the ANL Australia, we now have
two new cases of arms violations contravening
resolution 1737 (2006) and, most likely, in the case of
the RDX explosives, a violation of the embargo on the
export of dual-use items under the resolution. A
considerable flow of arms and other dangerous
material that has again come to light, with confirmed
itineraries between the port of Bandar Abbas and
Latakia, in particular. New routes have been identified
in Africa that are cause for concern. Once again, this is
undoubtedly only the tip of the iceberg.
In this regard, I welcome the fact that the
Member States concerned have been able to intercept
these cargos and to make notification of these cases of
violations. These notifications show that Member
States are indeed implementing the resolutions. They
are evidence that Iran continues to flout its
international obligations and to threaten international
and regional peace and security. They also show that
sanctions have an impact, as Iran has to make use of
increasingly complex routes and schemes.
We can only underscore the gravity of this type of
smuggling, and in that regard I underscore the concerns
expressed by the Chairman of the Committee in his
report. These violations pose a threat to our collective
security and to regional security in regions that have no
need of any such additional threat. They require the
greatest vigilance on our part.

5

10/12/2010 16:33:21 — 20/12/2010 13:28:00

As a result, we hope that the Panel of Experts
recently appointed by the Secretary-General will
investigate these cases of violations in depth, pursuant
to its mandate; study Iran’s evasive techniques, in
particular in the transport sector; and on that basis
provide recommendations to the Committee.
I referred earlier to the recent establishment of
the Panel of Experts. This is good news, and my
country welcomes this. A meeting of the Committee
with the experts will be held later today, but as of now
I wish to underscore the importance of their work to
ensuring the effective implementation of the resolution.
It is essential that the Panel be able to study the
national implementation reports concerning violations,
issue periodic recommendations for improving the
sanctions provisions, and develop outreach activities.
We encourage all States to cooperate fully with the
Panel.

S/PV.6442
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\S6442001E.doc

held on 6 and 7 December was in this regard the
outcome of the numerous calls for dialogue and the
repeated efforts of Ms. Ashton and the E3+3 partners to
resume dialogue with Iran.
However, the meeting would not have taken place
without the pressure of the international community,
which increased further still with the adoption of
resolution 1929 (2010). In Geneva, the E3+3 partners
reiterated their common concern about the Iranian
nuclear programme described by the IAEA, the
expectations of the international community, and Iran’s
obligations. They also stressed their resolve to find a
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear crisis.

We also welcome the fact that the Committee has
continued its awareness-raising activities by its recent
adoption of information hand-outs detailing the
contents of the resolutions and the respective roles of
the Committee and the Panel.

We now hope that Iran will make use of the
weeks remaining before the January meeting in
Istanbul in order to consider the situation in the light of
the messages it received in Geneva; adopt irreversible,
specific measures to respond to the concerns of the
international community; honour its international
obligations; and finally accept to consider our requests
for dialogue and cooperation in order to begin
discussions with the E3+3 partners in a constructive
spirit.

I touched on violations that have been brought to
the attention of the Committee and the concerns these
have raised. These concerns have been confirmed with
regard to the Iranian nuclear programme in the latest
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of 23 November. The
report underscores that Iran continues to refuse to
honour its international obligations and to conform to
the demands of the Security Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors.

Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Ambassador Nishida, for his briefing on the
work of the Committee over the past three months. We
deeply appreciate his efforts in chairing the Committee,
which has done a great deal of work in that time in
various areas of its mandate. The Committee has
strictly discharged its mandate, and it is important that
it continue to do so in the future.

Iran is pursuing its uranium enrichment activities
at 3.5 and 20 per cent, as well as its heavy water
projects, despite the repeated demands of the
international community and, we note, in the absence
of any veritable civilian use. Iran refuses to cooperate
with the IAEA in order to shed light on the nature and
full extent of its activities. In particular, Iran continues
to refuse to answer the IAEA’s questions regarding the
militarization of its nuclear programme. The Director
General states in his report that questions concerning
these alleged uses remain unanswered.

We welcome the establishment of the Panel of
Experts, which will provide the Committee with
professional support. We expect the Panel to do
practical work in implementing, under the guidance of
the Committee, the tasks assigned to it. All members of
the international community must strictly abide by
Security Council resolutions and the sanctions regime
with respect to Iran and not to go beyond those
boundaries.

The measures adopted by the Security Council
are not an end in themselves. Their purpose is to
convince Iran to negotiate in conformity with the dual
approach of the E3+3 partners. The Geneva meeting

6

With respect to the current situation of the Iranian
nuclear programme, our position remains unchanged.
We have consistently called for a solution to the
problem through dialogue and interaction with the
Iranian side. The foundation of our approach is the
continuation of the talks towards a diplomatic solution

10-68565

10/12/2010 16:33:21 — 20/12/2010 13:28:00

and to work with Tehran while ensuring the full
cooperation of Iran with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA).
We welcome the Geneva talks on the Iranian
nuclear programme held on 6 and 7 December with the
European Union High Representative for Foreign
Policy, Baroness Ashton, with the Secretary of the
Supreme National Security Council of Iran, Mr. Jalili,
and with the political directors of the E3+3. The
discussions resumed after a long break, and the parties
took a close look at issues of mutual interest, including
the situation of the Iranian nuclear programme as well
as matters of global security and the strengthening of
the non-proliferation regime.
Some steps were identified to enable the
continuation of the dialogue with the aim of furthering
cooperation and seeking common approaches. It is
important that an agreement was reached in Geneva on
future meetings, such as that planned for January in
Istanbul. We hope that these talks will enjoy further
momentum and that all interested parties will continue
to interact in the interest of finding an exclusively
peaceful and political settlement of the situation of the
Iranian nuclear problem.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.
Let me also begin by thanking Ambassador
Nishida for his briefing today and for his own and
Japan’s exemplary leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the
past two years. The Committee has accomplished a
great deal and he has set a very high standard for his
successor to live up to.
Six months ago, almost to the day, this Council
adopted resolution 1929 (2010) in response to Iran’s
continued refusal to comply with its international
nuclear obligations. Since then, Iran’s non-compliance
with its obligations to the Security Council and under
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons has persisted, as has its lack of full
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and, as we have just heard, have its
numerous violations of Security Council resolutions.
Allow me to make three brief points on the current
situation and appropriate next steps.
First, unfortunately, when it comes to the actions
of Iran, not much has changed since we last met. Iran

10-68565

S/PV.6442
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\S6442001E.doc

continues to violate its obligations to the IAEA and the
Security Council. The latest report on Iran of the IAEA
Director-General, released just a few weeks ago, again
underscores Iran’s continued refusal to comply with its
international nuclear obligations and to cooperate fully
with the IAEA.
Most notably, the report underscores Iran’s
ongoing uranium enrichment at 3.5 per cent and
near-20 per cent levels. The report also details Iran’s
continued construction of a heavy water research
reactor, its refusal to permit the IAEA the access it
needs to answer long-standing questions about the
Qom enrichment facility, and its non-response to the
questions around a possible military dimension to
Iran’s nuclear programme. In sum, the latest IAEA
report records Iran’s continued defiance of its
international obligations and shows that Iran has yet to
take the meaningful steps required by this Council and
called for by the IAEA Board of Governors.
Secondly, we must continue to maintain the
pressure on Iran to change course. All Member States
have an obligation to fully implement Security Council
resolutions. We urge those that have not yet done so to
report to the Committee on their national
implementation efforts as soon as possible. These
Security Council resolutions affirm obligations on Iran
with a clear objective: to resolve the international
community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear activities.
The 1737 Committee and the recently-constituted
Panel of Experts will help to maintain the pressure on
Iran by monitoring and improving the implementation
and enforcement of the Iran sanctions regime.
In particular, we urge the Committee, with the
Panel’s support, to investigate thoroughly all reported
sanctions violations. We commend Nigeria for having
seized Iranian arms exported in violation of United
Nations sanctions. We also commend Italy for seizing
items that Syria was attempting to procure illicitly
from Iran. Investigations into these incidents can help
us to better understand and to halt Iran’s arms
smuggling and proliferation networks in violation of
Council resolutions.
We are pleased that the Panel of Experts is now
operational. The Panel is an exceptionally wellqualified team, and we expect that it will significantly
improve our ability to monitor and tighten enforcement.
Finally, let me reiterate my Government’s
commitment to a dual-track strategy of both pressure

7

10/12/2010 16:33:21 — 20/12/2010 13:28:00

S/PV.6442
w:\mswdocs\_4verbatim\S6442001E.doc

and engagement to convince Iran’s leadership to
change course. Earlier this week, we held frank
discussions and dialogue with Iran and our E3+3
partners. We aim to continue a careful and phased
process of building confidence between Iran and the
international community.

continued talks in late January to discuss practical
ideas for a way forward to resolve our core concerns.
We remain committed to working closely with our
partners in this Council and the international
community to prevent Iran from developing nuclear
weapons.

As we have said before, we recognize Iran’s
rights, but we insist that Iran fulfil the obligations that
accompany those rights. Iran’s choice remains clear. If
it builds international confidence and respects its
obligations, we will reciprocate; but if Iran refuses, its
isolation will only grow. We will base our actions on
Iran’s degree of cooperation. We look forward to

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

8

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

10-68565
