S/PV.9257

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9257th meeting

Thursday, 9 February 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Chanda
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Sixteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2023/76)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-04072 (E)
*2304072*

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the face of sheer brutality and evil. They reminded us
of the trauma and destruction that terrorism leaves long
after an attack is over.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Sixteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2023/76)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General,
Office of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Weixiong Chen,
Acting
Executive
Director,
Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Franziska
Praxl, Director of Multilateral Relations, Global Center
on Cooperative Security.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/76, which contains the sixteenth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to provide a briefing to it today.
As I present the sixteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by Da’esh to international
peace and security and the United Nations counterterrorism efforts in support of Member States
(S/2023/76), it is important that we remember the
impact that this terrorist organization has on human
lives, livelihoods and peace.
In September last year, the Office of CounterTerrorism organized in New York the first United
Nations Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism. That
high-level event began with a powerful call to action
by 10 victims and survivors of terrorism from around
the world, who shared their heart-wrenching stories of
pain and loss but also of resilience and steadfastness in
2/21

09/02/2023

I regularly meet with victims of terrorism. Their
stories have a profound impact on me, because beyond
the headlines and behind the numbers, there are many
people and communities who were affected by the
heinous crimes of Da’esh and other terrorist groups and
individuals. Engaging with and addressing the plight
of victims and survivors provides us with a compelling
reason to support and strengthen our collective efforts
to confront and defeat terrorism. It also serves as
an impetus to keep strengthening multilateral and
inter-agency networks, including at the United Nations
through the Secretary-General’s Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact.
I am pleased to be joined today by Mr. Weixiong
Chen, Acting Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, to present
this report, which our offices prepared jointly with the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. I
would like to thank Mr. Justin Hustwitt, Coordinator
of the Monitoring Team, for his contribution in the
preparation of the report, his first in this new role.
And I look forward to building on our common efforts
throughout his term.
Allow me to highlight a few key takeaways from
the report, against the background of trends observed
in the past two years.
The report asserts that, despite leadership losses
and expenses that are diminishing its cash reserves,
the threat posed by Da’esh to international peace and
security remains high and has increased in and around
conflict zones in which the group and its affiliates
are active.
The expansion of Da’esh and its affiliates is
particularly worrying in Central and Southern Africa,
as well as in the Sahel. The Secretary-General’s
reports have dutifully recorded this unfortunate trend,
which should prompt us all to rethink and revise our
efforts to counter the group, especially those that rely
disproportionately on the use of force.
Previous reports raised concerns about an
increased risk of attacks in non-conflict areas by
unaffiliated lone actors and small cells inspired by
Da’esh as pandemic-related restrictions eased. While
that has not materialized over this reporting period, the
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

level of terrorist activity continues to be a concern to
Member States.
For example, Da’esh continues to use the Internet
and social media, video games and gaming-adjacent
platforms to extend the reach of its propaganda to
radicalize and recruit new supporters. The group’s
use of new and emerging technologies also remains a
key concern. Da’esh continues to use unmanned aerial
systems for surveillance and reconnaissance, and uses
virtual assets to raise funds.
Despite repeated calls by the Secretary-General
for urgent action, the dire situation in camps and
detention facilities in the north-eastern Syrian Arab
Republic persists. The humanitarian, human rights,
legal and security risks associated with the status
quo have potentially far-reaching consequences in the
medium to long term. The pace of repatriations remains
too slow, and children continue to bear the brunt of
this catastrophe.
At the same time, the challenge of foreign terrorist
fighters and their family members is not restricted
to Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. It is a global
challenge. Foreign terrorist fighters move between
different theatres of conflict. In addition, the list of
issues for when they return extends from accountability
and prosecution for suspected crimes to managing
associated family members, as well as rehabilitation
and reintegration.
Foreign terrorist fighters with battlefield experience
relocating to their homes or to third countries further
compounds the threat. As noted in the report, terrorist
attacks committed by such individuals have proven to
be particularly lethal compared to those committed
by purely home-grown terrorists. There are also some
instances of radicalized women associated with Da’esh
who reinvent themselves as recruiters, indoctrinating
others, particularly children.
Looking ahead, the report offers three key
observations for the Council’s consideration.
First, the high-level threat posed by Da’esh and its
affiliates, including their sustained expansion in parts
of Africa, underscores the need for multidimensional
approaches beyond security-centred responses. More
complementarity is needed between security responses
and preventive measures. The framework for ensuring
such complementarity is offered by relevant Security
Council resolutions, as well as the United Nations

S/PV.9257

Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which this year is
undergoing its eighth review. The United Nations will
continue to work with Member States in order to ensure
their effective, integrated and balanced implementation.
Secondly, such multidimensional approaches
must be gender-sensitive and firmly anchored in
international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, and must
reflect a broad range of views from various segments
in societies affected by terrorism. In line with the
Secretary-General’s A Call to Action for Human Rights,
human rights must be at the centre of the United Nations
system’s efforts to counter and prevent terrorism.
Thirdly, as the report points to an increased threat
from terrorism in conflict zones, further efforts are
necessary to address and prevent those conflicts in the
first place. While terrorists exploit conflict dynamics,
peace efforts are too often undermined and further
complicated by terrorism. Better understanding the
complex relationship between conflict and terrorism is
a necessary step for devising more effective responses
to those recurring challenges.
Referring to the New Agenda for Peace in his briefing
to the General Assembly earlier this week (see A/77/
PV.58), the Secretary-General said it must recognize
the need for a new generation of peace-enforcement
missions and counter-terrorism operations. The New
Agenda will also outline possible actions for ensuring
more effective responses to terrorism across the United
Nations system.
The Abuja summit being organized later this year
by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Government
of Nigeria will offer another opportunity for exploring
options in the light of the deteriorating situation in parts
of Africa, where terrorist fighters, funds and weapons
are increasingly moving between regions, demanding a
transcontinental approach.
The threat posed by Da’esh is a symptom of
the convergence of risks and threats outlined by
the Secretary-General in his Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) report. Countering that threat will continue to
require our multilateral, collective and decisive efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chen.

23-040723/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Chen: The threat that Da’esh and its affiliates
pose globally has not diminished. They constitute a
complex, evolving and enduring threat in both conflict
and non-conflict zones. In the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/76), the following points are apparent.
First, Da’esh continues to exploit local fragilities
and intercommunal tensions, particularly in Iraq,
the Syrian Arab Republic and parts of the African
continent, in particular to boost terrorist recruitment.
Secondly, as noted by Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov in his remarks just now, Da’esh, years after
suffering its losses, has sustained its ability to carry
out operations across diverse regions and expand its
base of affiliated entities, notably in parts of Central,
Southern and Western Africa. The visit of the CounterTerrorism Committee to Nigeria in October confirmed
that assessment.
Thirdly, generating revenue and fundraising
have become critical for Da’esh. That is conducted
through a wide range of ways, including extortion,
looting, smuggling, taxation, soliciting donations and
kidnapping for ransom. We have also seen an increased
use of social media and gaming platforms as a means to
raise money, while unregistered informal cash-transfer
networks and mobile money services continue to be the
dominant means of moving money.
Finally, the group’s access to conventional and
improvised weapons, including components of
unmanned aircraft systems and information and
communications technologies continue to contribute
to the terrorist menace. Using improvised, stolen or
illegally trafficked weapons, Da’esh has launched lethal
attacks against a range of targets. The group’s access to
information and communications technologies allows
it to diversify its tactics. Its misuse of the Internet
and social media platforms for propaganda increases
its ability to access audiences and incite violence
among followers.
There are also other aspects of concern. The speed
at which foreign nationals — women, men, children and
the elderly — with alleged links to Da’esh in camps and
prisons in north-eastern Syria are being repatriated to
their countries of origin continues to be protracted. Such
conditions provide Da’esh with ongoing opportunities
to recruit from camps and prisons and facilitate
radicalization to violence and the spread of terrorism.
4/21

09/02/2023

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) continues to implement its
mandate, in line with resolution 2617 (2021), to
counter the complex threat of Da’esh and its affiliates.
Through country assessment visits, as well as the
analysis of emerging trends, issues and developments,
CTED facilitates Member States’ understanding of
the evolving threat and their implementation of the
provisions of the relevant Council resolutions.
Finally,
based
on
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s recommendations, CTED coordinates
closely with the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
other partners of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact to support capacitybuilding activities in a range of thematic areas, such as
the continued support of the Lake Chad basin countries
to strengthen cross-border cooperation and develop
comprehensive approaches to screening, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED
have also ramped up efforts to address the use of new
and emerging technologies by terrorists. The Delhi
Declaration, adopted by the Committee last October,
calls for efforts to develop recommendations and
non-binding guiding principles to assist Member States
in implementing the relevant Council resolutions on
countering terrorism and, specifically, the terrorist use
of new and emerging technologies. CTED will provide
its fullest support to the Committee in that regard.
(spoke in Chinese)
Only by working multilaterally and cooperatively
will we succeed in mounting an effective response
to the evolving global terrorist threat. To develop
and implement effective counter-terrorism strategies
and measures, it is vital that we apply a forwardlooking, holistic and coordinated all-of-United-Nations
approach. Our measures must be tailor-made, age- and
gender-responsive and human rights-compliant.
CTED remains dedicated to supporting the Security
Council and the Counter-Terrorism Committee in those
endeavours while collaborating with all the relevant
stakeholders and players.
The President: I thank Mr. Chen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Praxl.
Ms. Praxl: I thank the Security Council very
much for inviting me today to share some observations
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

regarding the importance of gender mainstreaming
across all countering violent extremism and counterterrorism efforts. My name is Franziska Praxl-Tabuchi,
and I am the Director of Multilateral Relations at the
Global Center on Cooperative Security.
I want to thank the Government of Malta for
inviting me to brief the Council today on genderresponsive approaches to addressing terrorism. We
recognize its efforts to secure a civil society briefer for
today’s meeting who operates at a local or a national
level and the steps that it took to ensure their safety
in the light of increased reprisals for both civil society
and United Nations personnel, as seen most recently in
the expulsion of the head of the Human Rights Division
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the pressure placed
on the civil society briefer. No one should face
retaliation for speaking out on human rights abuses.
Indeed, the Security Council has a long history of
being a forum for debate and action on such matters.
Moreover, the perspectives of local civil society must
inform this organ’s decisions and the broader work of
the United Nations, especially when those decisions
affect those most affected by terrorism and counterterrorism. We hope to see our local partners sitting in
this seat next time, and we call on Council members
and the United Nations system to support and safeguard
their participation.
In addition to adding invaluable perspectives
to the Council, local and national civil society have
been instrumental in moving towards gender-sensitive
policies in programmes and policies on countering violent
extremism and counter-terrorism. Security Council
resolutions and discussions have long emphasized the
need to integrate a gender perspective into countering
violent extremism and counter-terrorism approaches.
They have also called for greater participation and
leadership by women, amplified the work of women
and women’s organizations and addressed the role of
gender stereotypes and masculinities. Similarly, the
Secretary-General’s 2015 Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674) recommends that
States Members of the United Nations mainstream
gender perspectives across efforts to prevent violent
extremism. Indeed, the Secretary-General’s sixteenth
report (S/2023/76) on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) reflects on
the grave abuses against children and women, their
significant representation in camps and detention

S/PV.9257

facilities and the need for gender- and age-sensitive
approaches to their rehabilitation and reintegration.
Mainstreaming
gender
into
the
design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
countering violent extremism and counter-terrorism
measures is not just a matter of realizing the goal of
the participation of women. It is about ensuring the
inclusive and equitable participation and leadership
of people of diverse gender identities. It requires
accounting for the experiences, needs and challenges
of individuals and recognizing how gender identities
relate to other identity factors. Simply put, integrating
a gender perspective is a prerequisite for successful
human rights-based and people-centred policies and
programmes intended to address peace and security
issues, including those that seek to counter violent
extremism and terrorism.
In that regard, tentative progress has been
made, particularly in the promulgation of normative
frameworks, resources and guidance documents.
However, we see greater opportunities to move
beyond the status quo by better understanding and
addressing how gender identities intersect with other
identity factors, including ethnicity, age, religion and
geographic origin, and by operationalizing the existing
guidance in countering violent extremism and counterterrorism programmes and measures in partnership
with local and regional civil society stakeholders to
ensure their contextualization.
For the Council’s consideration, and based on the
Global Center’s experience and diverse network of civil
society partners, I will share a set of key principles
that should inform more gender-sensitive, rights-based
countering violent extremism and counter-terrorism
approaches to addressing the threat posed by ISIL
(Da’esh) and many other terrorist groups.
First, the do-no-harm principle and gender and
conflict sensitivity must underpin all components of
countering violent extremism and counter-terrorism
policies and practices. Countering violent extremism
and counter-terrorism policies and programmes must
account for the complexity of drivers of insecurity
beyond those posed by terrorism. They must avoid
creating, or exacerbating, drivers of violence and,
instead, make a positive contribution to peace and the
promotion and protection of human rights. They must
therefore be conflict-sensitive, uphold do-no-harm
standards and account for the diverse needs, challenges

23-040725/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and risks to men, women, girls, boys and people of
diverse gender and intersecting identities. Furthermore,
the maintenance of strong, independent institutions of
oversight and accountability over justice and security
actors and interventions to prevent and address abuse
and corruption is a crucial prerequisite for equitable
and inclusive community engagement. Peace and
security interventions that fail to account for gendered
roles, needs and power relations have a substantially
higher risk of doing harm and of reinforcing norms,
institutions and structures that enable gender-based
injustice and violence.
Secondly,
gender-responsive
stakeholder
engagement should be inclusive and participatory and
prioritize the empowerment of the most marginalized
and affected. All aspects of countering violent extremism
and counter-terrorism interventions, including their
design, should be co-led by stakeholders, partners
and programme participants of diverse gender and
intersecting identities, prioritizing the women’s civil
society organizations and marginalized groups most
affected by a policy or programme. Such stakeholders
are best equipped to define what success looks like and
the means to measure it, as well as to identify the nature
and terms of their engagement in countering violent
extremism and counter-terrorism initiatives, including
on whether a countering violent extremism framing is
most appropriate in each circumstance.
Thirdly, inclusivity means more than casting a
wide net. It means actively seeking to remove barriers
to participation. Countering violent extremism and
counter-terrorism efforts are only as inclusive as they
are accessible. The participation and leadership of
boys, men, girls, women and people of diverse gender
identities can vary significantly, depending on when and
where activities, meetings and consultations are held.
For example, considerations related to participants’
physical and mental safety, the risk of reprisals,
access to transportation and the need for childcare and
associated costs are crucial to ensure that individuals
can participate in project activities.
Lastly, civil society experts should be compensated
for their engagement. In many countries, women’s
labour and expertise are undervalued across the
board, including in Government, civil society and
academia. That disparity enables an environment in
which women — far more frequently than men — are
expected to speak and write without compensation
in order to establish and maintain credibility in their
6/21

09/02/2023

fields. When women, men and people of diverse gender
identities are invited to participate in activities as
expert speakers, authors, trainers or consultants, they
should be fairly compensated.
In order to illustrate the importance of those guiding
principles, allow me to highlight their application to
two areas of counter-terrorism and countering violent
extremism interventions that were mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s sixteenth report to demonstrate
what gender-sensitive approaches look like in practice.
I will focus on rehabilitation and reintegration and
then turn my attention to countering the financing
of terrorism.
First, policies and programmes that focus on the
disengagement, rehabilitation and reintegration of
persons associated with violent extremism or terrorism
are more successful when they account for individual
experiences and needs and are not confined to the
victim/perpetrator binary. The gendered nature of power
relations within societies and within terrorist groups
is a critical dynamic that should be recognized. Most
rehabilitation and reintegration interventions have been
designed for male perpetrators. Building on the existing
evidence base, it is important to design rehabilitation
and reintegration programmes and policies that take
into account gendered norms, structures and processes
and their relevance to violent extremism and terrorism
and to countering violent extremism and counterterrorism efforts. Accountability and reconciliation
efforts for returnees from Syria and Iraq should take
into account the local attitudes towards individuals
associated with violent extremist and terrorist groups
and, where appropriate, engage with communities in
order to help them to support returnees.
Assumptions and stereotypes about women’s
agency and their status as the victims of perpetrators
further complicate the process of designing effective
rehabilitation and reintegration policies and programmes.
Other stereotypes include the demonization of women
who are suspected of having committed crimes, which
can be particularly challenging when they are in the
process of reintegrating into a community. None of that
is intended to detract from the prevalence of human
trafficking and gender-based violence against women.
In West Africa, some of our local partners facilitate
dialogues, training and workshops using peacebuilding
education and restorative justice methods to engage
individuals who have been involved in terrorist groups.
In the wake of the violent Boko Haram insurgency,
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

trauma consciousness and resilience support has risen
to the forefront of those efforts. The organizations
provide training for counsellors and civil society actors
as first responders to victims of the insurgency.
During trauma and resilience workshops, trainers
create a safe space that is conducive to the facilitation of
open dialogues, addressing topics such as anger, conflict
and power as they are experienced by individuals. That
approach enables trainers to address the gendered
nature of trauma and sexual and gender-based violence.
Individuals can address their lived experiences, while
accounting for intersectional identity factors such as
gender, age and sexual orientation. In order to address
safety concerns, particularly for women and girls,
mobile listening and counselling clinics are used to
allow for flexible, safe and private spaces in which
women may process their trauma.
Secondly, efforts to counter the financing of
terrorism have long been known to both intentionally and
unintentionally constrict civic space, human rights and
access to financial services. While the impacts are felt
broadly across a diversity of actors, power and resource
imbalances mean that the misapplication of measures
for countering the financing of terrorism can have a
disproportionate effect on marginalized communities.
Women-led and women-focused organizations often
have profiles that leave them vulnerable to experiencing
the consequences of countering the financing of
terrorism more intensely. For example, organizations
that challenge the prevailing gender norms may see their
work disrupted under the auspices of anti-monitoring
laws and obligations that are related to countering
the financing of terrorism. Smaller organizations and
those with less financial resilience may struggle to
meet the compliance standards related to countering
the financing of terrorism and anti-monitoring laws,
especially when measures are arduous and unduly
restrictive. The gender and human rights implications
of measures related to countering the financing of
terrorism are receiving increased attention, but more
needs to be done to ensure that the gender and human
rights implications of measures for countering the
financing of terrorism are properly understood and
addressed from policy through practice. That includes
ensuring that efforts related to anti-monitoring laws
and countering the financing of terrorism do not
hinder financial inclusion, which is particularly
relevant for women, as it correlates with their financial

S/PV.9257

independence and economic empowerment, which can
in turn increase their resilience to violent extremism.
I would like to conclude by noting that those are just
a few examples of the importance of gender-responsive,
rights-based approaches to countering violent
extremism and terrorism. Prioritizing individuals and
their experiences is essential for successfully countering
violent extremism and for counter-terrorism efforts.
While we continue to expand normative frameworks
and resources in that regard, it is crucial to focus on
their implementation and alignment with international
law. In order to realize gains in sustainable peace and
human rights, our efforts must be co-designed and
implemented in partnership with local and national
stakeholders from the respective countries or regions.
I once again thank Council members for the
opportunity to brief them on the importance of genderresponsive efforts for countering violent extremism and
for counter-terrorism and the need for such efforts to be
undertaken with local civil society actors.
The President: I thank Ms. Praxl for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me
start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and Acting Executive Director Chen Weixiong for the
combined efforts of the various United Nations entities
and international organizations that helped prepare the
sixteenth report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/76)
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support
of Member States in countering the threat, which
contributed to today’s briefing. I also want to thank
Ms. Praxl for her informed and thoughtful remarks on
gender mainstreaming in our counter-terrorism efforts.
My delegation took away three key highlights from
the Secretary-General’s report. First, the report highlights
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
continues to take advantage of conflict, corruption and
inequality to attract followers and organize its terrorist
attacks. Secondly, it also acknowledges that security
responses alone are not sufficient. And thirdly, it makes
clear that the international community must strengthen
the capacity of vulnerable populations to counter
misguided ideologies and reject violent extremism.
The annual stabilization pledge drive of the Global

23-040727/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Coalition against Da’esh is in my delegation’s view a
particularly important pathway for the international
community to fund stabilization programmes that can
build resilient communities in the liberated areas of
Iraq and Syria. Such efforts strengthen the capacity of
those communities to reintegrate returnees, who will
then work to help defeat ISIS.
We also thank the Secretary-General for the
report’s accurate account of the tragic aftermath of the
so-called ISIS caliphate, which primarily includes the
fact that tens of thousands of foreign nationals, most
of them women and children, still reside in displaced
persons camps. As we heard from our briefers today,
those camps constitute a humanitarian, human rights
and security crisis. The repatriation, rehabilitation
and reintegration, as appropriate, of foreign terrorist
fighters and their associated family members is a
top priority for the United States and is in our view
the most durable solution to ensure that ISIS does
not re-emerge in north-east Syria. We are pleased to
have seen an increase in repatriations over the past six
months, which we hope is a sign of greater efforts to
come. The United States stands ready to help Member
States bring their nationals home.
The United States remains particularly concerned
about the increasing terrorism threat across Africa,
which is outlined in the Secretary-General’s assessment.
We share his concern about the increased terrorist
violence and confrontations between Government
forces and non-State armed groups in the Sahel. The
United States therefore continues to provide its African
partners with critical counter-terrorism assistance
designed to help them disrupt and degrade ISIS and
Al-Qaida affiliates in a manner that is consistent
with international law, underscoring that capable law
enforcement and broader security-service responses
are essential to preventing and countering terrorism.
We look forward to engaging in March with the
Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS Africa Focus Group
on ways to confront and defeat ISIS on the continent.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment of ISISKhorasan. That group remains a significant terrorist
threat in Central and South Asia. It continues to
harbour ambitions and build capabilities to conduct
external operations. It is critical that the international
community deny safe haven for ISIS-Khorasan and
Al-Qaida and its affiliates in Afghanistan.
8/21

09/02/2023

Finally, we continue to press the Taliban to adhere
to its counter-terrorism commitments. We are also
gravely concerned about the Taliban’s edicts restricting
women and girls from working for non-governmental
organizations and attending school. They are putting
the lives of millions of innocent Afghans at risk as
Afghanistan endures one of its coldest winters and
grapples with emergency levels of food insecurity.
The United States stands with the Afghan people in
rejecting those edicts. We stand ready to help forge a
united international response that reflects a collective
commitment to the rights of Afghan women and girls
and safe access to vital aid. I reiterate my thanks
for the convening of today’s meeting and for the
briefers’ remarks.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Chen and Ms. Praxl for their
briefings. I would like to make two points.
First, the terrorist threat is not abating, which
means we must be ever more vigilant. Da’esh remains
a fundamental threat. In the Levant, our efforts remain
essential, as evidenced by Da’esh’s aim of recruiting
young people and its attempts to release prisoners. The
efforts of the Global Coalition against Da’esh, in addition
to the efforts to combat impunity for the crimes it has
committed, remain essential. The return of families to
their communities of origin must be accompanied by
robust solutions geared towards reintegration in order
to prevent the threat from spreading. In Africa, the
threat is spreading from the Sahel towards the Gulf of
Guinea. The development of Da’esh-affiliated groups
in Central, Eastern and Southern Africa is a growing
concern. In that regard, we are determinately pursuing
our efforts alongside our African partners within the
Coalition for the Sahel and within the Global Coalition
against Da’esh.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban takeover and the recent
deadly attacks confirm our fears that Da’esh may
become embedded in that country over the long term
and that Al-Qaida may once again find a haven there.
The terrorist threat there is more complex. Terrorists
are exploiting community conflicts and socioeconomic
difficulties to gain a foothold. They benefit from
crime and trafficking, including acts that damage
the environment.
Secondly, in continuing our efforts, we must adapt
to this threat. I would like to mention three areas of
action in that regard.
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The first involves combating the financing of
terrorism, which continues to evolve. The action
that was initiated with the adoption of resolution
2462 (2019) must continue in order to ensure its full
implementation and follow-up. We must take into
account all sources of financing, including alternative
and innovative financing.
The second area of action is about preventing the
use of the Internet for terrorist purposes. We have
made progress. France and New Zealand took action
by launching the Christchurch Appeal. We welcome
the increasing consideration of those issues in the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and hope that
momentum can be maintained.
Thirdly and finally, we must take action to address
the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism by
implementing a global response. That response should
not be confined to the military sector but should also
take into account the civilian dimensions of the problem.
It must respect human rights and international law.
Actors such as the Wagner Group, which claims to be
combating terrorism while committing massive human
rights violations, are ineffective and counterproductive.
We can see that clearly in the countries where they have
a presence.
The United Nations has a central role to play in
coordinating efforts to combat terrorism. France will
continue to support all counter-terrorism actors at the
United Nations.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Acting
Executive Director Chen and Ms. Praxl, Director
of Multilateral Relations at the Global Center on
Cooperative Security, for their briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General (see
S/2023/76) affirms the threat that the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, known as Da’esh, together
with its affiliate groups, poses to international peace
and security. The group’s geographic expansion of its
operations, and the increasing attacks in Africa and
Central Asia, are a reminder that terrorism is a global
phenomenon to which no country is immune. Da’esh
exploits conflict zones and socioeconomic issues such
as unemployment, discrimination, inequality and the
absence of the rule of law to exacerbate grievances and
promote violent extremism. That explains its larger
presence in States where those types of vulnerabilities
are more pronounced.

S/PV.9257

The Secretary-General’s report has once again
highlighted the worrisome circumstances of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families in detention
camps. My delegation supports the efforts by various
organizations to address the humanitarian and security
needs of those populations, particularly their women
and children. We must combat terrorism with a
comprehensive strategy that in addition to the security
agenda includes a preventive approach in dialogue
processes; a development outlook focused on proposing
solutions to the factors that serve as a breeding ground
for radicalization that segment of society; and the
establishment of mechanisms at all levels to ensure that
those responsible for terrorist acts do not go unpunished.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report,
much of Da’esh’s financing comes from its involvement
in criminal activities linked to organized crime, such
as extortion, kidnapping and the control of commercial
routes for the purpose of trafficking weapons, narcotics
and people. It is therefore essential to strengthen the
mechanisms aimed at combating the financing of
terrorism, such as the Financial Action Task Force,
whose work we support.
The use of technological means to spread narratives
of violent extremism and the use of unmanned aerial
systems by terrorist groups are new challenges facing
the international community. In that regard, the Delhi
Declaration on countering the use of new and emerging
technologies for terrorist purposes, adopted by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in October 2022, is an
example of how the Security Council can respond to
the changing nature of terrorism. We therefore support
the work of the United Nations system in that area and
recognize the efforts that are being made to improving
coherence and coordination among the Organization’s
agencies and bodies that are tasked with combating this
multidimensional phenomenon.
In conclusion, Ecuador fully and unequivocally
condemns all acts of terrorism in all their forms
and manifestations, regardless of their purpose or
their perpetrators. Consequently, and in line with
international law, international humanitarian law
and international refugee law, Ecuador reiterates its
commitment to the fight against this scourge.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Acting Executive Director Chen and

23-040729/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Ms. Praxl of the Global Centre on Cooperative Security
for their briefings.
Terrorism fundamentally amounts to a denial and
destruction of human rights, and the fight against
terrorism will never succeed by perpetuating that denial
and destruction. That remark made by the SecretaryGeneral in 2017 still resonates today. It should guide us
in all discussions and actions on the issue of terrorism,
within the Council and beyond. People from many
regions around the world suffer the effects of terrorist
acts, which we firmly condemn in all their forms and
manifestations. However, our response cannot be the
indiscriminate use of force. Each terrorist threat has
its own underlying causes and its own evolution of
radicalization and violence. We should assess each
context and always respect international law, in
particular human rights law, international humanitarian
law and refugee law, in all our efforts.
Switzerland is concerned about recent developments
in Africa and Central Asia, as described in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/76), particularly in
conflict zones and neighbouring regions. Situations
that were already complex are becoming increasingly
murky as new extremist and violent groups emerge.
However, the persistent threat of Da’esh is a global one
and extends far beyond its own zone of activity. Like
many other countries, Switzerland is very concerned
about that. Last month, a man claiming to be acting
in allegiance to Da’esh was sentenced to 20 years in
prison after stabbing a victim selected at random. To
address such challenges, we must step up our efforts
and adopt a differentiated approach, one that takes
into account age and gender, in order to prevent and
combat radicalization and violent extremism in all their
forms. The complete and balanced implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy must remain a
priority if we are to address the root causes of terrorism
and ensure that our commitment is founded on the
rule of law. Civil society and human rights defenders,
crucial partners in that task, must be able to operate in
a safe and respectful environment.
Lastly, we noted that the report highlighted the
growing use of new technologies by Da’esh. With the
Delhi Declaration, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
has a solid basis to further consider the issue. However,
we cannot focus only the potential threats that new
technologies pose, considering that they also provide
major economic, social and cultural opportunities,
which we can leverage to prevent and combat terrorism.
10/21

09/02/2023

In that regard, it is important to continue an inclusive
dialogue with the private sector, academia and civil
society. Moreover, we must strive to make good use of
new technologies in ways that accord with international
law, in particular human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
The Secretary-General concludes his report by
stating that security responses alone are not sufficient.
They must be accompanied by efforts aimed at
preventing new recruits from joining the ranks of
Da’esh and other terrorist groups. Switzerland supports
that conclusion. The fight against terrorism and by
extension against the threat posed by Da’esh will
succeed only if we approach the situation as a whole
by considering all the factors that lead to radicalization
and violence. We can succeed only if we comply with
the rule of law.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, and the delegation
of Malta for convening today’s meeting on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/76) and thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Acting Executive Director
Weixiong Chen, as well as Ms. Franziska Praxl,
Director of Multilateral Relations at the Global Centre
on Cooperative Security, for their useful perspectives
on the subject.
Regrettably, the Secretary-General’s report
confirms our fears about the increasing threat posed
to international peace and security by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh and its affiliates, as we
saw in the second half of the year, when it spread across
conflict zones and to their neighbours, despite national
and global attempts to bring it under control. Another
grim reality that confronts us, as the report warns, is
the convergence of global threats, in particular the
intricate and intertwined connection between armed
conflict, terrorist attacks and transnational organized
crime. That reality must not be allowed to fester, as it
aggravates an already dire situation for humankind.
We are therefore gravely concerned about the
spread and incidence of terrorist attacks by Da’esh
and its affiliates across the African continent, with
their devastating consequences. We are particularly
concerned about the fact that in West Africa and the
Sahel, Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates and the Islamic
State in the greater Sahara have intensified their violent
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

activities since their new leader, Abba Al Saharawi,
was appointed in May 2022, and have continued to
take advantage of intercommunal and social tensions
to further their agenda. The situation in the Sahel in
particular has deteriorated to a point where several
countries are contending with terrorist groups that in
some cases are fighting Government forces as well as
one another for territorial supremacy and the control
of resources. The troubling situation threatens peace,
stability and security throughout the continent. As noted
by Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Giovanie Biha of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel in her recent briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.9238), the activities carried out by
armed organizations, violent extremists and criminal
networks have resulted in the closure of more than
10,000 schools, which has had an impact on the lives
of millions of children, as well as approximately 7,000
health centres. As she said,
“the
central
Sahel
continues
to
face
multidimensional
challenges,
unprecedented
levels of security and humanitarian challenges and
sociopolitical instability, further compounded by
the impact of climate change and food insecurity,
which has been exacerbated by the conflict in
Ukraine” (S/PV.9238, p. 2).
In recent weeks, the brutality perpetrated by
terrorist groups against innocent populations in Burkina
Faso has compelled thousands to flee to neighbouring
countries, including Ghana. The displacement of our
neighbouring brothers and sisters reflects the fragile
nature of the situation in the Sahel and the immense
challenges that we collectively face in helping them
to develop resilience through measures aimed at
stabilization and recovery. We believe that we should
not allow a few disgruntled elements in our societies to
put the lives of the many in danger. Through enhanced
international solidarity, we must demonstrate that
we have the numbers and the resources to effectively
confront that negative canker.
Acts of terrorism are a slap in the face of all of
humankind. Not only do they constitute an attack on
innocent lives, our economies and infrastructure, they
also symbolize a complete assault on our common ideals
and the dignity of every person. No country is exempt.
Ghana believes strongly that preventing and countering
terrorism requires enhanced global mobilization and a
multidimensional approach. It is in that context that I
wish to highlight the following four points.

S/PV.9257

First, Ghana stresses the importance of agreeing
on a universal definition of the crime of terrorism.
That definition should be grounded in the Charter of
the United Nations and in international law and should
be avoid creating any confusion. Within the current
context of the global fight against terrorism, the absence
of a suitable universal definition poses a challenge and
subjects the question to different agendas, purposes
and biases.
Secondly, in the light of the significant incidence
of terrorism on the African continent, the situation
requires both the coordination and the strengthening of
the capacities of the countries of the region on the basis
of the principle of ownership. We value our engagements
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and encourage their ongoing cooperation and support.
However, many African countries still require technical
support to build up their capabilities, especially in the
realm of new and emerging technologies. As a result, we
advocate for increased funding to improve the capacity
of countries in our common battle against terrorism.
Thirdly, at the continental level, Ghana is
making every effort to improve its coordination
and cooperation with countries under the African
Union’s counter-terrorism framework. Strengthening
the ties between the United Nations and ongoing
counter-insurgency operations conducted by regional
organizations based on normative frameworks, such
as the counter-terrorism policies of the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
is an important priority for Ghana. At the regional
level, Ghana has developed strong cooperation with
its neighbouring countries in key areas related to
the fight against terrorism. That has primarily been
accomplished through the sharing of information and
intelligence within the ambit of the Accra Initiative.
As one of the leading nations against terrorism in West
Africa, Ghana will continue to advance the initiative
to make significant contributions to the stability and
security of the region, including through securing our
joint borders and staging joint exercises as part of our
counter-terrorism policy.
Fourthly, Ghana places a strong focus on the
importance of prevention as a primary objective that
should be pursued in countering terrorism. Ghana
strongly believes that increased investments in
tackling the ideological, political, economic and social

23-0407211/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

underpinnings of terrorism are necessary in order to
effectively prevent and combat terrorism. Equally
vital is the development of a consistent political
approach based on prevention. We encourage the
adoption of a whole-of-society approach by involving
private sector and civil society groups in resolving the
underlying drivers and believe that can help reduce the
vulnerability of youth groups to radicalization through
the opening up of further opportunities for them. It is
also important to adopt a gender-sensitive approach
in countering terrorism, as one of our briefers today
also underscored.
In conclusion, Ghana thanks the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of CounterTerrorism for their support in the fight against
terrorism. In that regard, we are grateful for the
support we have received from allies in our region in
our efforts to confront terrorists and violent extremists
head-on. However, the Council has not stepped up to
fully meet its responsibility in this area in the same
manner that it has responded to the traditional threats
to international peace and security. In that context,
we warmly welcome the upcoming UNOCT counterterrorism summit to be held in Abuja in October 2023,
at which the question of support for counter-terrorism
operations in Africa will be considered in depth. Ghana
will continue to actively engage in efforts to counter
terrorism and violent extremism at all levels and will
contribute constructively to advancing efforts to put
an end to terrorism, including through the work of the
Council and other relevant international organizations.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov, Mr. Chen and Ms. Praxl
for their very helpful briefings. We are grateful to the
United Nations for all its efforts in the fight against
terrorism.
Last year, the Da’esh terror campaign was dealt
a severe blow by the death of two of its leaders, but
despite that, the threat from Da’esh and its affiliates
continues to grow and evolve, as we heard today.
A resurgent Da’esh core in Syria and Iraq remains a
significant danger. We need to maintain our resolve,
including through the Global Coalition against Da’esh.
The United Kingdom remains firmly committed to
supporting that. In 2022, for the first time in the history
of Da’esh, the majority of its attacks were perpetrated
outside its core focus area of Syria and Iraq. We have
a collective responsibility, as States Members of the
12/21

09/02/2023

United Nations, to use all the legal tools and levers at
our disposal to counter that threat.
In Afghanistan, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province continues to show that
it has the capacity to carry out high-profile attacks
inside that country and to use it as a base to encourage
attacks abroad. The Security Council must continue to
demand of the Taliban that Afghanistan’s territory does
not provide a shelter for terrorist groups. We are also
deeply concerned about the spread of the Da’esh threat
through its affiliates across Africa. Instability, famine
and climate-related crises are creating conditions that
are being exploited by terrorist groups. We must rally
together with the whole United Nations system behind
a comprehensive approach that tackles the drivers of
those conditions. The Secretary-General’s New Agenda
for Peace is an opportunity to galvanize that work.
We must also use United Nations sanctions regimes
rigorously in order to prevent the proliferation of
weapons to terrorist groups and choke off their access
to financing.
There is one other important point to note in all of
this: the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/76) is
clear that the presence of non-State armed groups is a
destabilizing factor. Groups such as the Wagner Group
are not the answer. As the Secretary-General also notes
in his report, we must ensure that all counter-terrorism
efforts involve civil society and are gender-sensitive
and anchored in human rights.
In closing, please allow me to underscore the United
Kingdom’s commitment to working together, including
in the Council, to continue the global fight against all
forms of terrorism and violent extremism.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I wish to
congratulate Malta on taking the initiative to convene
today’s debate on the threat that terrorism continues
to pose to international peace and security. I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Acting Executive
Director Chen and Ms. Praxl for their enlightening
briefings.
Between January and September of last year, more
than 1,000 terrorist attacks were perpetrated in Africa,
killing 7,816 people and injuring 1,772 more. According
to data provided by the African Centre for the Study
and Research on Terrorism, each of the continent’s five
regions has had its share of casualties among civilians,
security forces and officials. Of particular concern is
Da’esh’s ability to mobilize vast resources, making it
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

possible to acquire stockpiles of small arms and light
weapons that fuel instability and violence on the African
continent, especially in the Sahel; the Lake Chad basin,
including the Great Lakes region; and Southern Africa.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2023/76) notes the correlation between the structural
security, social and economic difficulties experienced
by some countries, particularly in Africa, and the
dangerous rise of Da’esh’s activities. In that regard,
the many challenges posed by terrorist movements
to international peace and security require continued
vigilance and exemplary cooperation in order to
strengthen the capacities of fragile States, in particular
with regard to mastering the new information
technologies that Da’esh is using with formidable
expertise to expand its criminal activities. That is indeed
a fundamental requirement, as terrorist groups continue
to establish themselves in areas in which the authority
and capacity of States are insufficient or lacking. The
Security Council is the place in which to reaffirm the
commitments we made in the Delhi Declaration and the
need to implement its relevant recommendations.
Terrorist networks are constantly changing and
are clearly resilient, despite the mobilization of
the international community. Terrorist threats are
intensifying and spreading to all regions. Governments
are increasingly under pressure from populations fed
up with the growing insecurity, especially since the
political and economic measures adopted seem to fall
short of the urgency and steadfast resolve required
to fight the scourge. It is a war that puts the limited
capacities of States to the test and destabilizes entire
regions. That transnational threat is formidable, and
no Government or organization can fight it alone.
Concerted action at national, regional and global levels
is crucial.
African leaders understand that. On 28 May 2022,
the Heads of State and Government of the African Union,
meeting in Malabo, adopted an important declaration,
in which they reaffirmed their commitment to fight
against all forms and manifestations of terrorism and
extremist violence on the continent. They also boosted
numerous regional initiatives to fight terrorism,
including the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Accra Initiative.
We must ensure that the current polarization of the
world does not lead to a weakening of multilateralism,
which dangerous terrorist groups and their affiliates

S/PV.9257

could take advantage of. Above all, we must stress the
need for a holistic approach that fully considers the
precarious socioeconomic conditions that make many
disillusioned young people easy targets for radicalization
and recruitment into terrorist organizations.
In the face of that scourge, we will need to agree
on a number of cardinal principles, including zero
tolerance of all forms and manifestations of terrorism
and extremist violence; action on the basis of strict
compliance with international law, respect for the rule
of law and other relevant international instruments
and protocols; and action protected from any form of
politicization through irreproachable impartiality.
We must continue and strengthen our cooperation
through information-sharing, the training of security
and intelligence personnel and, where appropriate,
support for operations aimed at weakening terrorist
groups, particularly along common borders, where
State capacity and authority are often limited.
On the African continent, the Accra Initiative,
which is aimed at a coherent response that combines
the military approach with long-term interventions to
address governance deficits, can serve as a reference
in that respect. We must tailor our response coherently,
because fragmented responses fuel the interests of
terrorist groups, which exploit systemic flaws to sow
the seeds of violence. Those flaws include humanitarian
crises, which are becoming increasingly complex, given
the induced effects of climate change, and are correlated
with the rise in poverty and inequality inherent in
recurrent political and socioeconomic crises.
Our collective action against terrorism therefore
requires a comprehensive approach and an appropriate
treatment of the socioeconomic challenges faced by
the affected countries: addressing the issue of youth
education and training; strengthening State authority,
particularly in fragile States; and improving living
conditions, especially for disadvantaged populations.
Similarly, we must dry up the sources of funding for
terrorist networks through consolidated partnerships
by gathering intelligence on online money transactions
and combating the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, drug trafficking, human trafficking and
kidnapping for ransom.
The United Nations must redouble its efforts,
increase its means of action and boldly support
peace-support initiatives and operations, particularly

23-0407213/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

African initiatives. The front against terrorism
must be united, and everyone everywhere must be
fully committed.
In Gabon’s view, the international community’s
efforts must be supported by regional and subregional
organizations, which are more familiar with the
dynamics on the ground. However, they can be effective
only if they have real capacity. It is therefore up to us to
provide those organizations with the tools necessary to
strengthen their resilience.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the crucial
nature of the fight against terrorism as an absolute
imperative for the peace, security and development of
our States. The international community must be more
determined to take urgent measures commensurate
with the threat, within the framework of broader
governance and involving all components of society, in
order to deprive terrorists of the ideological propaganda
they use for the radicalization and manipulation of
vulnerable communities.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to
start by thanking the Under-Secretary-General of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
the Acting Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, Mr. Weixiong
Chen, and the Director of Multilateral Relations of the
Global Center on Cooperative Security, Ms. Franziska
Praxl, for their comprehensive briefings. Mozambique
expresses its full support for their work.
Terrorism is a global evil and a global responsibility.
As such, the international community must help its
countless victims. It is a phenomenon that can be
seen as the result of the deficit of collective security.
Combating terrorism is the collective responsibility
of all peace-loving nations. Mozambique is therefore
deeply concerned by the worrisome information
provided in the report of the Secretary-General,
contained in document S/2023/76. Despite efforts
to curb the financial capabilities of Da’esh and its
leadership losses, this group continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security.
The increase in the use of new technologies, including
unmanned aerial systems and cryptocurrencies, and
information and communications technologies such
as the Internet and social media platforms by terrorist
groups is a matter of huge concern, requiring concerted
and robust counter-strategy responses.
14/21

09/02/2023

Mozambique is a firm believer in multilateralism
and international cooperation to counter terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We therefore
commend the Secretary-General in calling on the States
Members of the United Nations and all member States
of this organ, in particular, to continue prioritizing the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, under General Assembly resolution
75/291. In our view, that is a comprehensive tool at
the disposal of our Organization for countering the
threat posed by Da’esh, its affiliates and other similar
terrorist groups.
The most vulnerable Member States need to be
supported in countering that evil through a range of
actions, including developing appropriate responses to
address the precarious situation.
We are saddened by the grave abuses committed by
Da’esh and its affiliates in areas in which they operate
and the disproportional and devastating impacts on
women and children, in particular. It is also shocking
that children continue to suffer from the impacts of
landmines, improvised explosive devices and explosive
remnants of war, both in conflict zones and in postconflict settings. Equally horrific is the fact these
vulnerable groups continue to bear the consequences of
atrocities such as abduction and sexual violence.
As the world steps up the fight against terrorism
and all it represents, the African continent has been
increasingly serving as a fertile ground for various
terrorist groups. Terrorist organizations such as
Da’esh, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab have dramatically expanded their
operations to the five regions of the continent and,
in the process, are bringing a wave of unprecedented
destruction, death and humanitarian crises.
The massive influx of terrorists and extremists
from other parts of the world has resulted in escalating
turmoil in the Sahel and North, Central and East Africa,
as well as the Lake Chad basin and Southern Africa.
We therefore could not conclude without reiterating
the urgent need to revert the current endemic trend
of the Africanization of terrorism, the result of which
we are witnessing in all parts of the African continent
under increasing terrorist threats, which must be
stemmed by means of the concerted efforts of the
international community.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Acting
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.9257

Executive Director Chen for their valuable briefings. I
also took note of the informative briefing by Ms. Praxl
of the Global Center on Cooperative Security.

roles in the development of such approaches is also
integral to their success, as our civil society briefer
outlined today.

In January alone, 10 attacks by Da’esh in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Syria resulted in an estimated 50 people killed and
even more wounded. That is a stark illustration of the
simple fact, illuminated by many of the statements made
here today, that the international community has been
unable to find an effective framework for responding to
the evolving nature of terrorism. To combat that threat,
we urgently need an updated and refocused strategy
in order to address the root causes of terrorism and
prevent and counter the new phenomenon of terrorists
using ever-increasingly sophisticated technology.

The United Arab Emirates welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recognition that the root causes
of radicalization by Da’esh must be at the core of
our collective measures against the terrorist group.
We therefore encourage an increased focus in the
Secretary-General’s reporting on how terrorists exploit
such conditions to consolidate and expand their control.

The international community must launch
sustainable partnerships with local stakeholders. By
working with grass-roots organizations, as well as
religious and community leaders, we must tackle local
grievances and prevent terrorists from exploiting such
challenges for propaganda and recruitment in order for
our strategy to be effective.
Terrorist propaganda networks are extremely
resilient. Despite the demise of two Da’esh leaders this
past year, the group’s media arms remain worryingly
active. In Afghanistan, Da’esh-Khorasan’s nihilistic
propaganda is being published in local and regional
languages in order to reach the maximum number of
possible recruits.
We must adapt and be agile in response to that
evolving threat and ensure that alternative messages
reach people before the propaganda does. Those
messages must be tailored so as to address local
concerns and promote the values of human fraternity,
such as peaceful co-existence, interreligious dialogue,
equality and tolerance. We should commit to a
comprehensive architecture that addresses extremism
as the antithesis of those values. On the occasion of the
International Day of Human Fraternity last week, the
Secretary-General underlined the danger of religious
extremism undermining peace everywhere.
In parallel, affected populations must be offered a
path to rehabilitation that leaves no place for terrorists.
Access to education, economic inclusion and a secure
and stable environment must be at the heart of that
approach. Importantly, that applies equally to women,
men, girls and boys. Ensuring the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in decision-making

New and emerging technologies in the hands of
terrorist groups pose an urgent threat to international
peace and security. Governments and the private
sector will have to collaborate closely to combat that
misuse. Some analysts estimate that more than 20
non-State armed groups, including terrorists, have
already acquired drones; others believe that as many
as 60 such groups are in possession of drones today.
That discrepancy shows the need for enhanced data
collection and analysis, as well as close monitoring.
Da’esh and other terrorist groups continue to expand
their drone arsenal for surveillance, reconnaissance
and the filming of propaganda footage and for carrying
out attacks. Terrorists are able to acquire drones
and drone components, which are ever more readily
available. That is also due to a lack of awareness of
red flags by States’ authorities and among legitimate
online retailers, whose trade in such technology must
be monitored.
I would like to stress that the terrorist proliferation
of drones can be addressed without stifling
innovation. The United Arab Emirates recommends
strengthened international cooperation, based on
transparent regulatory standards, among the relevant
State institutions responsible for trade, customs,
transportation, border control and other matters
relevant to a country’s specific context. The private
sector plays a vital role in furthering the legitimate use
of drone technology while employing appropriate due
diligence measures.
Last year, the Counter-Terrorism Committee took
a key step by adopting the Delhi Declaration, which
provides non-binding guidance to stakeholders on
how to counter the terrorist use of new and emerging
technologies. As the current Chair of that Committee,
the United Arab Emirates intends to build on that
important achievement.

23-0407215/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Despite its territorial defeat in Iraq and Syria four
years ago, Da’esh remains a significant threat to all
of us. If we want to succeed in our fight against the
group, we must address the root causes of terrorism
and effectively prevent terrorist access to advanced
technology. That is why that has been the focus of
my statement today. Business as usual is no longer
an option. The United Arab Emirates intends to work
diligently with all Council members to close such
existing gaps in the counter-terrorism architecture.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank Malta for having convened this meeting. I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Acting Executive
Director Chen and Ms. Franziska Praxl, Director
of Multilateral Relations for the Global Center on
Cooperative Security, for their briefings.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
remains a threat to international peace and security
despite its continued losses in leadership. As pointed
out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/76), the
activities of ISIL and its affiliates in the Middle East
and Africa remain of deep concern. In particular, Japan
is concerned about the activity of ISIL-Khorasan in
Afghanistan. In addition, we agree with the view that
it is of vital importance to take steps with regard to
counter-terrorism in Africa.
As part of the global efforts on counter-terrorism,
Japan places particular emphasis on the following three
points: first, addressing the root causes of terrorism
and violent extremism; secondly, building the capacity
of law enforcement officials; and, thirdly, improving
counter-terrorism capabilities, including for countering
the threats of emerging technologies.
First, terrorism is a serious threat to the survival,
livelihood and dignity of its victims, as it targets
freedom from fear, which is one of the main pillars
of human security. On top of that, however, terrorism
will not be eliminated in a society in which the other
two elements of human security, namely, freedom from
want and the right to live in dignity, are not ensured.
Addressing the root causes, such as poverty and
inequality, is an essential element of counter-terrorism.
Secondly, capacity-building for law enforcement
officials is critical to preventing and effectively
combating terrorism. Japan has provided capacitybuilding assistance through United Nations agencies in
areas such as border control, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration and maritime security.
16/21

09/02/2023

Thirdly, the recent development of emerging
technologies can enrich people’s lives, but, at the same
time, it poses a threat to international peace and security.
Like other representatives, we commend the leadership
of India for its timely adoption of the Delhi Declaration
in the Counter-Terrorism Committee last year.
Terrorists and violent extremists have proved able
to exploit the Internet to recruit and spread propaganda.
Multi-stakeholder cooperation is necessary to effectively
address that threat. In addition, it is important to take
countermeasures against the financing of terrorism
through emerging technologies, such as cryptoassets.
Furthermore, the threat of terrorist attacks has
increased, as the technology related to unmanned
aircraft systems has improved.
We will continue to work with the international
community to address the threat of terrorism posed
by emerging technologies. Such efforts are integral
to maintaining the foundation of the free and open
international order, based on the rule of law. The rule
of law is a key principle in effective counter-terrorism,
and upholding it is essential not only for direct ing
counter-terrorism operations but also for addressing the
root causes of terrorism through social and economic
development assistance.
Japan is determined to work continuously to
promote and strengthen the rule of law in order to
maintain international peace and security throughout
its two-year term on the Security Council.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Acting Director Weixiong Chen
for their briefings. We are truly grateful to the United
Nations for the work that they do in that regard. I also
thank Ms. Praxl, the civil society representative, for her
very informative briefing. Furthermore, what we have
taken away from the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/76) is that terrorism remains a serious threat to
international peace and security.
As many others noted, terrorism continues to
spread across the African continent, especially the
Sahel, where terrorist groups continue to proliferate
and harm civilians. And we have seen that groups such
as the Wagner Group are not the solution. As we heard,
despite all actions undertaken against Da’esh, the group
continues to recruit new members, including women.
Da’esh continues to gather resources in order to fund
its terrorist ideology and activities, as do other terrorist
groupings, such as Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and the Islamic
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

State in Iraq and the Levant — Khorasan Province.
They exploit modern technology and communication in
order to spread death and destruction, and we should do
more to prevent that. The persistent threat of terrorism
requires us to reconsider our fight against it and to fight
it at the source. That requires us to invest in education,
health, sustainable development, the rule of law and just
societies. Our best defence against terrorism is to create
the necessary conditions for people to live in dignity,
with their rights and freedoms protected. That is how
we will become immune to the plague of terrorism.
In the meantime, we must fight the manifestations
of terrorism with all our might, but we must do so
without violating the values and norms that we cherish,
while seeking to protect ourselves from terrorism.
We must ensure accountability and design policies
that are victim-centred and gender-sensitive. Our
collective fight against terrorism must be a just fight,
in full compliance with international law. We support
the listing of more individuals under the sanctions
regime of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities — a regime that
provides us with powerful tools to cut the financial
lifeline of terrorist groups.
We also urge all countries to repatriate their
citizens from the camps in Syria and Iraq. Repatriation
and reintegration should be part of our fight against
terrorism. Albania has done its part, has repatriated
Albanians from Syria and Iraq and has designed
comprehensive reintegration programmes in order to
give those people a second chance in life. We believe
that is the right policy for everyone to follow.
In conclusion, Albanian fully supports the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We need a
global response to counter terrorism, with the United
Nations having a central role in coordinating all efforts.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): We thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov and the Acting Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, Mr. Weixiong Chen, for their briefings. I
also thank Ms. Praxl for her contribution.
Brazil shares the Secretary-General’s concern
about the threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates to
international peace and security, in particular its
regional spillover and the use of new and emerging

S/PV.9257

technologies for terrorist purposes. Poverty, inequality
and social exclusion, especially in countries already
affected by armed conflict or civil unrest, are some of
the key drivers of recruitment and pledges of association
in favour of Da’esh. The deep sense of injustice felt by
marginalized populations certainly does not justify
terrorism-related violence — or for that matter, any
type of violence — but it does contribute to the appeal
that radical ideologies can have for people who are
disenchanted with their prevailing socioeconomic
conditions. Moreover, expressions of xenophobia,
discrimination and prejudice not only contribute to
social exclusion but also fuel extremist narratives that
are conducive to terrorism. Building more just and
equal societies under the rule of law should be at the
forefront of our efforts to contain the spread of the
threat posed by Da’esh, in particular beyond its core
area. Peacebuilding and financing for development
must be an integral part of any comprehensive counterterrorism strategy under the auspices of the United
Nations, which must necessarily involve the competent
United Nations bodies.
Another issue mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/76) relates to the relative
weakness of the ties of association between Da’esh
and certain groups or individuals pledging allegiance
to that organization. We should reflect upon the
standards currently applied by the Security Council to
include entities or individuals in the sanctions regime
established to deal with the threat posed by Da’esh.
Brazil reiterates that decisions to add individuals to
sanctions lists must always be evidence-based. We
emphasize that listing requests should be submitted
to the appropriate sanctions committee, accompanied
by the evidence supporting the request, so that all
committee members are in a position to judge the
request on its own merits.
The Secretary-General’s report contains several
references to the possible connections between
terrorism and transnational organized crime. As the
Security Council has already recognized, the nature
and scope of the possible linkages between terrorism
and transnational organized crime vary considerably,
depending on their geographic, social and political
contexts. We reiterate that there is no automatic nexus
between the two — they demand different remedies and
must be addressed in their respective forums. A treatybased definition of terrorism, with general acceptance,
would be necessary to avoid any politicization of the

23-0407217/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

subject, as well as to quell the criticism that double
standards are applied in international efforts to counter
the terrorism threat. We hope that the upcoming eighth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy will provide an opportunity for the General
Assembly, with its broader scope and membership, to
advance those discussions.
Brazil is adamant about condemning terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, and we remain
concerned about the continued threat posed by Da’esh to
international peace and security. As guiding principles
of our foreign policy, our Constitution enshrines the
repudiation of terrorism, the prevalence of human
rights, peoples’ right to self-determination, equality
among States and the principle of non-interference.
There is no real alternative to pursuing the objectives of
ridding the world of terrorism other than by respecting
international law, including international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law, strengthening international cooperation,
and promoting economic development and social justice.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Voronkov and
Mr. Weixiong Chen for their analysis of the activities of
the United Nations entities in charge of the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I also
thank Ms. Praxl.
Issues related to combating terrorism must always
be de-politicized. By its very nature it is a unifying
topic. An evil such as international terrorism can only
be defeated by working together. We must not allow
the international legal counter-terrorism framework to
crumble and the basic tasks of counter-terrorism and
anti-extremism to be eroded. Nor should we impose
views based on false theories and rules. Russia’s
policies are well known, and we are consistent in
our implementation of them. Our key priorities
include acknowledging the leading role of States
and their relevant authorities in combating terrorism
and extremism, permitting no justifications for any
manifestations of terrorism and ensuring that terrorists
and their accomplices cannot escape being called to
legal account. It is important to maintain the central and
coordinating role of the United Nations in international
cooperation and to ensure compliance with the universal
norms and principles of international law.
The Middle East and North Africa continue to be the
epicentre of the spread of terrorism to other regions of
18/21

09/02/2023

the world, particularly the rest of the African continent.
We have all been discussing that danger for a long time.
Each successive report of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by ISIL notes the deteriorating situation
and the increasing scale and reach of terrorist activities.
African States continue to confront the problem of a
lack of the resources needed to ensure security, in
addition to difficulties in implementing binding
provisions of counter-terrorism resolutions. Typically
in Africa we have seen pseudo-Islamic ideologies and
terrorist-exploited narratives conflated with religious,
ethnic, social and political divisions. The terrorists
are also benefiting from the effects of the colonial and
neocolonial policies of the Western States, which have
never shied away from fuelling and keeping afloat
various long-standing conflicts for the sole purpose
of continuing to plunder the continent’s resource-rich
territory for their own enrichment.
Centuries later, little has changed and,
unfortunately, colonialism has yet to be eradicated.
We are well aware of the real reasons behind Western
countries’ hysterical accusations of various actors who
are working effectively to bring order and stability to
countries on the African continent, at their request
and in close cooperation with the local authorities.
And incidentally, the looting of resources is not just
happening in Africa. In the parts of Syria occupied
by the United States and NATO, which have been
seriously affected by terrorism, the West continues to
plunder natural resources, particularly oil, as well as
priceless objects of cultural heritage, all according to a
centuries-old practiced pattern.
We are well aware of the difficulties that African
States face in fulfilling their obligations, and the most
vulnerable of them are those that have not been lucky
enough to rid themselves of a Western military presence.
The Permanent Representative of France mentioned the
work of the Wagner Group. We can see that the French
delegation is disappointed by the consistent refusal of
States in the Sahel to cooperate with France and its
military where the provision of security is concerned.
But can anyone blame the countries of Africa for taking
matters into their own hands and independently looking
for and choosing those who they want to cooperate with
and under what conditions? I am sorry to say this, but
France’s failures in the Sahel are the very reason that we
are now witnessing the growing radicalism in the region
that terrorist and extremist groups readily exploit. The
States of the Sahel are aware of the futility — and even
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the harm — of the French presence there and are turning
for assistance to people who can truly restore order
while also building equitable relationships. We will
continue to provide such assistance on a bilateral basis.
We suggest that the Security Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
focus on the States of the African continent and try to
prioritize assessment visits, which would not only help
to define problem issues but ensure that subsequent
specific recommendations from country reports could
serve as a basis for technical assistance programmes. If
that approach is to be successful and productive it will
require political will, a responsible attitude and close
cooperation between the Committee and the African
States themselves.
In the regional and global context, we are also
seriously alarmed by the situation in Afghanistan,
where international terrorist organizations, first and
foremost ISIL-Khorasan, are expanding their capacities,
and where there is a risk of a spillover of terrorist
activity into neighbouring countries. The main reason
for the current situation is the military intervention
by the United States and its allies, which has had an
extremely destabilizing effect on the entire region,
not just Afghanistan. In the 20 years that the United
States and its NATO allies spent in Afghanistan, the
threat of terrorism has only increased. Yet the effects
of that inglorious campaign, including the war crimes
committed by the United States and NATO forces, as
well as their private military companies, have been
carefully glossed over.
We once again feel compelled to point to the problem
of weapons falling into the hands of terrorists, to which
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/76) makes
only passing reference. The main issue is that there is
no indication of any sources. But there is no mystery
about that. Weapons fall into the hands of terrorists
either through criminal groups or directly from those
who supply them in large quantities to maintain and
foment conflicts. For example, the enormous stockpiles
of weapons and equipment abandoned by the United
States and NATO during their withdrawal from
Afghanistan have long been used by terrorists in South
Asia. They have even fallen into the hands of ISIL
in Afghanistan. The huge quantities of weapons that
Western countries are sending to the Kyiv regime are
already being found in the hands of criminal groups in
Europe itself and even among terrorists in Africa. And
there is ample evidence of that.

S/PV.9257

The terrorist activity of ISIL and Al-Qaida and
its affiliated groups remains a major challenge for
international security. Terrorists are changing their
tactics. They are making extensive use of information and
communications technologies to finance their criminal
activities, disseminate their ideologies and carry out
attacks. That is a universal problem, and it requires
the development of coordinated intergovernmental
mechanisms to put a stop to it. In that regard, the socalled exclusive international partnerships that bypass
established intergovernmental platforms — above all the
United Nations — are unacceptable. In that connection,
we welcome the efforts made by India last year in its
capacity as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which helped to formulate the Delhi Declaration, on
countering the use of new and emerging technologies
for terrorist purposes.
The Russian Federation will continue to build
close cooperation on counter-terrorism issues with
genuinely interested international partners, while
taking into consideration their national experiences
and requirements. We urge States not to allow effective
intergovernmental mechanisms for cooperation on
counter-terrorism and anti-extremism to be undermined
and to focus on the real collective priorities in that area.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Acting Executive Director
Weixiong Chen for their briefings. We appreciate
the work of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
We also listened attentively to the briefing by Ms. Praxl.
The briefings we just heard and the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/76) demonstrate
comprehensively that the threat of terrorism remains
very grave and there is still a long way to go before
we can relax international counter-terrorism efforts.
Since the beginning of 2023, two vicious terrorist
attacks were already perpetrated in Kabul, while
another reprehensible suicide attack was perpetrated
at a mosque in Peshawar, Pakistan, on 30 January.
Those attacks resulted in heavy casualties and raised
yet another alarm. Da’esh terrorist forces are making a
comeback in Afghanistan and the region.
We note with particular concern that the report of
the Secretary-General states that the Eastern Turkistan
Islamic Movement, also known as the Turkistan Islamic
Party, a terrorist organization listed by the Security

23-0407219/21

S/PV.9257

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council, is cooperating with Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan, including in jointly publishing
propaganda posters, the exchange of personnel and
joint military operations. We call on the international
community to combat all forms of terrorism with a
zero-tolerance approach and urge the Taliban to take
resolute and strong measures to prevent the convergence
of terrorist forces in Afghanistan in order to effectively
protect the safety of the Afghan people and the foreign
citizens resident in Afghanistan. We are equally
concerned about the increasing geographical spread
and frequency of violent terrorist activities across the
African continent, including the marked deterioration
of the situation in the Sahel, among other regions.
We also note that Mozambique, Nigeria, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries
have taken action to enhance counter-terrorism efforts,
with remarkable results. The deployment of troops
by the countries of the region to Mozambique has
greatly weakened the strength of Da’esh-affiliated
groups. The efforts of African countries to carry out
joint counter-terrorism operations are commendable.
The relevant international partners should increase
their support, in particular with regard to financing,
equipment, intelligence and logistical supplies, in
order to help African countries improve their counterterrorism capabilities.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
report, decades of counter-terrorism efforts have shown
that security responses alone are not sufficient. At the
same time, efforts should be made to prevent new
recruits from joining the ranks of terrorist groups. In that
regard, the United Nations Development Programme
issued another and more revealing investigative
report a few days ago, which found that in the Sahel
subregion, the majority of those who join extremist
groups are from the most remote and underdeveloped
areas. One quarter of the respondents said that finding
a job was the main factor motivating local people to
join violent extremist groups — an increase of 92 per
cent over comparable levels in 2017. Those facts and
statistics are astounding. Although poverty cannot be
deemed to be the only root cause of terrorism, poverty
and associated economic deprivations are clearly
important factors that breed terrorism. To eradicate the
scourge of terrorism, the international community must
make greater efforts to promote economic and social
development. However, that is precisely the weakest link
in a long-neglected section of the international counterterrorism cooperation network. After adopting military
20/21

09/02/2023

and security measures to curb the strength of terrorist
groups, economic and development-related measures
must be adopted as soon as possible. Otherwise,
hard-won counter-terrorism gains may be lost. The
international community should create a fair and
favourable international economic, financial and trade
environment for developing countries. International
financial institutions should increase their inputs and
support the countries concerned in allocating more
resources to poverty eradication, universal education,
food security, public health and other aspects of
people’s livelihoods. In that way, developing countries
can embark on a path of sustainable and inclusive
development that will enable everyone, especially
young people, to benefit from development and
thereby eliminate the breeding ground of insecurity
and terrorism.
We are approaching the eighth biennial review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We hope that the international community will take
this opportunity to reaffirm its strong determination
to jointly combat terrorism, share useful experiences,
resolutely reject double standards and politicization,
and remain committed to promoting the implementation
of the four pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in a comprehensive and balanced manner.
More attention should be paid to capacity-building in
developing countries and the elimination of the root
causes of terrorism in order to inject confidence and
impetus into global counter-terrorism cooperation and
restore hope to the countries and peoples that have
suffered so much from terrorist activities.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
At the outset, I thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Acting Executive Director Chen and
Ms. Praxl for sharing their insights today.
Today’s briefings highlight the undeniable reality
that terrorism remains a grave threat to international
peace and security. Malta is particularly concerned
about the expansion of the terrorist threat across Africa,
with the risk of spillover into new regions, particularly
through Da’esh’s dynamic affiliates. Al-Qaida also
continues to expand its reach on the African continent
through groups, including Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin in the Sahel and Al-Shabaab in Somalia.
Furthermore, Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates remain
resilient in North Africa, despite counter-terrorism
23-04072

09/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

pressures. The deteriorating situation in Afghanistan
is also extremely worrisome, with Da’esh-Khorasan
carrying out regular attacks. Such violence not only
destabilizes the country even further but also challenges
regional security. In addition, Da’esh maintains the
ability to carry out high-profile attacks in Syria and
Iraq. Da’esh’s attack on the Al Hasakah prison almost
one year ago serves as a stark reminder of that threat.
The continued presence of foreign terrorist fighters in
the region is also a major security threat.
I was pleased to attend the special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee held in India last year
and welcomed the adoption of the Delhi Declaration,
which symbolizes the Security Council’s shared
determination to address that challenge. We also
note the attention in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/76) to the misuse by Da’esh of information and
communications technologies. We echo the concerns of
the Secretary-General that Da’esh’s efforts to misuse
the Internet and social media for propaganda purposes
have become more sophisticated. In that regard, Malta
underscores the importance of digital literacy skills in
preventing and countering violent extremism online.
Media literacy and critical thinking skills are necessary
for participating in democratic systems, countering
disinformation and, ultimately, tackling the root
causes of radicalization. Terrorist groups are exploiting
grievances, inequalities and governance deficits in
order to radicalize and recruit. A comprehensive
approach to addressing humanitarian, development and
social needs is required in order to prevent recruitment
among vulnerable populations, especially young
people. We share the Secretary-General’s view that
security responses alone are not sufficient. Effective
responses to preventing counter-terrorism require
whole-of-society approaches, including meaningful
engagement with civil society.
Malta also underscores the importance of protecting
human rights and safeguarding the principles of

S/PV.9257

humanitarian action while countering terrorism. Too
often, counter-terrorism measures are misused to silence
human rights defenders and to deny populations vital
humanitarian aid. As we have seen in many contexts
over the past year, this legal risk is not hypothetical.
Counter-terrorism measures must always comply with
international law, including international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
In addition, Malta supports a gender-responsive
approach to counter-terrorism and welcomes the
continued attention of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to this issue. All of us
are aware that terrorist groups perpetrate callous acts
of sexual and gender-based violence, including rape,
sexual slavery and forced marriage, violence which
disproportionately affects women. We must therefore
heed the voices of women and ensure their participation
in decision-making on counter-terrorism.
Finally, as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, Malta is concerned about the
recruitment and exploitation of children by terrorist
groups. These practices are unacceptable, and we
commend UNICEF for its support to affected children.
Before concluding, Malta welcomes today’s
announcement by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
regarding the upcoming review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We look forward to
engaging with all Member States during the negotiations
and to working constructively with both CTED and
UNOCT during our Security Council tenure.
I now resume my function as President of
the Council.
There are no more speakers inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

23-0407221/21
