A/64/PV.70

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

70

th plenary meeting
Monday, 8 February 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 45 (continued)
Sport for peace and development: building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic
Ideal
Solemn appeal by the President of the
General Assembly (A/64/646)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
read out the President’s solemn appeal.
“The ancient Greek tradition of the
ekecheiria, or ‘Olympic Truce’, born in the eighth
century B.C., serves as a hallowed principle of
the Olympic Games. In 1992, the International
Olympic Committee renewed this tradition by
calling upon all nations to observe the Truce.
“Through its resolution 48/11 of 25 October
1993, the General Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce from the seventh
day before the opening to the seventh day
following the closing of each Olympic Games.
This appeal was renewed in the Millennium
Declaration.
“In the 2005 World Summit Outcome, our
leaders emphasized that ‘sports can foster peace
and development’, and encouraged the General
Assembly to foster a dialogue and agreed
proposals for a plan of action on sport and
development.

“On 3 November 2005, the General
Assembly held a plenary debate on the agenda
item entitled ‘Sport for peace and development’,
and also adopted, with universal support,
resolution 60/8, entitled ‘Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic
Ideal’, deciding to consider this item every two
years in advance of each Summer and Winter
Olympic Games.
“To this end, on 19 October 2009, the
General Assembly adopted resolution 64/4. In
that resolution, the Assembly urged Member
States to observe, within the framework of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Olympic
Truce, individually and collectively, during the
XXI Winter Olympic Games, to be held in
Vancouver from 12 to 28 February 2010, and the
X Paralympic Winter Games, to be held from
12 to 21 March 2010.
“The Olympic movement aspires to
contribute to a peaceful future for all humankind
through the educational value of sport. The
Games will bring together athletes from all parts
of the world in the greatest of international sports
events as a means to promote peace, mutual
understanding and goodwill among nations and
peoples — goals that are also part of the founding
values of the United Nations.
“As an expression of these common
objectives, in 1998 the International Olympic
Committee decided to fly the United Nations flag

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-23289 (E)

*1023289*

A/64/PV.70

at all competition sites of the Olympic Games.
The United Nations system and the International
Olympic
Committee
have
subsequently
strengthened their mutual cooperation and
support through joint endeavours in fields such as
poverty alleviation, human and economic
development, humanitarian assistance, education,
health promotion and HIV/AIDS prevention,
gender equality, environmental protection and
peacebuilding.
“Recognizing the importance of sport and
the Olympic ideals, and in order to further
promote the cooperation between the United
Nations
and
the
International
Olympic
Committee, the General Assembly, in its
resolution 64/3 of 19 October 2009, decided to
invite the International Olympic Committee to
participate in the sessions and the work of the
General Assembly in the capacity of observer.
“As President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fourth session, I solemnly appeal to all
Member States to demonstrate their commitment
to the Olympic Truce for the 2010 Vancouver
Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games, and to
undertake concrete actions at the local, national,
regional and world levels to promote and
strengthen a culture of peace and harmony based
on the spirit of the Truce.”
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of the solemn appeal in connection with the
observance of the Olympic Truce?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to thank
the Government of Canada for hosting the forthcoming
Winter Olympic Games, and to wish it every success.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 45?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/64/L.39/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the Assembly held a debate on agenda item
63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) jointly with agenda
item 47 at the 22nd through 24th plenary meetings on
20 and 21 October 2009.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.39/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”. I wish to inform the Assembly
that since the issuance of draft resolution
A/64/L.39/Rev.1, Portugal and Serbia have become
sponsors.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.39/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/64/L.39/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 64/252).
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

2

10-23289
