UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1765
th

MEETING:

NEW

8 APRIL 1974

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l765/Rev.

1)

.........................

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Georges Pompidou, President of the French
Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of welcome to Mr. Ivor Richard, representative of the United
Kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

......................................

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency Force
(S/11248).............................................

S/PV. 1765 and Corr.1

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisioni of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted.before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-FIFTH

Held in New York on Monday,
&&dent:

Mr. Talib ELSHIBIB

(Iraq).

1974, at 3 pm.

leadership will be deeply missed. Our heartfelt sympathies
go to the people and the Government of France and to the
late President’s family. May I on this occasion request all
members to observe a minute’s silence.

fiesenz: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.
‘,’

8 April

MEETING

i%e representatives, standing, observed a minute’s silence.
Expression of welcome to Mr. Ivor Richard,
representative of the United Kingdom

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l765/Rev.l)
3. The PRESIDENT: Today we have amongst us for the
first time the newly appointed representative of the United
Kingdom to the Security Council, Ambassador Ivor
Richard. I should like to congratulate him on his appointment to this important post, to welcome him to our midst,
and to assure him that all members of the Council look
forward to the same friendly co-operation that we enjoyed
with his predecessors.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/l 1248).
7%hemeeting IWS called to order at 4.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

lke agenda was adopted.

1. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding with the business
before us today, I should like to take this opportunity to
express in the name of the Security Council the appreciation we all feel for the valuable services rendered. by
Ambassador Anwar Sam of Indonesia during his presidency
ln the month of March. Although no formal meetings of the
Council were held in March, that fact might be ascribed to
the skilfully impartial and genial manner in which he
conducted our informal consultations and carried out the
other aspects of his task as President of the Security
Council. All the members of the Council, I am sure, and I
especially, feel indebted to him for his valuable contribution to our work.

The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Emergency Force (S/l 1248)
4. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has received a draft
resolution /S/11253/ elaborated in the course of intensive
consultations among all the members of the Council who
agreed that the text should be put to the vote following
explanations of vote before the vote. I shall now call on
those representatives who wish to explain their vote before
the vote.

Tribute to the memory of W. Georges Pompidou,
President of the French Republic

5. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (translation from Chinese):
Mr. President, allow me first ‘of all, in the name of the
Chinese delegation, to express deep condolences on the
untimely passing away of the late President Georges
Pompidou, and our solicitous sympathy to Ambassador de
Guiringaud and his colleagues in the French delegation.

2. The PRESIDENT: May I, on behalf of the Council,
convey to the Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador de Guiringaud, our sincere condolences on the tragic
and untimely death of President Pompidou of France. His
sudden death not only has left France bereft of its leader
but also has deprived the world of an outstanding statesman
at a difficult and critical moment of transition when the
whole world is engaged in a quest for a new and more
equitable basis of international relations. My own country,
Iraq, had opened a new and propitious chapter in its
relations with France under President Pompidou’s great
predecessor, General de Gaulle. The few years of
Mr. Pompidou’s presidency witnessed the expansion and
the consolidation of our bilateral relations. His wise

6. The Middle East question has long been a question of
concern to the people of the world. To date it has remained
unsolved. The development of events has enabled people to
see ever more clearly that the root cause of the Middle East
question lies in the aggression on the part of Israeli Zionism
and the super-Powers’ increasingly fierce contention for
hegemony in that area. To make it possible to achieve a
genuine settlement of the Middle East question, Israel must
withdraw from the Arab territories it has occupied; the
1

Nations was embarking on a historic journey. We supported
the creation of the Force then and we are second to none in
supporting it now. We are glad that in his report the
SecretaryGeneral expresses the same view [see S/11248,
paru. 68/. The reason for our support is plain. Our bitter
experience is that, unless the parties to the conflict are
separated by a neutral force like the United Nations, the
mere calling for a cease-fue would, in many casts, have no
appreciable positive end.

Palestinian people must regain their national rights, and the
super-Powers must cease to practise hegemony and power
politics in the Middle East. Failing all this, the Arab and
Palestinian peoples will never stop their struggle, the
justice-lipholding countries and peoples in the world will
never cease their support for the just struggle of the Arab
and Palestinian peoples, and there can never by any “just
and durable peace” in the Middle East.
7. The Chinese Government and people will, as always,
f&y
support the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just
struggle to recover their lost territories and regain their
national rights. Last year, the Arab countries and peoples
won new political and military victories in their war against
Israeli aggression. They have become increasingly aware~
through actual struggle that unity is a powerful weapon to
defeat the enemy and win victory. The road of the struggle
may be tortuous, but the future is definitely bright. We are
deeply convinced that, no matter how hard the enemy puts
up a struggle and makes trouble, the great Arab and
Palestinian peoples, upholding unity and persevering in
struggle, will certainly surmount numerous difficulties, foil
all enemy schemes and plots and win fmal victory in their
just cause.

13. Resolution 340 (1973) inter alia called for the return
of forces to positions occupied by them on 22 October
1973. It is worth while reminding ourselves that the force
that advanced beyond the line of the 22nd has now even
gone behind the 1967 line. In other words, the Security
Council resolution, unlike many others, has not been a dead
letter. It has been implemented, and the image of this
principal organ of the United Nations has been improved.
14. I may also recall here that paragraph of the terms of
reference of the Force as contained in the report of the
Secretary-General of 27 October 1973 [see S/l 10.52/&~.1,
states
that
UNEF
will
supervise
the
pura. 21,
withdrawal
of forces to the line of 22 October 1973.
Obviously that paragraph is now obsolete.

8. With regard to the question of dispatching the United
Nations Emergency Force (UNEF), we have always been
opposed to it in principle. It was only out of consideration
of the desire of the victims of the aggression that the
Chinese delegation refrained from casting a veto on the text
of resolution 340 (1973) adopted by the Security Council
on 25 October 1973. Basing ourselves on this position, we
will not participate in the voting on the draft resolution for
prolonging the mandate of UNEF.

15. Paragraph (b) of the terms of reference of the Force
states: “The Force will use its best efforts to prevent a
recurrence of the fighting”. That paragraph is very much
alive and should be enough to cover the current needs of
the Force. Therefore we do not see the need at the moment
to draft new terms of reference. If in future no withdrawal
of occupying forces has been effected and the role of the
Force takes on a new colouring, then perhaps that will be
the time to take action.

9. Mr. FAKIH (Kenya): May I begin by paying a tribute to
the memory of a great Frenchman and a great European. It
was with shock that we learned of the passing away of the
President of France, Mr. George Pompidou. He believed in
France and he was not the one to ahow his great and
ancient country to be treated like a flag following the wind.
He was indeed a great and courageous personality and his
passing away is a loss to both France and the international
community.

16. Peace keeping has a price. Thirty million dollars every
six months Is a great deal of money, but no price is too high
to pay to save human lives and to create the necessary
atmosphere in which peace negotiations can take place.
Every penny that can be saved should be saved, and we
have noted that 139 cadets from Peru have left the Force.
We also note in paragraph 70 of the current report that it is
the intention of the Secretary-General to reduce the Force
when the situation allows. We should, however, not move
too far too fast. It is within the bounds of possibility that a
separation of forces could take place on another front and
UNEF could then be needed there.

10. Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Council. Your country,
like mine, belongs to the group of nonaligned countries
and the Group of 77. Many, therefore, are the forums
where our two delegations co-operate. It is, therefore, with
pleasure that we see you in the Chair and my delegation
will not be found wanting in extending the fullest cooperation to you in the discharge of your onerous duties.

17. While on the question of finances, it is essential to
point out that the countries that have co-operated by
offering contingents to the United Nations should not in
any way be made to suffer. They should all be treated
equally. My delegation is in favour of the following
approach. Firstly, a ceiling should be set for the amount
that all countries that have sent contingents can claim for
reimbursement. Secondly, a portion of the expenses could
be paid now to the countries that have sent contingents,
rather than waiting untii after the General Assembly has
met in September. Adjustments could then be made, after a
decision had been made by the General Assembly.

11. We have in our midst a new Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, Mr. Ivor Richard. My delegation is
happy to see him here and we look forward to working
harmoniously with him to vindicate the principles of the
Charter.
12. When, on 25 October last year, Mr. Odero-Jowi
submitted a draft resolution on behalf of the non-aligned
members of the Security Council-which
is now resolution
340 (1973)~calling for the creation of UNEF, the United

18. Inasmuch as all contingents of UNEF are soldiers of
peace of the United Nations and receive instructions from
2

,:

.._..s..

done has been decisive for the preservation of calm in the
sector where UNEF operated and that the renewal of the
mandate for another six months is indispensable.

the United .Nations;the parties to the dispute in the Middle’
East have a duty to treat them ,equally. This is a
fundamental point, and we hope that no differentiation will
be shown in the way the contingents are treated by the
parties in the area. We, again note with approval that the
Secretary-General in paragraphs 10 and 71 of his report,
assures us that he is giving close attention to this problem.

27. Obviously my Government is ready with the same
enthusiasm to continue to contribute to this new effort,
convinced that we are thus fulfilling our duty as a Member
of the United Nations and that we shall furthermore -be
contributing to the noble efforts to achieve the ultimate
goal, namely, peace.

19. It would be idle to pretend that the Force, which was
created in such haste, has not had its share of hard times
and difficulties. There have been, for example, a number of
unexpected expenses; countries contributing troops still
have to be paid; there are more troops from some countries
than others, and so on. However, compared to the outlook
for peace in the area, these problems are indeed minor.

28. My delegation has been happy to endorse the appreciation expressed to the Secretary-General for his great efforts
to achieve the full implementation of the resolutions. We
also wish to commend the excellent work of UNEF, whose
efficient Commander, General Siilasvuo, is with us today.
We wish also to express our satisfaction at the important
report of the Secretary-General on the functioning of the
Force, a number of whose paragraphs have been noted in
the resolution that the Council has just adopted.

20. I cannot end my short intervention without paying a
tribute to the Governments that have contributed their
forces, to the Secretary-General and his staff for their
energy and devotion to the peace-keeping and peace-seeking
efforts, and to the personnel of UNEF who have paid the
ultimate sacrifice in giving their lives while on this mission
of peace. Our condolences go to their families and their
Governments.

29. However, my delegation must express some concern
about the problem of reimbursement and we hope that it
will very speedily be solved, since this doubtless is a
problem that touches the developing countries more
closely, because their contribution to UNEF represents a
greater economic effort. However, in the spirit of cooperation with the Secretary-General that we have always
displayed, I should like to express the hope on behalf of the
developing countries whose contingents form part of UNEF
that a uniform top reimbursement figure will be set without
distinction as to nationality and in accordance with the
principles of equality set forth in the Charter.

21. With those remarks, my delegation wishes to state that
it will vote in favour of the draft that we have before us.
22. The PRESIDENT: Since no other representatives wish
to explain their votes before the vote, I shall now put the
draft resolution [S/IZ253]
which is before the Council to
the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

30. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, since this is the first time I have
spoken in an official meeting of the Security Council my
first remarks will naturally be to address to you my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for
this month. This is indeed a difficult month, because to
preside over the Council while the important sixth special
session of the General Assembly is meeting is certainly no
sinecure. But we have the greatest confidence in your
qualities as a diplomat and in your recognized competence
fully to discharge that responsibility.

TRe draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none. 1
1suo members (China and Iraq) did not participate in the
voting.
23. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR
(Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, although you have very
eloquently expressed the condolences of the Council to the
representative of France on the death of President Pompidou, I must here express the condolences of Peru-which
indeed have already been expressed by President Velasco
Alvarado to President Poher-on the loss of such an
outstanding statesman who was at the same time a brilliant
exnonent of the highest qualities of the French spirit.

31. I should like also to express the thanks and gratitude
of my delegation to our colleague and friend Ambassador
Anwar Sani, for the outstanding manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council during the past month.
Finally, I wish to extend a welcome to our colleague
Ambassador Richard, who has just been appointed as
representative of the United Kingdom.

24. I wish to offer you, Mr. President, with affection, the
co-operation of my delegation in your tasks in presiding
over the Council. You are daily giving proof of your zeal
and skill in that work.
25. Finally, I should like to extend a welcome to the new
representative of the United Kingdom, Mr. Richard. I am
convinced that he will bring to the Council all his skill,
experience and intelligence and worthily represent the great
tradition of British diplomacy.

32. These expressions of gratitude and pleasure would
have been felt the more keenly if they were not, unfortunately, accompanied by the grief which is now being
experienced by the French people and Government. The
tragic death of President Pompidou is not only a loss for
France; it is a loss for the entire international community,
which has seen and appreciated the important contribution
made by the French Head of State to the quest for peace,
understanding and entente among peoples. Furthermore,
the name of President Pompidou, who was closely as-

26. The Peruvian delegation had perforce to vote in favour
of the draft resolution that has just been adopted, since
through
our direct participation in UNEF in the past few
months we have become convinced that the work being
1 See resolution 346 (1974).
3

sociated with the work of General de Gaulle, was one that
meant a great deal to many of us Africans-it
evoked
memories of resistance against Nazi occupation and, therefore, it evoked memories of the struggle for national dignity
and independence, as well as of words and ideas which had
a particular significance in Africa. But the name of
President Pompidou also recalled the vast undertaking of
decolonization in Africa by the French Republic, which
enabled many African countries to take charge of their own
destiny and to make their way in the concert of nations.
But the name of Georges Pompidou is today more than ever
reminiscent of the trusting and friendly relations that have
been established between the French Republic and all the
Arab and African countries. It is for all these reasons,
therefore, that on behalf of my country I pay a tribute to
the memory of President Pompidou and extend to the
French delegation our deepest sympathy.

36. It is in view of all these considerations that my
delegation favoured the extension of the mandate on the
terms already decided by the Council and reaffirmed today
in the resolution that we have just adopted.
37. Similarly in supporting this resolution, we felt that the
discharge of the mandate entrusted to the Force should be
in compliance with certain principles, two of the most
important of which are mentioned by the Secretary-General
in paragraph 71 of his current report and the urgency of
which are stressed in the text adopted.
38. In the first place, the Emergency Force must be
regarded not as belonging to any particular country but
rather as an integrated military unit carrying out an
international mission. No restriction or discrimination
should be imposed on its freedom of movement, because of
the need for concerted action in maintaining the cease-fire.
This fundamental question is under review and we trust
that it will soon be satisfactorily resolved.

33. I should like now to %explain briefly why my delegation supported the draft resolution contained in document
S/l 1253. It has seemed to us that the terms of reference of
the Emergency Force as set forth in resolution 340 (1973)
and as described in the Secretary-General’s report of 27
October 1973 is still very topical. The situation in the
Middle East remains unstable and potentially dangerous,
according to the words used by the Secretary-General. The
cease-fire which now obtains between Egypt and the
Zionist occupation authorities remains precarious. The least
incident could upset this apparent state of calm and lead to
an inevitable resumption of hostilities. Such an incident
cannot be ruled out so long as the territories of Egypt and
Syria and the territory of Jordan continue to be under
military occupation, so long as the Palestinian people
remain expelled from their homeland, affronted in their
dignity and denied their rights. Such an incident cannot be
ruled out so long as Israel continues its implacable policy of
destruction and colonization by force, flying in the teeth of
all international standards and rights and all the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

39. Secondly, these contingents, and particularly their
Governments, must be treated on a footing of equality,
setting aside all considerations of the standards of living in
the countries of origin. Wherever they are from, these
soldiers are all carrying out the same duties; they are
subject to the same conditions; and they incur the same
dangers. It is regrettable, therefore, that some among them
receive preferential treatment. We are convinced that the
Secretary-General will find an appropriate solution within
the framework of the consultations he is now carrying out
the Governments concerned. It is all the more necessary
since equality among all Member States is a fundamental
principle of the Organization.
40. I would not wish to conclude this brief statement of
explanation of vote, however, without paying a deserved
tribute to the Secretary-General for the seriousness and the
dedication with which he is carrying out the decisions of
the Security Council and discharging a task whose complexity and many ramifications we are all aware of. Our
thanks also go the countries that have made important
contributions to the quest for peace in the Middle East by
sending contingents to the region.

34. The tension is mounting dangerously in the occupied
Syrian territory of Golan, and Mrs. Meir declared on 28
March that Israel would not withdraw from that territory.
Along with that escalation, the Tel Aviv authorities are
committing the gravest desecration of the holy places of
Islam in Jerusalem; excavations are being undertaken which
can lead to the collapse and destruction of numerous
mosques, even though respect for the sacred character of
those places has been repeatedly affirmed by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. The mandate of the
Force was defined last October in dramatic circumstances,
and it is no less important and no less significant today. It is
a question today of supervising a cease-fire which can be
jeopardized at any moment and which can lead to a
resumption of hostilities.

41. Mr. NJINE (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, I should like first of all
to associate myself with you and preceding speakers in
expressing condolences to the Permanent Representative
of France on the sudden death of President Georges
Pompidou. When that loss became known, my Government
sent a telegram of condolences to the French Government
and to the late President Georges Pompidou’s family, and
our Head of State went to the funeral of the great
statesman in Paris in order to stress the deep sorrow felt by
the Cameroonian people at this loss.

35. It is not part of my intention to minimize the distance
that has been covered by the Egyptians, thanks to the
numerous initiatives undertaken in and outside the Security
Council. But we believe that until a global and definitive
solution is found for that region and until a durable peace is
established there, the Force must continue on an emergency footing and carry out its activities within the
framework of the terms of reference already determined by
the Council.

42. I should also Iike to extend my delegation’s welcome
to the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Richard, and to assure him of the constant
co-operation of my delegation as he carries out his
responsible duties.
43. Mr. President, it is an agreeable duty to congratulate
you on your assumption of the high post of President of
A

the Security Council for this month. Knowing your
outstanding qualifications as a diplomat and also your long
experience in the affairs of our Organization, I am
convinced that the Council under your presidency willlive
up to the hopes placed in it by the peoples of the world. I
can assure you that you will receive from my delegation all
necessary co-operation to ensure the efficient conduct of
our business. I should also like to address to your
predecessor, Ambassador Anwar Sani of Indonesia, the
appreciation and gratitude of my delegation at the effective
and honourable way in which he carried out the functions
of President of the Council for the month of March.

region may once and for all replace the present situation of
war or armed peace.
50. During the past six months, the Emergency Force has
been competently carrying out the tasks assigned to it by
the Security Council under resolution 340 (1973). The
Force has at all times had the confidence of the Council
and the parties directly concerned and has been able in
large measure to function as an integrated military unitconditions which the Secretary-General’s
report of 27
October 1973 laid down for the effective deployment of
the Force. We must also note with gratification that the
financial estimates for the functioning of the Emergency
Force have been adhered to, without the efficiency of the
mission having been affected thereby.

44. Finally, my delegation would also like to address its
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, for the invaluable contribution he has made to
the search for peace in the Middle East.

51. My delegation is convinced that that fortunate experience of UNEF in the region, doubtless a result of the fact
that we have jettisoned certain old concepts in the matter,
will serve to enrich the experience of the Security Council
in the field of the organization of peace-keeping operations.

45. The memory of the particularly dangerous and indeed
fatal confrontation in the Middle East when UNEF was
constituted on 25 October 1973 is still alive in our mind.
The violence, the horrors, the damage and the destruction
that characterize all wars seemed more than ever to have
profoundly
afflicted that region of the world for an
extremely long period of time. The task of UNEF in this
political context and in the light of the territory where the
fighting was taking place seemed even more complex than
expected. In point of fact, the members of that Force had
to assume peace-keeping and humanitarian tasks with very
small means and in particularly dangerous conditions.

52. The resort to contingents of different geographical
regions seems to us one of the factors of efficiency of the
Emergency Force that should be borne in mind in future.
The unofficial and periodic consultations between the
Secretary-General and the Security Council have allowed a
number of misunderstandings to be dissipated and such
consultations should be encouraged in the future.
53. My delegation places its trust in the Secretary-General
in the search for an equitable and urgent solution to the
problem of the reimbursement of the expenses to those
countries that have placed contingents at the disposal of
UNEF, particularly in the light of the concern quite justly
expressed by a number of countries. My delegation also
hopes that the Secretary-General will do all in his power to
ensure that the States concerned respect the principle of
the freedom of movement in the region of the contingents
of all countries, without any restriction. Any discrimination
in this field would be most regrettable and could be a
disservice to the interests of the United Nations.

46. If today we weigh the scope of the problems already
solved there I think we can affirm with the SecretaryGeneral that the establishment of UNEF was a step that is
worthy of inscription in the annals of the United Nations.
--

47. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity warmly
to congratulate the Governments which agreed to place
contingents at the disposal of the Organization and also the
Commander and the men of UNEF, the UNTSO observers
and the representatives of the International Committee of
the Red Cross for the devotion which they have all shown
to the cause of peace and the United Nations.

54. Despite the positive accomplishments of the United
Nations in the Middle East, we cannot disguise the fact that
the situation is still tense and a source of concern in certain
areas. The reports received from the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization Observers are not too reassuring;
therefore, the presence of UNEF is still necessary in the
region in order to facilitate contacts between the parties
and to carry out a number of different peace-keeping
missions.

48. My delegation has very carefully examined the important report of the Secretary-General [S/11248/.
The
Government of the United Republic of Cameroon, which
has always advocated the scrupulous implementation of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), heard with great
interest of the disengagement of forces that took place on
the Egyptian-Israeli
frontier after the signing of the
agreement on 18 January 1974. The fact that the disengagement took place without incident and with the full
co-operation of the parties directly concerned seems to be a
good omen for the continuing negotiations towards the
establishment of a just and stable peace in the region.

55. That is why the extension of the mandate of UNEF, as
defined in resolution 340 (1973) was fully supported by
my Government.

49. It is true that there are still large obstacles on the path
to peace. Nevertheless, my delegation hopes that the efforts
of multilateral diplomacy and the current mediation of
certain Powers will make it possible to establish conditions
favourable to negotiations on other military fronts and on
the substance of the Middle East question, so that an era of
peace, justice and prosperity for all the peoples of the

56. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to associate myself fully with everything that
you said in expressing the Council’s deep sympathy to our
colleague the representative of France, Ambassador de
Guiringaud, and to the French delegation in the Council in
connexion with the death of President Pompidou.
5

57. For our part, we in the Soviet Mission to the United
Nations and in the Soviet delegation in the Security Council
have already had an opportunity to express our heartfelt
condolences at an informal meeting of Council members. I
should like now to read out a message from the Soviet
leaders, Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Podgorny and Mr. Kosygin, to
Mr. Alain Poher, Acting President of the French Republic,
and to Mr. Pierre Messrner, the Premier of the French
Republic:

61. It is a matter of satisfaction to us also to congratulate
our colleague, the representative of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Richard, who is taking part today for the first
time in an official meeting of the Council. For our part, we
shall make every effort to co-operate in the strengthening
of peace and security.
62. I cannot fail, in concluding my introductory remarks,
to express our sincere condolences to our colleague in the
Council, the representative of Peru, and to the Permanent
Mission of Finland on the deaths in the line of duty of a
number of their soldiers attached to UNEF in the Middle
East. We express our sincere sympathy at these losses
incurred in international service in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We have also just learned that the
Indonesian and Panamanian contingents have suffered
losses and that some members of the Austrian contingent
have been wounded, so we would also like to express our
sympathy at those losses and our sincere hopes for the
speedy recovery of the Austrian officers and men who have
been wounded.

“With deep sorrow we have learned of the untimely
death of the President of the French Republic, Georges
Pompidou. In this sad hour please accept our sincere
condolences.
“The Soviet Union had the greatest respect for President Pompidou, a distinguished French statesman who
did much to carry on the traditional friendship between
the Soviet Union and France.
“During the years of Mr. Pompidou’s Presidency,
Soviet-French relations were further strengthened and
were marked by the adoption by the two countries of
fundamental documents which achieved wide international recognition. We highly appreciate the results
achieved in co-operation between the USSR and France
during these years in furthering the process of detente in
Europe and throughout the world and the development
of co-operation among States on the basis of equal rights.

63. We should like to express our appreciation to the
commanding officers and personnel of the Polish contingent, which has been entrusted with the responsibility
for mine clearance, one of the most dangerous tasks of the
Emergency Force at this time. We should like to wish our
friends, the Polish officers and men, every success in
carrying out that work, so that there may be no further loss
of life from mines.

“The Soviet Union will continue to pursue a consistent
policy of friendship and comprehensive co-operation with
France in keeping with the vital interests of the peoples
of both countries-a policy which reaffirms the principle
of peaceful coexistence in relations between States with
different social systems.”

64. The Security Council is considering an important
question, namely, an extension of the stay of UNEF in the
Middle East. Members of the Council have before them the
special report of the SecretaryGeneral. They have also had
before them a draft resolution on this matter prepared
through the joint efforts of the nonpermanent members of
the Council. We note these efforts with appreciation.

58. Those leaders also sent the following cable to
Mrs. Claude Pompidou, widow of the French President:

65. Last October, at a delicate moment, when it was being
decided whether the war in the Middle East would continue
or the Security Council would be able to take steps to bring
about a cease-fire, the group of nonpermanent members of
the Council, and particularly the representatives of the
nonaligned countries, rendered signal service to the Council
and to the general cause of strengthening peace in the
Middle East. On their initiative, on their proposal and in
accordance with the resolution drafted by them and
adopted by the Council, the Emergency Force was established. In the present instance, before today’s meeting, it
was again the nonpermanent members of the Council who
worked hardest to prepare an appropriate draft resolution,
and their efforts have been crowned with success,since the
draft has been adopted almost unanimously, with only two
members not participating. I will not conceal from members that my delegation would have preferred a stronger
draft resolution, but since an overwhelming majority in the
Council agreed with this draft my delegation did not find it
possible to oppose it.

“We grieve with you at the untimely death of your
husband, Georges Pompidou, President of the French
Republic.
“We shall always remember our friendly meetings with
President Pompidou, who played a major role in the
development and strengthening of relations based on
concord and co-operation between the Soviet Union and
France.
“Please accept our heartfelt condolences at the grievous
loss which has thus afBicted you and your family.”
59. On behalf of the Soviet delegation, I should like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
high responsibilities of President of the Security Council
and to wish you successin your work. In the very first days
of your presidency you have already been called upon to
play an active part, and we have noted with great
satisfaction that you have most ably discharged your duties.
We sincerely wish you further success.

66. We have carefully studied the report of the SecretaryGeneral. It reflects all the most important aspects of the
organization and activities of the Emergency Force, which
can justly be called the first genuine international armed

60. We also recall with great satisfaction our joint work
with your predecessor, Mr. Anwar Sam, to whom we
express our warm appreciation.
6

lasting peace in that explosive region, and we fully associate
ourselves with the statement in the Secretary-General’s
report to the effect that “the disengagement of Egyptian
and Israeli forces is only a first step . . . towards the
settlement of the Middle East problem”
[S/11248,
para 681. This view is reflected in the resolution just
adopted by the Security Council on the matter.

force of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace in
a dangerous area. The makeshift “United Nations forces” of
the remote past cannot provide an example for the
etiabllshment of truly international United Nations forces
to carry out the noble task of peace keeping.
67. There is every reason to acknowledge that the Secretary-General and the Commander of the Emergency Force
have done a great deal of very difficult work and have
achieved positive results. The Security Council has every
reason to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Waldheim, and to the Commander of UNEF in the
Middle East, General Siilasvuo.

71. The questions raised in the last report of the Secretary-General concerning various aspects of the activities of
UNEF are not in principle new to members of the Security
Council. It is quite appropriate to recall in that connexion
that the broad complex of questions connected with UNEF
has been considered repeatedly and in detail by members of
the Council in the course of their informal consultative
meetings.

68. The question of UNEF’s stay in the Middle East is
closely bound up with the development of the general
situation in the region. The efforts of the Security Council
and of countries concerned to see a just and lasting peace
established in the Middle East have been successful in
creating the prerequisites for a peaceful settlement of the
acute and dangerous Middle East problem, which resulted
from Israel’s aggression against neighbouring Arab States. It
therefore continues to be of particular importance that
resolution 242 (1967) and the subsequent resolutions
338 (1973), 339 (1973) and 340 (1973), adopted by the
Council in October last, should be complied with. The
implementation of these resolutions is an essential prerequisite for the achievement of a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East.

72. First of all, it should be noted that that discussion has
already had positive results. Systematic supervision by the
Council of the activities of UNEF and close contact and
co-operation between members of the Council, the Secretary-General and the Secretariat are greatly helping matters.
Consultations between members of the Council and the
Secretary-General must continue in future on a regular
basis. We also note with satisfaction that the SecretaryGeneral is submitting periodic progress reports to the
Council on the activities of UNEF. A number of members
of the Council have, however, expressed the hope that in
future those reports will be more detailed and will cover all
matters relating to UNEF’s activities which are of interest
to members of the Council.

69. Regarding the problem of a Middle East settlement,
The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade Leonid
Ilyich Brezhnev, said the following in his address at the
meeting of Soviet-Cuban friendship, held in Havana on 29
January 1974:

73. One of the important questions before the Council is
what UNEF’s strength should be in the light of its real
needs, its deployment and the effectiveness with which it is
being used. In this connexion, it should be noted that the
original guideline strength of UNEF, which was set at about
7,000 was established, as the course of subsequent events
has shown, without taking sufficiently into account the
specific tasks of UNEF and the situation in the field,
although it must be said in all fairness that it was not easy
at that time to obtain accurate fwres.

“‘Peace as we understand it means the restoration of the
lawful and inalienable rights of the Arab peoples, which
have been flouted by the Israeli aggressor; it means a
constructive and lasting solution to the Middle East crisis.
This is what the Soviet Union has firmly and consistently
advocated.

74. There was less justification for raising the question of
a further increase in UNEF’s strength. However, we must
give credit to the members of the Security Council for not
automatically accepting that proposal. As a result of their
serious approach to the matter and the detailed exchange of
views which was jointly conducted with the SecretaryGeneral, it has proved possible not only to avoid increasing
the strength of UNEF but, on the contrary, to make do
with de facto strength of less than 7,000, which is now
given officially in the Secretary-General’s report as 6,788.
As the report shows, more effective and rational use is now
being made of UNEF, which is something the Council can
only welcome. My delegation notes with satisfaction the
statement by the Secretary-General in his report that he
firmly intends not to increase UNEF’s strength and,
moreover, to “keep under constant review the required
strength of the Force with a view to making reductions and economies” [ibid., para. 7U]. This provision of the report
has now been reflected in the resolution adopted by the
Council. Thus, it can be flatly stated that this idea has twice
received recognition

“The troop-disengagement agreement reached between
Egypt and Israel as the Geneva peace conference began its
work is a positive step, but it is only a partial measure of
a purely military nature and so far affects only one of the
Arab countries that took part in the hostilities. Matters
cannot, of course, be permitted to rest there. The Geneva
conference must carry out its principal mission, which is
to achieve a fundamental political settlement and establish lasting peace in the Middle East. However, that
objective can be attained only if Israeli troops are
withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967
and if the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine are
respected. The decisions of the United Nations on the
Middle East must be carried out completely, in all their
parts and as soon as possible. The Soviet Union has made
and will continue to make an active contribution to this
important matter.”
70. The question of UNEF’s stay in the Middle East is part
of the broader question of the need to achieve a just and
7

European country, Poland, are being subjected to intolerable discrimination by the Israeli Government, contrary
to the decision of the Council, for the sole reason that the
Governments of those four States do not have diplomatic
relations with Israel.

75. In this connexion, we must express the wish that the
situation which arose during the discussion on the establishment of UNEF should also be taken into account. I am
referring to the fact that when UNEF was established it was
assumed that the optimal size of each national contingent
would be no more than 600 to 700 men. The Secretariat
and the Commander of UNEF should look at this matter,
too, in the light of the consensus reached at that time.

80. It must be particularly stressed in this connexion that
this unlawful policy and practice on the part of Israel is
greatly restricting and consequently paralysing the activities
of UNEF, reducing the effectiveness with which it is being
utilized, and making it necessary to increase its strength in
officers and men beyond the point that would be necessary
in normal circumstances in order for the Force to carry out
its mission.

76. Another matter of undoubted interest to the members
of the Council is the cost of maintaining UNEF. Objectively
speaking, there is no reason to agree that when considering
the extension of UNEF’s stay in the Middle East for a
further period of six months we must also discuss increasing
the expenditure on maintenance of the Force above the
$30 million approved by the General Assembly for a
six-month period. The only conclusion that can be drawn
from this approach is that there is an over-expenditure at a
given time, or over this whole period. During the fnst four
months of UNEF’s existence, as we are all aware, the Force
was substantially under strength. Only in the last two
months has its strength approached the 7,000 level, but it
has still not reached that level. Under the circumstances,
even if there are some unforeseen expenditures, one would
have expected the actual expenditure over the first six
months to be considerably below $30 million. The Council
should direct its attention to this fact.

81. The UNEF command, as can be seen from earlier
reports of the Secretary-General, has been obliged to
denote as “reserves” the contingents which are going
unused because of Israel’s position-as if this part of UNEF
was actually being held in reserve, when the real reason why
it cannot be effectively used lies in the restrictions on its
movement being applied by the Government of Israel.
Thus, Israel bears direct responsibility for the unnecessary
and unjustified increase in the strength of UNEF and,
consequently, for the increased cost of maintaining the
Force, Obviously, the possibility of presenting the bill to
Israel for the extra costs should be considered.
82. Even more important is the fact that the illegal
restrictions and discrimination with regard to a certain part
of UNEF personnel is completely illogical and has no
foundation in international law., The composition of UNEF
was determined by a decision of the Security Council which
was directed specifically against any attempt by Israel to
discriminate against particular African, Asian or Eastern
European contingents. Thus, it is the duty and the
obligation of members of the Council to require that Israel
bow to the decisions of the Council and abandon this
unlawful practice.

77. The Council has considered and endorsed the Secretary-General’s view that UNEF’s operations should be
carried on at the least possible cost and with the greatest
possible savings. The Council is entitled to expect that this
will be done and that appropriations for UNEF will not
exceed the level established by the General Assembly. The
Secretariat and the Commander at UNEF must take this
matter seriously and sit down, pencil in hand as it were,
total up what it really costs to maintain UNEF and.take
urgent steps to effect the greatest possible economies.

78. One of the fundamental principles governing the -- 83. This is reflected in the resolution adopted by the
establishment and functioning of UNEF is one which is - Council, which notes the particular urgency of the problem
accepted in the United Nations system and has been
dealt with in paragraph 71 of the Secretary-General’s
reaffirmed by the Security Council, namely the principle of
report, and the &a-graph does indeed deal with this most
equitable geographical representation in the establishment
important and pressing problem. The report rightly notes of United Nations emergency forces. That principle, as we
that the question of freedom of movement for contingents in
are aware, was specially endorsed by the Council with due
UNEF’s area of operations is a problem calling for urgent
regard for the specific conditions under which the United
solution, and the Council must help the Secretary-General
Nations troops have to operate. The strictest compliance
to solve as speedily as possible this problem which has
with this principle is therefore an important criterion of
arisen from the actions and the position taken by Israel.
whether UNEF is a truly international United Nations
armed force performing United Nations peace-keeping
84. The following logical question quite naturally arises in
functions. There is, however, irrefutable evidence that the
this connexion: Israel, as we know, was forced to agree,
principle is being violated in regard to the deployment,
first of all, to a cease-fire and, secondly, the signing of an
movement and utilization of UNEF. That fact has already
agreement on the disengagement of its troops and the
been noted by earlier speakers. The Secretary-General’s
Egyptian troops against which it had been fighting. It also
report states frankly: “One of the problems still outstandgave its assent to the establishment of a disengagement
ing relates to restrictions on the freedom of movement of
zone. Why then, under these circumstances, does Israel
personnel of certain contingents.“[ibid.,
pcm. ZO/
continue its policy of enmity and hatred vis&is
other
States which have not been at war with it but merely do
79, Members of the Council are well aware of what is
not have diplomatic relations with it because of its
behind this rather general statement in the report. What this
aggression against the Arab States?
actually means is that the contingents of two African
85. There is not and cannot be any justification for this
countries, Ghana and Senegal, the contingent of one Asian
attitude towards the Emergency Force. There must be an
country, Indonesia, and the contingent of one Eastern
8

end to restrictive measures and discrimination against all
contingents, including those, of countries with which Israel
has no diplomatic relations. All the contingents comprising
UNEF must enjoy equal rights and respect. Since they are
part of UNEF, they are international armed forces. They
were established by the Security Council in its capacity as
the principal organ of the United Nations for halting
aggression and maintaining peace. These are United Nations
troops, not national troops; they are conducting an
international United Nations peace-keeping operation assigned to them by the Council, and they must be treated
accordingly. The Council is duty-bound to take its own
measures to assist the Secretary-General in solving this
problem.

90. We also note with satisfaction that the resolution takes
particular note of the Secretary-General’s intention to keep
under constant review the required strength of the Force
with a view to making reductions and economies. Thus, the
resolution duly reflects problems which, as many members
of the Council have repeatedly pointed out in the course of
informal consultations, call urgently for a solution.
91. Mr. SALAZAR
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to associate
itself with your comments when you spoke on behalf of the
Council and offered condolences to the representative of
France on the untimely death of President Pompidou. The
international community as a whole was deeply shaken by
the loss of the great French leader, and my Government has
addressed its sympathy to the Government of France for
the mourning of the French people.

86. Another criterion of unswerving compliance with the
principle of equitable geographical distribution is that this
principle is applied at every level of UNEF’s direction and
command. The Council must see to it that the principle is
fully applied, first of all, in relation to the Secretariat
department in charge of UNEF affairs and, secondly, in
regard to proper representation in headquarters and brigade
staff, of UNEF, as well as in the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO).

92. Mr. President, we congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are familiar
with your experience and your tact in the carrying out of
diplomatic tasks, and you have given ample proof of the
experience you possess in the consultations that have taken
place for the preparation of the resolution that we have just
adopted. I trust that you will be very successful in your
term of office and I assure you of the cooperation of my
delegation to that end.

87. Lastly, the third aspect of the principle of equitable
geographical representation, as approved by the Council, is
its application to the reimbursement of costs incurred by
countries in connexion with the service of their contingents
in UNEF. This important question was dealt with by
previous speakers and will obviously be raised by subsequent speakers as well. The report contains a number of
positive statements about the need to establish a standard
reimbursement and a ceiling for such reimbursement. We
understand this to mean that all UNEF contingents should
be placed on an equal foo.ting as regards the reimbursement
of costs, irrespective of nationality, race, colour and
political or religious beliefs.

93. I also wish to extend a welcome to the new representative of the United Kingdom in the Security Council and I
trust that he will be fully successful in the fulfilment of his
duties.
94. My delegation would like to give some of the reasons
why we have supported the resolution that has just been
adopted. We are fully conscious of the fact that UNEF has
played a decisive-and I would say, indispensable-role since
its establishment. Costa Rica was not a member of the
Security Council when, last October, by a decision of this
body UNEF was set up. However, we know that the
initiative came from a group of countries that were not
permanent members of the Council and that the decision
adopted later by the Council was an effective guarantee of
the resolutions which were subsequently adopted on a
cease-fire, which led later to complementary measures that
may ensure the reestablishment of peace in the Middle
East.

88, What the report says on this score is too general,
however, and should be made more precise. In view of the
importance attached to the matter, particularly by those
Members of the United Nations whose contingents are in
UNEF for the first time, it is essential that this important
question, which could give rise to serious complications,
this question of unequal reimbursement, should be dealt
with positively in the near future in accordance with the
principle of full equality and justice. However, the Council
is obviously entitled to appeal to Member States, for their
part, not to make excessive demands in this regard.

95. My delegation is a successor to the delegation of
Panama, which earlier represented Latin America on the
Council, and as such we intend to exert the same efforts to
ensure the fulfilment of the duties and tasks incumbent
upon the Council. Therefore, as a successor to Panama, we
were very happy to vote in favour of the draft resolution
that has just been adopted.

89. In view of what I have said and in view of the fact that
the questions raised by the Soviet delegation were taken
into account in the Council’s resolution, my delegation did
not oppose Council approval of an extension of UNEF’s
mandate in the Middle East for a limited additional period
of six months. We bear in mind the fact, however, that the
resolution particularly notes the importance of a proper
solution to the urgent problems referred to in paragraph 71
of the Secretary-General’s
report, and particularly the
importance of an urgent solution to the important question
of freedom of movement for all UNEF contingents in their
operational area.

96. Furthermore, my delegation was very gratified to read
the report that served as the basis for that resolution. The
Secretary-General’s report very clearly indicates the concern and the dedication of the Secretary-General in
ensuring effective implementation of the measures that this
Council decided upon in regard to the reestablishment of
peace in the Middle East. I should like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General on the
9

excellent report he has furnished to us and the very wise
and timely measures he has proposed in it.

The timely response of the Council to a crisis whose
dimensions might well have spread beyond the region
immediately affected has a deep significance. It shows in
the first place the indispensable role of the United Nations
in any peace effort in the Middle East.

97. Mr, JANKOWITSCH (Austria): In the past week a
great statesman and great European, President Georges
Pompidou of France, has died. Last Saturday an impressive
gathering of. woild leaders, -the United Nations being
represented by our Secretary-General, gathered in Paris to
pay a tribute to his memory and to mourn with the French
people. Allow me now to extend the most heartfelt
condolences of my delegation to Ambassador de Guiringaud on this sad occasion. President Pompidou was held in
high esteem in Austria, and the visit he paid to Vienna in
his capacity as Prime Minister of France is not forgotten.
Nor shall we forget his distinguished contribution in
securing for Austria a new constructive relationship
with the European Community. Expressing a widely held
feeling, the Federal Chancellor of Austria, Bruno Kreisky,
said that the Austrian people had lost in him a great friend.

102. A permanent settlement in the Middle East, as we
know, depends on the interplay of a great many factors. It
is an area of particular sensitivity. Large and smaIl Powers,
Powers inside and outside the region alike, are involved. It
demands constant vigilance, effort and goodwill on all sides.
Efforts for peace-making in the Middle East, however,
require a peace-making machinery and only a world
organization like the United Nations can provide these
services.
103. Apart from the significant impact that the establisbment of UNEF had on a world crisis, this fact also holds
promise for the future of the Organization itself. The
creation of UNEF on a basis of consent much larger than
any previous occasion shows the constructive potential of
the United Nations and its ability to respond decisively and
swiftly in an hour of crisis. By its nature and functioning
UNEF is without doubt one of the finest examples of the
creativity of the process of international co-operation. Born
as a unique instrument of peace keeping in another earlier
crisis, out of the initiative of a great Canadian statesman
who later received the Nobel Peace Prize,. it was developed
and used by the Organization and its great servants. Now
the United Nations emergency machinery has already
reached a high level of perfection. Thus, despite all the
tremendous difficulties of the moment, the Force was able
to come into operation and to perform within the shortest
possible time.

98. I should like to extend to you, Mr. President, the
warmest congratulations of my delegation upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We are pleased to see the able and talented
representative of Iraq, Ambassador El-Shibib, in the Chair,
and we pledge to him our full support in the fulfilment of
his duties.
99. Let me also take this opportunity to thank our
President for the previous month, Ambassador Anwar Sani
of Indonesia, for the services he once again rendered to this
Council with so much circumspection and dedication. These
services match tne aamirabie records of leader&p he has
already established on previous occasions: during his
Presidency in January 1973 and as Chairman of the
Security Council to Zambia in February 1973.
100. A warm word of welcome is due to our new
colleague, the representative of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Richard. Mr. Richard brings to this Council the
rich experience he has acquired in the political life of his
country, both in Her Majesty’s Government and in the
House of Commons. There could hardly be a better
qualification for serving the Council than the distinction
and fascination membership in the mother of parliaments
confers. His presence among us is a matter of great
satisfaction, therefore, and augurs well for the future work
of the. Council. My delegation and I personally look
forward with great pleasure to co-operating with him.

104. In reviewing six months of UNEF experience, we can
safely say that the Force has fulffled our expectations. The
Force quickly became an indispensable instrument in
controlling a highly dangerous situation. Later on it
provided the basis for supplementary efforts to obtain the
separation and disengagement of opposing forces. A most
important assignment has been given to the Force in
carrying out and supervising Israeli-Egyptian agreements-on
separation and disengagement of troops, and its presence
will be of over-riding importance for continued efforts in
this sector. Its presence and its good services will be further
required to allow the continuation of the efforts for
building a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

101. The Security Council is meeting today to extend the
mandate of UNEF in the Middle East. The establishment of
a new United Nations Emergency Force by the Council on
25 October 1973 was an act of truly historic dimensions. It
is not necessary here in this chamber to recall in detail the
anxious hours of the world crisis that erupted in October
1973. The records of the Council speak persuasively of the
drama and tension of the hours and days immediately
preceding and immediately following the voting of the
cease-fire resolution on 22 October and thereafter. In the
course of these events the establishment, practically overnight, of a new United Nations Emergency Force in the
Middle East was in more than one sense a turning point and
represented a first and essential step on the way to peace.

105. In the establishment and activities of the Force, a
great tribute must be paid to the Secretary-General, his
close associates and staff at Headquarters and in the tieId,
and in particular to the Force Commander, General Ensio
Siilasvuo, who is among us this afternoon. At this point I
also deem it appropriate to pay a very special and deeply
felt tribute to those soldiers on the Force who have died in
the course of action for peace and to those who were
wounded in the performance of their duties. I think that
the international community as a whole and the Security
Council in particular owe an expression of highest praise to
the courage and dedication of the officers and men of the
United Nations battalion now serving under such difficult
conditions.
10

._;

,’

110. In a study on ‘Peace-keeping by United Nations
Forces” published by Princeton Studies in World Politics a
few years ago, two distinguished Australian scholars, Arthur
Lee Burns and Nina Heathcot, addressed themselves to the
question whether military force in United Nations hands is
an effective instrument for the perservation of peace. I
think that the experience with UNEF in the Middle East
provides a conclusive and positive answer to that question.

106. Almost six months have now elapsed since war broke
out again in the Middle East. For a period much too long a
great danger to world peace and security had arisen. It was
in this situation that the Council was called upon to take
action, to prevent a further deterioration of the situation
and to put an end to bloodshed and destruction. Since that
time the road to peace has been reopened, not least as a
result of the Security Council resolution mentioned here
before. A peace conference convened by the United States
and the Soviet Union and presided over by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations began its work in Geneva in
December 1973. Both the Soviet Union and the United
States have firmly committed themselves to the continuation of peace efforts in the Middle East. Progress has been
achieved on many fronts. We have been heartened by the
developments on the Egyptian-Israeli sector and we place
great hope in the negotiations now beginning on a similar
.agreement on disengagement and separation of forces on
the IsraeliSyrian sector.

111. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translation from Russian): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere condolences to the French delegation in
the Security Council on the occasion of the untimely death
of an outstanding statesman, the President of France,
Georges Pompidou. The late President was widely known in
the Byelorussian SSR, and the people of Minsk, the capital,
welcomed him warmly in January of last year when he met
Comrade Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, in
Zaslavl. That meeting, as you know, promoted the further
development and strengthening of Soviet-French relations
and reaffirmed the principle of peaceful coexistence among
States with different social systems, the cause of detente,
and the strengthening of peace in Europe and throughout
the world.,

107.
But there are still great and manifold reasons for
concern. Much more must be done in order to prevent
recurrence of fighting and to bring about a fundamental
change in the situation. Among the contributions that the
United Nations can make to this end is the continued
existence and service of UNEF together with the other
United Nations instruments for peace keeping, UNTSO in
particular, and a guaranteeing of its proper functioning.

112. Mr. President, my delegation would also like to
congratulate you, as other delegations have done, and
express our sincere satisfaction that we are working under
your presidency this month. We do not doubt that your
diplomatic experience will help the Council to solve the
problems before it.

108. The clear, concise and comprehensive report which
the Secretary-General has submitted, and for which we
should like to express our appreciation, points to the
elements necessary for the continued and satisfactory
performance of UNEF. We fully share and endorse the
fmdings and observations contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. My country, which was among the first to
participate in the operation, would like to express its
continued readiness to the best of its ability and resources
to co-operate in this endeavour. It is therefore deeply
interested in all questions affecting the Force. Needless to
say, we fully support the Secretary-General in carrying out
his responsibilities. In particular, we express the hope that
appropriate solutions to the urgent problems still facing the
Force can soon be found. This applies also to the solution
of the financial question involved. But we are equally
confident that a satisfactory solution can be found. In
particular, we hope that the financing of the operations can
be adequately secured. While nobody will underestimate
the financial burden that has been called for and the burden
on each and every Member, we still feel that the total
amount necessary for the financing of the Force is rather
small in comparison to the cost of a single day of war in the
Middle East. Keeping this obvious consideration in mind
and remembering the true proportions, it should be easy to
find the amounts needed to ensure orderly financial
arrangements.

113. We should also like to extend a welcome to the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the
United Nations, who is taking part in a meeting of the
Council for the fust time., We are confident that, working
with Mr. Richard, we will help to strengthen peace and
security.
114. Concerning the resolution on UNEF just adopted by
the Council, we share the general opinion expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report [S/11248, para. 641 that
the establishment of UNEF in the Middle East and its
operation during the period under review is “a milestone in
the history of the United Nations”.
I.
115. Emergency Force was in fact established on the basis
of a Council resolution in complete compliance with the
Charter. Its mandate and national composition were determined by the decisions of the Council. Operational direction of the Force’s activities has been exercised by the
Council through the Secretary-General. ‘Ihe procedure for
financing the Force was determined by the General
Assembly.
116. It is our firm conviction that these fundamental
differences from past United Nations operations explain the
success as achieved by UNEF in maintaining peace in the
Middle East and its competence and authority. There have
been times when decisions regarding peace-keeping operations were taken in violation of the Charter, when armed
forces could be used by the Secretary-General in a manner
not in conformity with the intentions of the Council, when

109. In conclusion, I should like to express the sincere
hope that efforts on the road to peace in the Middle East
will progress at a pace that will make UNEF a commitment
limited in time.. However, I should like to express full
confidence in the role and functioning of the Force and in
the successful accomphshment of its mission.
11

representatives of whole groups of countries and regions
were excluded from participation in or even direct knowledge of the conduct of such operations, which at that time
were regarded as the business of one group of countries
only. As the report rightly notes: “That units from so many
different regions and with such different backgrounds could
work harmoniously and efficiently for the common cause
of peace is highly encouraging for the future”. [ibid.,
para 671

obstacles put in the way of the Force in the discharge of its
tiurctions.
123. As we consider extending UNEF’s mandate, the
problem of financing the Force becomes particularly acute.
Our delegation is greatly concerned at the fact that there is
as yet no clear-cut and readily comprehensible system for
calculating the cost of maintaining the Emergency Force, so
that, as we see from the Secretary-General’s report, the cost
is determined on the basis not of estimates approved by the
General Assembly but of accounts rendered, That being the
.case, it is of course very difficult to foresee what
expenditures may arise. Full endorsement should therefore
be given to the Secretary-General’s statement in paragraph
70 of his report that he wilI keep under constant review the
necessity of making economies when the situation allows.
We believe that there has been unnecessary delay in devising
standards for expenditure and setting an upper limit for
reimbursement and that an effort must be made to do this
as soon as possible. We hope that the Secretary-General will
take all necessary steps to institute a reasonable system of
economizing so as to avoid additional expenditures for this
type of United Nations activity in the current financial
year, which, as we already know, will be full of major
events with serious financial implications for the United
Nations.

117. Another important positive factor in the establishment and functioning of UNEF has been the close attention
paid by the Secretary-General to the views and wishes
stated by members of the Council in informal consultations
and the adoption of practical joint measures with the
Commander of the Force, General Siilasvuo, to eliminate
the shortcomings noted.
118. Another distinguishing feature of UNEF is the fact
that the Council’s decision to establish the Force has won
wide international recognition, as expressed in the adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 3101 (XXVIII)
concerning the participation of all States Members of the
United Nations in the financing of the Force.
119. We now have every reason to say that the establishment of UNEF and its successful operation in the Middle
East have been helped by the general easing of the
international atmosphere which can be observed as a result
of the active and consistent pursuit by the Soviet State of a
programme of peace.. Detente created conditions for a start
in solving the Middle East problem and for the successful
operation of UNEF in the region..

124. With those reservations, the Byelorussian SSR supported the draft resolution extending UNEF’s mandate for
a further six months. We continue to believe that the
Security Council should, until the end of the entire
operation, continue to maintain tireless supervision over all
aspects of the activities of the United Nations Emergency
Force in the Middle East.

120. At the same time, as can be seen from the SecretaryGeneral’s report, there are serious difficulties and problems
regarding the formation and functioning of UNEF, and
their nature is perfectly clear. On the whole, they result
from blatant and inexcusable violations of the Charter and
the decisions of the Security Council. Our delegation is
greatly concerned at the unjustified delay in considering the
question of unlawful “restrictions”,
as they are referred to
in the report although in fact they represent discrimination
practised by Israel against certain contingents of United
Nations troops. What this means in practice is that up to
now Israel has prevented UNEF from properly carrying out
the important peace-keeping task in the region entrusted to
it by the Council. As a result, certain contingents are
underutilized while the strength of others is being unduly
increased, leading to additional expense.

125. Mr. JOEWONO (Indonesia): It was with profound
sorrow and regret that my delegation learned of the
untimely passing of President Pompidou. France, and the
world have lost in him an eminent statesman. Indonesia
joins France in mourning its President.
126. Allow me now, Mr. President, to avail myself of this
opportunity to repeat, in this formal meeting, the congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month and to
pledge to you our co-operation as you discharge of your
difficult duties. It gives me great pleasure to see the Chair
occupied by such a distinguished, able and experienced
diplomat and representative of a nonaligned nation with
which Indonesia has always maintained close and friendly
relations..

121. We regret that the Secretary-General has confined
himself in his report to pointing out this shameful fact and
has not informed the members of the Council of how
matters stand with regard to the consideration of this
question. We feel that the Council should adopt an
appropriate decision condemning such practices by Israel
with regard to UNEF. To put it mildly, this irregular
situation needs to be remedied..

127. My delegation would also like to take this opportunity to extend a cordial welcome to the new Permanent
Representative
of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Richard, and to assure him of our friendly and close
co-operation
128. My delegation would like to express its great appreciation to the Secretary-General for the comprehensive
report which he has submitted to the Council. We should
like to draw the special attention of the Council to
paragraphs 71 and 10 of that report. As stated in
paragraph 71:

122. The report does not give a single example of
co-operation by the Israeli authorities in such matters as
providing the Force with the necessary quarters or encampments. On the contrary, everyone is well aware of the
12

“In connexion with the strength and composition of
the Force, two problems have arisen which require urgent
solution. One concerns the rate of reimbursements to
contributing Governments for the costs incurred as a
result of supplying troops to the United Nations. The
other relates to the freedom of movement of all contingents in the operational area. The Security Council may
be assured that I am giving close attention to both
problems and shall continue to exert every effort to solve
them in a satisfactory way.”

134. It was in view ‘of those considerations that my
delegation voted in favour of the resolution extending the
mandate of UNEF for a further period of six months.
135. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Before
speaking to the subject of today’s meeting, I would like to
extend my most heartfelt condolences to our colleague,
Ambassador de Guiringaud on the death of President
Pompidou. President Pompidou’s death is a tragic loss not
only to France but to Europe and to the world. His courage
and his vision will be much missed by all who love peace,
including those of us who labour within the United Nations
family.
T,

129. My delegation entirely agrees with the SecretaryGeneral that these problems of reimbursement and the
freedom of movement of all contingents in the operational
area require solution. In both cases, any form of discrimination should be avoided, as all contingents are part of one
and the same UNEF.

136. I also welcome the new Ambassador of the United
Kingdom, Mr. Richard, who brings with him an impressive
background in foreign policy, as well as a distinguished
reputation as an outstanding intellect. My delegation and I
look forward to working closely with him and his delegation to further the objectives of the United Nations and to
enhance the historic friendship between the British and
American peoples.

130. With regard to the problem of reimbursement, it is
the considered view of my delegation that any discriminatory treatment should be avoided, as any form of
discrimination would give rise to political reactions, not
only in the countries concerned but also in the United
Nations itself. We are confident that the Secretary-General
will be able to produce a formula for reimbursement which
w-ill avoid such reactions; my delegation would like to
express the hope that it will be possible for him to start
very soon the process of reimbursing the countries contributing contingents to UNEF-if
necessary partially, until
the availability of funds makes full reimbursement possible.

137. The United States welcomes the extension of UNEF
and its mandate for another six months. This resolution
assures the continued operation of UNEF under its original
mandate as approved by Security Council resolution 340
(1973). In paragraphs 68 and 69 of his most recent report
on UNEF, the Secretary-General supported and recommended the reaffirmation of the mandate. The United
States shall continue to extend its full support to the
efforts of the Force to implement its mandate and the
relevant Council resolutions.

131. With regard to the discriminatory
treatment of
certain contingents of UNEF by one of the parties, my
delegation fully agrees with the view that such discrimination cannot be accepted by this Council: all contingents are
part of UNEF; they are not there as an instrument of policy
of their respective countries.

138. We are pleased that the performance of the United
Nations and the Emergency Force has added new lustre to
the United Nations as an Organization vital to the promotion of international peace. The Force has played an
indispensable role in reestablishing peace in the Middle
East. It has made possible the implementation of the
cease-fire ordered by the Council in October 1973 and the
subsequent Egyptian-Israeli agreement on disengagement of
forces. Indeed, it is difficult to exaggerate the constructive
part played by the Force in these important first steps
towards achieving the just and durable peace envisaged in
resolutions 338 (1973) and 242 (1967).

132.. My delegation would like to underline the view of
the Secretary-General as stated in paragraph 10 of his
report:
“One of the problems still outstanding relates to
restrictions on the freedom of movement of personnel of
certain contingents. I have consistently taken the position
that UNEF must function as an ‘integrated and efficient
military unit’, that its contingents serve on an equal basis
under the command of the Force Commander and that
no differentiation can be made regarding the United
Nations status of the various contingents.”

139. On this occasion, therefore, it gives me particular
pleasure to extend our highest appreciation and commendation to the Secretary-General and his Headquarters staff, to
the Commander of UNEF, Lieutenant-General
Ensio
Siilasvuo, to the civilian staff, to the UNTSO observers in
the field, and particularly to the UNEF troops, all of whom
risk paying and some of whom have paid the ultimate price
to preserve world peace. The United Nations and the world
community owe these brave men a debt of gratitude which
only our best efforts to bring peace to the Middle East can
repay.

Discrimination against certain contingents by one party
would certainly influence the efficiency of UNEF. My
delegation sincerely hopes that the Secretary-General will
be able to eliminate such discriminatory treatment in order
to achieve the maximum efficiency and economy in the
functioning of UNEF,
133. In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
its sincere hope that UNEF will not go the way of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus in that the
periodic extension of its mandate will become a regular
feature of the meetings of the Council. We hope that
negotiations will make continued progress towards solution
of the Middle East problem.

140. The United States will continue to encourage a
negotiating process looking toward a permanent and equitable settlement of the Middle East dispute. In this connexion
we believe that paragraph 68 of the Secretary-General’s
report on UNEF usefully emphasizes that “the continued
13

have carried out their tasks ‘under conditionsnot, free from
&fficdties.
!
‘.
.’
j :

operation of UNEF is essential not only for the mainte-.
nance of the present quiet in the Egypt-Israel sector but
also to assist, if required, in further efforts for the
establishment of a just and durable peace in the Middle
East .”

149. As a firm and long-standing supporter of United
Nations peace-keeping efforts and a regular contributor in
the past and present to its peace-keeping and peace-observation operations, Australia appreciates the strains, including
the financial ones, involved in maintaining a force of the
size of UNEF. It is gratifying, therefore, to note that the
Secretary-General does not expect that any increase in the
Force will be necessary and. that he will keep under
constant review the strength of the Force with a view to
making reductions and economies as the situation allows. I
have no doubt that the Secretary-General will welcome any
measure of assistance Governments may be able to give in
easing the burden on the United Nations. I might mention
that my own Government was happy to be able to make a
contribution by airlifting, at its own expense, one of the
contingents of the Force and by helping to equip another.

141. We would like to take this opportunity to commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General,-as described in part V
of his report, to deal with the complex problems of
maintaining a peace-keeping force in the Middle Fast in
accordance with the mandate approved by the Security
Council. We believe that the contribution of UNEF to
peace in the Middle East far outweighs any difficulties
caused by differences of opinion regarding questions of
financing and operation142. The United States fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to solve these problems on an equitable
and practical basis and without impairing the efficiency of
the United Nations Emergency Force.

150. It is scarcely surprising that UNEF continues to face
problems, but the Secretary-General has made it plain that
he is fully aware of them and we fully endorse the efforts
he is making to solve them.

:‘

143. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first join you and my other colleagues in expressing
my sincere condolences to the representative of France over
the sad and untimely death of President Pompidou.
Addressing the Australian House of Representatives a few
days ago, my Prime Minister spoke with deep feeling of
President Pompidou’s contribution to world peace and
world statesmanship and the grievous loss suffered by the
people of France and Europe and the world as a whole.

151. We share the Secretary-General’s view, as expressed
in his report, that the establishment of UNEF is a milestone
in the history of the United Nations-a milestone reached, I
believe, above all through the essential community of
purpose that existed among members of this Council. It is a
good augury for the future work of this Organization and
the Security Council in particular in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

144. Mr- President, let me again welcome you to the
presidency of this Council and congratulate you on the
conscientiousness and perseverance you have already shown
in your first two days of the conduct of the Council’s work.

152. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): First I should like
to join those delegations which have today offered their
condolences to the representative of France on the occasion
of the death of President Pompidou. May I say as a
representative of a country with the very closest ties with
France, that I assure my French colleague that the sorrow
of his people is shared my mine. We salute President
Pompidou as a statesman of vision and distinction and a
man of very great courage.

145. In his absence, I should like also to salute my
long-time friend and colleague Ambassador Anwar Sani of
Indonesia for the customary skill he showed during March,
his month of office as President.
146. Allow me also to welcome to the Council the new
representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Richard, and to express my full confidence that we shall
continue to enjoy with him the co-operation we had with
his distinguished predecessor.

153. Next I should like to thank all those who have been
so kind as to welcome me on this the first occasion that I
have had the opportunity of taking part in a meeting of the
Security Council. People have said some very kind things
about me this afternoon, which have been totally undeserved, and I thank them for it. As members know, I am
not a professional diplomat; I am a professional politician,
so the experience that I bring to these debates is perhaps
slightly different from that of many sitting around this
table. I was asked yesterday by a journalist what my fast
impressions of the United Nations were, and I am bound to
say the only answer I could think of giving was, “Well, it is
very different from the House of Commons”. I am hoping
that I may be able to contribute something to the
deliberations of this Council as a representative of a
Government whose Foreign Secretary opened his fust
major statement of our new Government’s foreign policy
since taking office

147. My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
in document S/l 1253 for the obvious reason that we regard
the continued presence of UNEF in the Middle East as
indispensable not only to the continuation of the quiet at
present prevailing in its area of operation but, equally
importantly, to the creation of an atmosphere in which a
successful and final solution to the problems of the Middle
East can come about.
148. We have welcomed and studied and are grateful for
the Secretary-General’s report on UNEF, as we have also
welcomed his progress reports issued regularly since the
inauguration of the Force. The Secretary-General and his
staff and the Force Commander, Lieutenant-General Ensio
Siilasvuo, and the officers and men of the contingents, as
well as the civilian staff, are to be congratulated and
warmly thanked on the exemplary manner in which they

“by recommitting the Government to the purposes of the
United Nations and to supporting it as the principal
I4

international organization dedicated to %he promotion ‘of
human rights, the rule of law and the peaceful settlement
of disputes”.

Force are’&ried”on~‘~as‘~conomically
as possible without
impairing its efficiency. We welcome this. We hope, too,
that he will constantly keep in mind the possibility of
reductions and economies. If I may just sound one very
brief word of warning, though, the financial position must
never be allowed, never be permitted, to lessen the
effectiveness of the Force in carrying out the mandate that
has been given to it. Further decisions may need to be
taken at the next session of the General Assembly with
effect to the financing of the operation, but in an operation
of this sort the overriding consideration must be to see that
the Force is functioning efficiently and well.

It is in the spirit of these words that I have come here and it
isin the spirit of these words that I hope to be able to work
with you and my other colleagues to achieve at least some
part of the aims for which the United Nations was set up.
154. Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure too, and an
honour for me as well, that you are presiding over this the
fust meeting of the Security Council that I have attended. I
do not think that I will be revealing any great diplomatic
secrets if I say that I am now hopeful that diplomatic
relations between our two countries will shortly be restored
after a break which I believe both our countries have come
to regret. We recall, Mr. President, with pleasure the period
when you were your country’s Ambassador in London and
I congratulate you and assure you of my delegation’s full
co-operation.

159. Meanwhile, I should like to take this opportunity to
reaffirm on behalf of the new British Government our
support
for
Council
resolutions
242 (1967)
and
338 (1973), in the drafting of the first of which an earlier
British Labour Government played a very important part.
We believe that those resolutions still remain the inescapable and fundamental-basis on which any lasting peace in the
Middle East will be constructed.

155. At the same time may I, finally, take this opportunity of congratulating your predecessor, the representative of Indonesia. I had little opportunity to see him in
action as President, but may I say that word of his skill and
his wisdom has travelled far and I look forward to
co-operating closely with him in this Council.

160. I should also like to pay a sincere tribute to the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger, for the
efforts he personally has made to promote a settlement.
The fact that the situation in the Middle East is measurably
improved since the Force was established last October is in
no small part due to his efforts.

156. Turning to the agenda before us this afternoon, my
delegation is very glad indeed to support the draft
resolution which the Council has just adopted extending
the mandate of the Emergency Force for a further period
of six months. While we have no desire to see an emergency
force of this nature become permanent, we believe that at
this time it is performing an invaluable service and making
an important and specific contribution to the efforts being
made to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
I join willingly with earlier speakers in commending the
Force Commander and all the other officers and men
serving in the Force. This type of operation is a difficult
and at times a worrying task for the soldiers who actually
have to do the job. Anyone who has seen an army in these
circumstances will I think confirm it. But the speed with
which the operation was mounted, with the assistance of
my Government among others, and the subsequent manner
in which the operation has proceeded, make the whole
episode one of the success stories of the United Nations.

161. Finally, with regard to my Government’s attitude
towards the Force itself, I should like to refer to what my
predecessor, Sir Donald Maitland, said before this Council
when the Force was established. We draw clear distinction
between the present Emergency Force and any more
permanent peace-keeping force that may later be set up to
guarantee a general settlement in accordance with resolution 242 (1967). As regards the latter, the United Kingdom
remains willing to participate in such a United Nations
,peace-keeping force in the Middle East if we are requested.
We do not put ourselves forward but we do stand ready to
play any role that would be constructive either in peace
keeping or in the negotiations themselves.
162. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, 1 was very moved by the words in
which you spoke of the memory of President Pompidou
and the remarkable development of France-Iraqi relations
in the five years during which he was at the helm in France.
I thank you for your statement.

157. I also join earlier speakers in congratulating the
Secretary-General and his staff, both for the part they have
played in the running of the Force and also for the very
clear and concise report which we have before us this
afternoon. I am sure that the report has made the
deliberations and the decisions of this Council that much
the easier. It is clear from that report that the operation has
gone remarkably smoothly considering the difficulties that
have had to be overcome.

163. I wish also to thank all my colleagues who, after you,
mentioned the great sorrow that has afflicted my country
and referred to the person and the work of the late
President, as well as to the relations that he enjoyed with
their respective countries. They did so in very moving terms
which I shall remember and which I shall, of course,
transmit to my Government.

158. We, like other delegations, note the problems to
which the Secretary-General draws attention in his concluding observations. We share his concern expressed in the
report but we are confident that he will be able to resolve
these problems in a way which is satisfactory. We also note
what he has to say about ensuring that the functions of the

164. I am extremely grateful to all members of this
Council for having been good enough to observe a minute
of silence in tribute to President Georges Pompidou. My
Government and the French people as a whole will be
appreciative of that gesture of sympathy coming from the
highest body of the United Nations. Apart from the pel;son
15

of the late President. it is France that was beina honoured
in a moment of difficulties. I thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative and all members of the Council. May I take
this opportunity
to express my appreciation to all the
delegations, to the SecretaryGeneral and to the members
of the Secretariat who in these last few days have sent to
my delegation very many indications of their sympathy.

same will not be the case when a peace agreement has been
arrived at between the parties. Then the role of the Force
will be that of guaranteeing not only the cease-fire but
peace. I recall here that in our view this peace-keeping force
should also include contingents supplied by the permanent
members of the Security Council,
171. I should like to stress the interest that the Council
has in receiving periodic reports, as complete as possible, as
has been the case thus far.

16.5. Before turning to the item on our agenda for today’s
meeting, I should like also, Mr. President, to join those who
have congratulated you on your accession to the Presidency
of the Security Council. And I, too, should like to express
the appreciation of my delegation to your predecessor,
Ambassador Anwar Sani of Indonesia.

172. It is for the reasons I have mentioned that my
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution that was
submitted to us today,
173. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on my
list. Therefore, I wish to take the floor to make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of IRAQ regarding our
non-participation in the vote that has taken place in the
Council this afternoon.

166. Finally, now that we are holding our first official
meeting since his arrival in New York, may I tender an
extremely cordial welcome to our new colleague, Ambassador Richard of the United Kingdom.
167. The report that the Secretary-General has submitted
to the Council on the United Nations Emergency Force in
the Middle East is fully approved by my delegation. It
stresses the fact that, despite the difficulties encountered
since its inception, the Emergency Force, under the
distinguished and effective leadership of General Siilasvuo,
has been able to fulfi the terms of the mandate entrusted
to it, thus justifying the hopes that the international
community had placed in the United Nations intervention
in the region.

174. Our position on the situation in the Middle East,
resulting from Israel’s aggression against Syria, Egypt and
Jordan and the continued occupation of their territories,
and the denial to the peoples of Palestine of their rights of
self-determination,
is well known. We have repeatedly
asserted our firm belief that the primary duty of the United
Nations, and particularly the Security Council, is to uphold
the principles of the Charter with regard to this situation, as
to all other situations. We firmly believe that the aggressor
should in no way be rewarded or appeased, that the
occupation of the territories of sovereign States Members of
the United Nations should not be tolerated, and that the
dispossession of the people of Palestine of their birthright
should be ended.

168. First of all, my delegation has noted with satisfaction
that the strength originally planned of approximately 7,000
men did not have to be increased, This had a direct
influence on the budgetary aspect of the Force. From this
point of view serious concern is expressed, and it is to be
desired that during the next session of the General
Assembly the Secretariat should be able to submit all useful
hiformation regarding expenditures made and those projected. For the time being the Security Council can only
limit itself to recommending as strict a management of the
Force’s budget as possible.

175. With regard to the present situation, we have
dissociated ourselves from the pertinent Council resolutions
by which the present role of the United Nations is defined.
However, despite our reservations, we do recognize our
responsibilities as a Member of the United Nations and
particularly our position on the Security Council. We have
therefore fully fulfilled our financial obligations towards
the financing of UNEF.

169. Two delicate and important questions have also been
mentioned in paragraph 71 of the report: that of the
reimbursement of contributing Governments for the costs
incurred, and that of the freedom of movement of all
contingents in the operational area. I share the views
expressed by a number of my colleagues on these points,
and particularly by Mr. Malik. With regard to the reimbursement to contributing Governments of the costs incurred, a
formula should be devised and applied that will do away
with the present disparities and that will be acceptable to
all. Concerning the freedom of movement of all contingents
without exception, it is obvious that any hindrance in this
matter is contrary to the Charter, as well as to the
resolutions adopted by the Council.

176. Despite these reservations, I feel in duty bound to
make some comments on the report of the SecretaryGeneral and the proceedings that have taken place this
afternoon in the Council. Two important features have
been highlighted in that report. The first one is the
disparity in the rate of reimbursement paid to the Govemments contributing contingents to UNEF. If we are not
going to mince words, this is clearly a question of
discrimination, which practice the United Nations could
not possibly uphold or continue. We cannot see the United
Nations putting a higher price on one man’s services, or his
life for that matter, than on those of another, who is
rendering exactly the same services, carrying out the same
task, and in the process putting his life in danger. We are
gratified that the Secretary-General has taken note of this
important issue and that he is pursuing his efforts to fmd an
appropriate solution.

170. With regard to the mandate of the Emergency Force,
my delegation shares the view expressed by the SecretaryGeneral himself in paragraph 69 of the report. The terms of
this mandate as defined in his report of 27 October 1973,
seem to cover the present situation quite adequately and
therefore, we believe, call for no specific modifications. The

177. The other question, which is equally important and
of an equally serious nature, is that of the limitation on the
16

’

freedom of movement of certain contingents of UNEF. To
put the matter more clearly, Israel has been discrimiiting
against four contingents of UNEF under the pretext that
the countries furnishing those contingents have no diplomatic relations with Israel. The countries that have broken
off diplomatic relations with Israel did not choose to do so
in response to a whim. It was an action due to Israel’s
continued defiance of the will of the United Nations and to
its continued occupation and colonization of Arab territories, and therefore it was a just and justifiable measure.
And if Israel’s defiance of the United Nations and its policy
of colonization and occupation continue, the time may not
be very far off when we shall see Israel having relations only
with a few States other than South Africa, with which it
has recently raised its diplomatic representation to that of
Ambassador.

discrimination are allowed to continue, then the future
participation of Governments in the formation of United
Nations peace-keeping forces will be in jeopardy and the
whole principle of equitable geographical distribution and
composition will be in danger.
179. My delegation is pleased that the Secretary-General
in his report has highlighted the urgency of these issues and
that he is pursuing them. We are also pleased to note that
the resolution just adopted notes these urgent problems and
notes the efforts of the Secretary-General in pursuing them.
We have also taken note of the statements made here which
emphasize the urgency and importance of resolving these
issues. Notwithstanding the position we take on this issue,
my delegation takes great pleasure in expressing its appreciation for the diligent efforts and the important work of
the Secretary-General and his aids.

178. We feel that these issues are of importance not only
to this particular case but to all future operations of the
United Nations in the field of peace keeping. If practices of

The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unitei
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

IIOIfY’XSfTb

IiBAAHZIII

OPl-AHN

3A9HH

OlS’bE~MHEHHhIX

HAIWR

sm.xax
SameM
Hauwfi.

HauaR
YOXAO ~ynwrb
B KHAXCRLXX Maran areHTc*aax
BO scex paRoxax
aaepa. HaBonwre
cnpaBKH
06 nmamax
a
RHH~HOM
Maramme
um numu~e
no anpecy : OpraHH3aLWR
O6ZeAHHeHHblX
Cexunn
no nponaxce
H3narxuR,
Hbm-Fiop~
HIGH Xexesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Hanamia

Opraumaqwu

06%enuxe~~brx

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
esMn en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00

74.82001-April1980-2.200
