UNITED NA TIONS

I

NA TIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIl.
orrlCllIl. RECORDS

792

TWELFTH YEAR
th MEETING: 26 SEPTEMBER 1957

erne SEANCE: 26 SEPTEMBRE 1957
DOUZIEME ANNEE

CONSEII. DE SECUBITE
DOCUMENTS OrrlCIEI.S
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF

CONTENTS
Page

Official communique

1

TABLE DES J.\.IATIERES
Communique officiel

1.

( 4 p. )
SjPV.792

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of ~apitalletters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

***
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les comptes
rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents offkiels.

Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un document de ['Organisation.

SEVEN HUNDRED AND NINETY--SECOND MEETING
Held in New York, on Thursday, 26 September 1957, at 10.30 a.m.

SEPT CENT QUATRE-VINGT-DOUZIEME SEANCE
Tenue a New-York, le jeudi 26 septemhre 1957~ a 10 h. 30

President: Mr. F. URRUTIA (Colombia).

President: M. F. URRUTIA (Colombie).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia. China. Colombia. Cuba. France. Iraq.
Philippines. Sweden. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland. United States of America.

Presents : Les representants des pays suivants
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak. Philippines, Suede. Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande
du Nord. Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Official communique

Communique officiel

In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, the following communique was issued and is circulated in place of a verbatim
record:

Conformement a I' article 55 de son reglement interieur
provisoire, le Conseil de securite a fait publier le communique ci-apres, qui tient lieu de compte rendu slenographique:

" At its 792nd meeting held in private on 26 September 1957. the Security Council considered the
question of the recommendation for the appointment
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
unanimously decided to recommend to the General
Assembly that Mr. Dag Hammarskjold be appointed
as Secretary-General of the United Nations for a
new five-year term of office. This'recommendation
will be transmitted to the President of the General
Assembly.
" The President of the Security Council addressed
the annexed letter to Mr. Hammarskjold."

« A sa 792e seance (privee) tenue le 26 septembre
1957, le Conseil de securite a examine la question
de la recommandation a faire touchant la nomination
du Secretaire general de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies; il a decide a I'unanimite de recommander a
l'AssembIee generale de nommer M. Dag Hammarskjold au poste de Secretaire general de I'Organisation
pour une nouvelle periode de cinq ans. Le President
de l'AssembIee generale sera saisi de cette recommanda.tion.
« Le President du Conseil de securiM a cnvoye a
M. Hammarskjold la lettre jointe en annexe.»

ANNEX

ANNEXE
26 septembre 1957

26 September 1957
Sir.

Monsieur le Secretaire general,

On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I have the honour to inform you that, at its 792nd
meeting held in private this morning, the Security
Council decided to recommend to the General Assembly
that it appoint you to the post of Secretary-General of
the United Nations for a new five-year term of office.
This recommendation was approved unanimously.
In conveying to you tlre decision of the Security
Council, I would like, on behalf of all members of the
Council, to express to you our sincere appreciation of
the able and devoted manner in which you have been
carrying out the great responsibilities entrusted to you
under the Charter.
May I earnestly express the hope that you will agree
to serve the United Nations as its Secretary-General
for a second term, should the General Assembly, as

Au nom des membres du Conseil de securite, j'ai
l'honneur de vous informer que le Conseil, it sa 792 8 seance
(privee), a decide ce matin de recommander it l'AssembIee
generale de vous nommer au poste de Secretaire general
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour une nouvelle
periode de cinq ans. Cette recommandation a ete approuvee it l'unanimite.
En vous faisant part de la decision du Conseil, je
voudrais au nom de tous ses membres, vous remercier
sincerement d'avoir su vous acquitter, avec tant de
competence et de devouement, des lourdes responsabilites que vous confie la Chart.e.
Je me permets de former le vreu que vous acceptiez
de servir l'Organisation des Nations Unies comme Secretaire general pour une nouvelle periode, si, comme les
1

members of the Council trust, proceed with the appointment following the recommendation of the Security
Council.
Accept, Sir, the assurances of my highest comaderation.
(Signed) Emilio NUNEZ PORTUONDO
President of the Security Council

His Excellency
Mr. Dag Hammarskjold
Secretary-General of the United Nations

membres du Conseil de securite en sont persua.des,

l'Assemblee generale donne suite a la recommandation

du Conseil.

Veuillez agreer, Monsieur le Secretaire general, les
assurances de ma tres haute consideration.
Le President du Conseil de securite
(Signe) Emilio NUNEz PORTUONDO
Son Excellence M. Dag Hammarskjold
Secretaire general de I'Organisation des Nations Vnies

2

Printed in France

Price : $U.S. 0.10 ; 9d. stg.; Sw. fr. 0.40
(or equivalent in other currencies)

9267-August 1958-1,800
