A /71/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

64th plenary meeting

Friday, 16 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 11 (continued)
Sport for development and peace
Draft resolution (A/71/L.38)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 11 at its 52nd plenary
meeting, on 6 December 2016.
The General Assembly will now take action on
draft resolution A/71/L.38, entitled “Sport as a means
to promote education, health, development and peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/71/L.38, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Argentina, Brunei Darussalam, Denmark,
Iceland, Mozambique, the Philippines, the Republic of
Moldova, Slovakia, Slovenia and Turkmenistan.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.38?
Draft resolution A/71/L.38 was adopted (resolution
71/160).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the United States of America.

Mr. Miller (United States of America): As a
sponsor of resolution 71/160, the United States strongly
believes that sport and physical education contribute
to the promotion of education, health, development
and peace, as well as to the promotion of equal access
to opportunities for physical education and physical
activity for all, including for women, girls and people
with disabilities.
With respect to paragraph 5, we support the
focus on training, capacity-building and education of
teachers, coaches and community leaders. However, the
United States does so mindful of and consistent with
our limited authority at the federal level with respect to
education, which is primarily a responsibility of United
States state and local Governments.
With respect to paragraph 14, the United States
believes that the United Nations Guiding Principles
on Business and Human Rights provide a valuable,
important and universal framework for hosting mega
sports events, including the complicated process of
bidding, organizing, executing and ensuring positive
legacies for these events. The United Nations Guiding
Principles set out the responsibilities of business
enterprises and provide relevant guidance for sportrelated organizations, federations and associations.
We welcome initiatives to implement or disseminate
the United Nations Guiding Principles, including
the initiative chaired by former United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson to
bring together sports bodies, corporate sponsors, civil
society and Governments to improve collaboration and
coordination on identifying and addressing the human

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44420 (E)

*1644420*

A/71/PV.64

rights impacts of mega sporting events. These joint
efforts are vitally necessary in order to preserve the
independence and autonomy of sport, as expressed in
paragraph 13.
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 11.
Agenda item 69
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolution (A/71/L.42)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 69 and its sub-items
(a) to (d) at its 56th and 57th plenary meetings, on
8 December 2016.
I now give the floor to the representative of Uruguay
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.42.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Draft
resolution A/71/L.42, entitled “The new United Nations
approach to cholera in Haiti”, is submitted by Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. The Group
comprises Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
France, Guatemala, Peru, the United States of America,
Venezuela and my country, Uruguay.
We would recall that on 1 December, the SecretaryGeneral presented the new United Nations approach to
cholera in Haiti. The strategy, which comprises two
tracks, takes a comprehensive approach to tackling the
problem of cholera in Haiti. The first track seeks to
step up support for the response to and the fight against
cholera; the other seeks to provide material assistance
and support to the communities and Haitian people most
directly affected by cholera. We will not dwell on this
because the report of the Secretary-General, contained
in document A/71/620, of 25 November 2016, provides
comprehensive information on both tracks.
We take this opportunity to note that many
nations have expressed their support for the initiative
of the Secretary-General. In that regard, we believe it
appropriate to present a draft resolution on this point.
The Group of Friends of Haiti therefore mobilized its
efforts to call for the elbaoration of a draft resolution,
2/4

16/12/2016

the text of which is before the General Assembly today.
The draft resolution contains three key features.
First, it welcomes the new approach of the United
Nations to cholera in Haiti as described in the report
of the Secretary-General. Secondly, it calls upon all
Member States and international governmental and
non-governmental partners to provide their full support
to the new approach, and in particular to intensify their
efforts to respond to and eliminate cholera and to address
the suffering of its victims, including by providing
material assistance and support to communities and
those Haitians most directly affected by cholera. It
also requests the Secretary-General to submit a further
report for consideration by the General Assembly.
This text was initially the subject of consensus
among the members of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
We would have liked to have had more time to broaden
participation of the membership, but we opted to adopt
a brief, concise and clearly intentioned text in order to
ultimately garner the support of all delegations who,
although not participants in the Group, can nevertheless
support the text. We call for the adoption of this draft
resolution by consensus. We hope that that will be the
case because the people of Haiti deserve it.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/71/L.42, entitled “The
new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/71/L.42, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Andorra, Barbados, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Georgia, Greece, Grenada, Italy, Japan,
Lithuania, Mauritania, Montenegro, Nepal, New
Zealand, the Niger, Norway, Panama, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Serbia, Thailand and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.42?
Draft resolution A/71/L.42 was adopted (resolution
71/161).
16-44420

16/12/2016

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Thailand.
Ms. Taranatham (Thailand): Let me begin by
commending the Secretary-General for his renewed
attempt at addressing the recurrent outbreaks of
cholera in Haiti. We join the international community
in expressing support for the Secretary-General’s new
approach, as reflected in his report (A/71/620).
Thailand believes that collaborative efforts are
needed to address such prolonged public-health
crises, including supporting recovery for the victims
and preventing potential reccurrence. We therefore
emphasize a need for any approach to be carried out in
a sustainable manner, particularly without financially
overburdening the capacity of Governments and
affected communities. We also cannot stress enough
the importance of access to safe water and sanitation
as an indispensable part of any approach to addressing
epidemics like cholera, as stipulated in Track 1B. We
also look forward to further discussions on Track 2,
proposals for support packages.
Once again, only with a truly collaborative and
comprehensive approach can the prevention of cholera
be achieved and sustained.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Haiti.
Mr. Louis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, I
wish to convey our heartfelt thanks for the convening
of this meeting in the General Assembly at the initiative
of the Permanent Mission of Uruguay, which, on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Haiti, submitted resolution
71/161, entitled “The new United Nations approach to
cholera in Haiti”, under sub-item (c) of agenda item 69.
During his visit to Haiti on 15 October, SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon made a public statement finally
recognizing formally that the United Nations had a
moral responsibility towards the victims of the cholera
epidemic and that, given its role in the outbreak of
the epidemic and the suffering of the victims, it was
incumbent on the Organization to do much more and
to do everything possible to help Haiti overcome the
epidemic.
On 1 December, in the context of the consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 69, entitled “Strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special

A/71/PV.64

economic assistance: Special economic assistance to
individual countries or regions”, the Secretary-General
presented his latest report (A/71/620), of 25 November
2016, sounding with some urgency a veritable alarm
about the cholera epidemic that has been raging
in Haiti since 2010. This urgent appeal received a
favourable response in Haiti from both the authorities
and the population. Indeed, the report highlights the
new approach proposed by the Secretary-General to
eradicate the disease while providing assistance to
victims, their families and their communities.
The Haitian Government took note of this new
approach put forward by the Secretary-General
with interest and close attention. In that regard, the
Government of Haiti fully endorses the proposed
action plan under Tracks 1 and 2, on an immediate
response to the epidemic and on long-term measures
to enable the country to acquire the appropriate watersupply, sanitation and health-system infrastructure,
respectively. In his 1 December statement to the General
Assembly, the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the
United Nations, Mr. Denis Régis, welcomed the report
of the Secretary-General, declaring that
“the appreciation of the Haitian Government is all
the greater given that this new approach has been
long hoped for and long awaited by all parties
concerned, first and foremost by the victims of
cholera and their families”.
Today, 16 December, just two weeks after the
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General,
my delegation is pleased that, under the informed
leadership of the Permanent Mission of Uruguay to
the United Nations, the Group of Friends of Haiti has
submitted the resolution just adopted by consensus by
the General Assembly. In this regard, I should like to
express the profound gratitude of my delegation to the
brotherly countries of the Group of Friends of Haiti
in particular, and to all Member States in general for
their solidarity and their sense of renewed friendship
with respect to the Haitian Government and people.
My delegation hopes that the concerted efforts to
implement the resolution will provide timely and
adequate means for the effective implementation of the
provisions contained in the new approach proposed by
the Secretary-General to put an end to cholera in Haiti.
In the same vein, my delegation would like to
commend the Special Adviser on the Impact of Cholera,
Mr. Ross Mountain, for the many initiatives he has

16-444203/4

A/71/PV.64

undertaken to intensify efforts to treat and eliminate
cholera, as well as to improve long-term access to
drinking water and sanitation.
I would like to take this unique opportunity to
express, on behalf of my delegation as well as on my

4/4

16/12/2016

own behalf, our best wishes for the Christmas and New
Year celebrations.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 69.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

16-44420
