S/2021/56

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 January 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 18 January 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the United Nations
World Food Programme; as well as the statements delivered by the representatives
of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam,
in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in the Middle East
(Yemen)” convened on Thursday, 14 January 2021. A statement was also delivered
by His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Awad Ahmed Binmubarak, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Yemen.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
President of the Security Council

21-00624 (E) 190121 220221

*2100624*

S/2021/56

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Martin Griffiths
The year 2020 ended on a harrowing note for Yemen. On 30 December, a
vicious attack targeted the newly formed Cabinet of the Yemeni Government upon
their arrival at Aden’s civilian airport. Dozens of civilians were injured or killed,
including Government officials, humanitarian workers and a journalist. Deliberate
attacks on civilians or civilian objects are prohibited by international humanitarian
law and may constitute a war crime.
I condemn this attack in the strongest terms possible. I offer my most sincere
condolences for those who lost their lives, as well as my hopes for a full and
speedy recovery to the injured. I also want to express my solidarity with the new
Government, which has demonstrated its resolve to stay in Aden to carry out its
duties to the Yemeni people despite the security risks.
In the days after the attack, I travelled to Riyadh to meet President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, and to Aden to see the Prime Minister and the Foreign
Minister; I also met with the Governor. In Aden, the wreckage I saw at the attack site
shook me. The extent of the damage was extraordinary.
The Government launched an investigation into the Aden attack. Earlier today,
the Government made public its conclusions that Ansar Allah was behind the attack.
For its part, Ansar Allah has denied any direct or indirect involvement in the attack.
The attack was an unacceptable act of violence. It cast a dark shadow over what
should have been a moment of hope in the efforts to achieve peace in Yemen. The
formation of the Cabinet and its return to Aden was a major milestone for the Riyadh
agreement and for the stability of State institutions, the economy and the peace
process. I congratulate President Mansour, the parties to the Riyadh agreement and
all political parties and components that supported and contributed to this process.
I also commend the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its success in its role as mediator.
I am extremely concerned about the impact of the decision of the United States
to designate Ansar Allah as a foreign terrorist organization. We fear that inevitably
there will be a chilling effect on my efforts to bring the parties together. We all hope
to have absolute clarity on an expansive package of licenses and exemptions to be
able to carry out our duties mandated by the Security Council. In any event, I remain
committed to engaging with all parties, including Ansar Allah, designated or not, so
as to end the conflict in Yemen.
However, none of the foregoing is anywhere near as important as the
humanitarian consequences, as we will hear from Mr. Lowcock. I strongly associate
myself with his view that the decision will contribute to famine in Yemen, and
therefore should be revoked on humanitarian grounds at the earliest opportunity.
The path to peace in Yemen was never easy, and I believe that it is now a great
deal more difficult than a month ago. But there is a way out. We must remember that,
even after all the tragedies that Yemenis across the country have suffered, peace is
possible where there is the will to make it happen.
Every month for the last nine months, we have discussed in the Security
Council the hopes we shared that the parties might agree to the joint declaration — a
set of proposals covering a nationwide ceasefire, some measures of humanitarian
and economic relief for the Yemeni people and, of course, the resumption of the
political process. The fact is that the two parties agreed in principle to the nationwide
ceasefire but differences have remained on the economic and humanitarian proposals,
in particular those concerning the manner in which salaries would be paid to civil
2/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

servants, the reactivation of the ports of Al-Hudaydah for imports and the opening
of Sana’a airport for international flights.
From the beginning, the United Nations has been clear that these humanitarian
measures need to be introduced. Indeed, in my very first briefing to the Security
Council I called for the opening of the Sana’a International Airport (see S/PV.8235).
The parties also need to agree on the release of more prisoners and detainees. I am
encouraged that the parties will be expected to meet soon to make progress on this
file.
I know that the negotiations on the joint declaration have been cumbersome
and frustrating and that they cannot continue indefinitely. But let me be clear, the
parties can slice and dice the set of proposals contained in the joint declaration in
any way they wish. It can be a whole package. It can be done in parts. I have no
objection to the way the measures are adopted, because I still believe that it is right
to pursue the proposals contained in the declaration. Furthermore, in the last few
days alone, I have received candid advice from Member States in the region that now
is the time to pursue a successful conclusion to the negotiations.
In any case, irrespective of the outcome of the negotiations, we need to
maintain our focus and that of the parties on the primary goal, which is to resume an
inclusive political process designed to comprehensively end the conflict. Agreeing
on a political end-state is of fundamental importance. It is the way the war ends. That
is why, for the parties, resuming the political process is more than an obligation — it
is a duty.
Let me end on a more positive note. Progress on the Riyadh agreement is
significant. It shows us that reconciliation between opposing parties can be achieved.
Despite all their bitter opposition, and with the tireless efforts of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia as mediator, the two sides made peace with each other. It therefore can
be done.

21-006243/37

S/2021/56

Annex II
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
The most urgent priority in Yemen right now is to prevent a massive famine.
The data show that 16 million people will go hungry this year. Already, about 50,000
people are essentially starving to death in what is essentially a small famine. Another
5 million are just one step behind them. Every decision the world makes right now
must take this into account.
On Sunday, the United States announced it will designate Ansar Allah as
a specially designated terrorist entity and foreign terrorist organization under
United States domestic law. For months, aid agencies have unanimously opposed
this designation. They believe it will accelerate Yemen’s slide into a large-scale
famine. The reasons agencies hold that belief are not well enough understood in
some quarters, so I am going to use most of my time today to explain them.
Security Council members will recall that I told them last month that Yemen
imports 90 per cent of its food. Nearly all that food is brought in through commercial
channels. Aid agencies give people vouchers or cash to buy commercially imported
food in the market. Aid agencies cannot — they simply cannot — replace the
commercial import system. What this means is that what the commercial importers
do is the single-biggest determinant of life and death in Yemen.
I also told the Council last month that we had been talking to the commercial
traders and asking them what impact the then-mooted United States designation
would have on them. They told us — and I told the Council — that they were not sure
they would be able to continue importing food into Yemen in those circumstances.
They thought the suppliers, bankers, shippers and insurers they do business with
could decline to do business with them if the designation proceeded. Council
members and I may think that the suppliers, bankers, insurers and shippers should
behave differently. That does not matter. What matters is what they decide to do.
Accordingly, we went back to the commercial traders over the last few days to
ask what they now think, given that the designation has happened. Already, Yemenis
are crowding into markets and shops to stockpile whatever they can afford. Families
are terrified that no more food or other supplies will make it into the country. The
Yemeni companies that bring in most of the food are using words like “disaster”,
“havoc” and “unimaginable” when they describe to us what they fear is coming.
For years, these companies have been moving mountains to sustain their very
risk-averse global supply chains — including the suppliers, banks, insurers and
shipping lines. Some suppliers, banks, shippers and insurers are ringing up their
Yemeni partners and saying they now plan to walk away from Yemen altogether.
They say the risks are too high. They fear being accidentally or otherwise caught up
in United States regulatory action that would put them out of business or into jail.
Some of the Yemeni traders’ suppliers, bankers, shippers and insurers are
saying they are hoping they can keep going. If they can, they say, their best-case
estimate is that costs could go up by 400 per cent. That will make it too expensive
for many importers to keep doing business. And in any case, hardly anyone in Yemen
could afford to buy food brought in at those prices.
The United States has said it will introduce licences so that some humanitarian
aid and imports can continue. Would that help? Well, first, those licences do not
yet exist. Aid agencies have no confirmed details on how they will work or what
activities will be eligible. The details apparently will not be ready until the day that
the designation takes force, on 19 January. But secondly, licences and exemptions
4/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

for humanitarian agencies will not solve the problem. As I have said, it is not
humanitarian agencies that are importing most of the food.
This is not the only problem we face. The Security Council has heard me
explain many times what is needed to prevent famine in Yemen: protection of
civilians, access for aid workers, funding for the aid operation, support for the
economy and peace.
Let us start with the protection of civilians. I condemn in the strongest
possible terms the attack on Aden airport that Mr. Griffiths just described. More
than 20 people died, including three humanitarian workers. Dozens more people
were injured.
Humanitarian access problems in Government-held areas have become worse
in the last few months. Recent incidents include warehouse break-ins, detention of
aid workers, seizure of relief items and attacks on humanitarian premises. The trend
is worrisome. But the most severe challenges to rapid and unimpeded access remain
in the north. I have no good news on that to report this month.
Neither do I have good news on funding for the aid operation either.
Humanitarian crises need continuous funding until the emergency is over. Past
contributions to the aid operation in Yemen saved millions of lives. But those past
contributions will not save a single life tomorrow or the next day. That money has
already been spent.
In 2020, we received $1.7 billion for the United Nations response plan, which
represents about half of what we needed; that amount was less than half of what we
got the year before. As Council members know, most of the reduction was because
Gulf donors gave much less last year.
The aid operation used to help 13.5 million people every month. Now we are
helping just over 9 million. Less money means stopping key programmes, including
food aid. Mr. Beasley will tell Council members what is going to happen next.
The 2021 response plan will be released next month. It will be similar to the
2020 plan — probably around $3.4 billion. We call on donors to pledge generously
and to disburse funds quickly.
On the economy, beyond what I have said, let me just repeat that Yemen needs
regular foreign-exchange injections to stabilize the currency, finance critical import
flows and lower prices in local markets. This worked well in the past, and it could
work again.
On progress towards peace, I have nothing to add to what Mr. Griffiths has
already said.
Let me, to clear any doubt, summarize my main message today. I am not
questioning the intent of the United States invocation of the foreign terrorist
organization designation. I am answering three questions. First, what is the likely
humanitarian impact? The answer is a large-scale famine the likes of which we
have not seen for nearly 40 years. Secondly, would licences and exemptions for aid
agencies prevent that result? The answer is no. Thirdly, what, then, would prevent
such a result? The answer is a reversal of the decision, as well as, of course, action
on all the other issues on which we brief the Security Council every month.

21-006245/37

S/2021/56

Annex III
Briefing by the Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
David Beasley
The Council has just heard from Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Griffiths, so I will not
repeat what they said, but it is my responsibility to tell the Security Council that the
foreign terrorist organization designation is a catastrophe for Yemen’s civilians.
As Mr. Lowcock just highlighted, more than 16 million people face a hunger
crisis in 2021, including 5 million already on the brink of starvation. The World Food
Programme (WFP), which currently reaches 13 million people with some form of
food assistance, concluded that the foreign terrorist organization designation would
force 80 per cent of Yemen’s population — 24 million people — into severe hunger, at
level 3, 4 or 5 of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) Acute Food
Insecurity classification. Within a couple of months, the 5 million people already in
IPC level 4 could be pushed over the abyss into famine. We are looking at an all-out
disaster in Yemen. Even worse, the foreign terrorist organization designation comes
at a time when our Yemen operation is already desperately underfunded.
Last November, I told the Council (see S/2020/1109) that the WFP needed
$2.6 billion for 2021 to support 13 million people, including reversing the April
2020 move to half-rations for 9 million people. I warned that, to stave off famine, we
needed — at an absolute minimum — $1.9 billion for 2021. So far, we have received
a mere $386 million in confirmed contributions. For the next six months alone, we
still require $860 million.
The foreign terrorist organization designation will ratchet up the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen to a whole new and terrifying level. As a result, up to 4 million
people may receive no food assistance at all, and the entire population of Yemen
could be plunged into an unparalleled hunger and humanitarian crisis. That means
no food, no medicines and no fuel — the basic necessities of life out of reach for
millions, building to a massive famine in 2021.
I have to warn the Council that I am concerned about the safety and security of
humanitarian workers in Yemen. Imagine what 24 million starving people would do
if they see trucks with food heading to other areas. The foreign terrorist organization
designation may finally break the Yemeni people. It will also make it even harder for
the humanitarian community to relieve their suffering.
Whatever decision is made, it is critical that the humanitarian community
can carry out our life-saving work without fear of sanctions or censure. I believe
the foreign terrorist organization designation should be reassessed, re-evaluated and
reversed. That is the only way to avoid the catastrophic famine that now threatens to
overwhelm Yemen.

6/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English and Chinese]
I wish to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Executive Director Beasley for their briefings. I also welcome the participation
of Mr. Ahmed Binmubarak, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Yemen,
in today’s meeting.
Currently, Yemen is facing multiple challenges, such as violent conflict,
economic crisis, the coronavirus disease pandemic and food security. It is deeply
mired in a large-scale humanitarian disaster. The tumultuous situation in Yemen
and the plight of its people are indeed distressing. All parties in Yemen and the
international community must take immediate action.
First, it is critical to achieve a ceasefire and stop the violence as soon as
possible. Violent conflicts continue in northern Yemen. The situation in AlHudaydah and other places is escalating. Saudi Arabia continues to suffer from
sporadic missile and drone attacks. China is deeply concerned. We have seen time
and again that military means cannot solve the problem and that the use of force
can only bring disaster. We call upon all parties to the conflict to heed the call
by Secretary-General Guterres and Special Envoy Griffiths for a ceasefire, and to
immediately cease hostilities in order to create the conditions for advancing the
political process. The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
should continue to carry out its mandate to monitor the ceasefire so as to ensure the
smooth operation of Al-Hudaydah port.
China strongly condemns the 30 December attack on the Aden International
Airport and deeply mourns the lives lost. China firmly rejects all attacks on civilians
and civilian facilities. We call on all parties involved in the Yemeni issue to put the
interests of Yemen and its people first and to refrain from taking any action that
might escalate tensions.
Secondly, the political process must be accelerated. Last month, Yemen’s new
Government was sworn in, which represents key progress in the implementation of
the Riyadh agreement, as well as an important step towards stabilizing the situation
in Yemen, improving State institutions and enhancing political cooperation among
parties. China welcomes that achievement and appreciates the responsible attitudes
shown by the relevant parties in Yemen and the contributions made by certain
countries of the region, such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
A United Nations-led comprehensive and inclusive political process is the only
way to end the conflict in Yemen. We encourage all parties in Yemen to maintain an
open dialogue, build mutual trust and support Special Envoy Griffiths and countries
of the region in actively carrying out good offices to push the parties to bridge
their differences and build consensus, with a view to restarting the comprehensive
political settlement process at an early date and restoring peace, stability and order
in Yemen. Throughout the process, Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity must be fully upheld and respected.
China takes note of the decisions taken by certain countries against the
Houthis. We agree with the evaluations and comments of the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, Executive Director Beasley of the World Food
Programme and many countries and are seriously concerned about the possible
political and humanitarian impact of that move. I want to emphasize that the Yemeni
21-006247/37

S/2021/56

issue must be resolved through United Nations-led peace negotiations. That is the
primary goal, and the entire international community should play a constructive role
in that regard.
Thirdly, together we must save lives. The people of Yemen are the primary
victims of the crisis. The briefings we just heard showed the severity of the economic
and humanitarian situation in Yemen. Oil shortages, currency depreciation and the
spread of the pandemic threaten all aspects of people’s lives. The latest Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification findings regarding Yemen, published last month,
once again sounded the alarm of famine. We must help save lives. There is no time
to lose.
The international community, especially the donor countries, must increase
financial and in-kind assistance to Yemen to prevent further deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis on the ground, and make every effort to avoid the spread of famine.
United Nations agencies must efficiently and effectively carry out humanitarian
operations, strengthen coordination with countries of the region and regional
organizations and work together to help the Yemeni people overcome the difficulties
they face. All parties to the conflict must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access and ensure that humanitarian supplies are delivered to the people in need and
that vulnerable groups, such as women and children, are effectively protected. The
problem of the FSO SAFER oil tanker must also be resolved as soon as possible.
For years, China has provided significant food aid to Yemen, reaching most of
its provinces. China recently signed a bilateral agreement on economic and technical
cooperation with Yemen and will provide ¥100 million in assistance through a
bilateral channel. We will continue to provide rice and medical supplies and other
humanitarian assistance to the Government and the people of Yemen in order to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Fourthly, we must strengthen regional security cooperation. The settlement of
the Yemeni issue hinges on a good regional security environment. Recently, we have
seen a turnaround in the relations among relevant countries of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, thereby injecting new impetus into easing the situation in the Gulf region.
China welcomes that. Countries in the Gulf region should not only be beneficiaries
of regional peace and security but also be active promoters and effectively play
a leading role. We call on the international community and the Gulf countries to
work together to launch an inclusive dialogue process through building a multilateral
dialogue platform in the Gulf region with a view to forging consensus on regional
security issues, enhancing mutual trust, resolving differences and friction and
maintaining peace and stability in the Gulf region.

8/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Executive Director Beasley for their briefings. I also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Yemen Mr. Binmubarak.
It is saddening and frustrating that, despite the worsening humanitarian
situation and all peace efforts, hostilities in Yemen continue, causing more and more
civilian casualties.
We strongly condemn the heinous attack on Aden International Airport on 30
December, which took place just after the landing of a plane carrying the members
of the new Government. According to credible assessments, the attack — in which
27 people were killed, including three staff members of the International Committee
of the Red Cross — was likely carried out by the Houthis. It is another tragic event
for the Yemeni people and another deliberate and indiscriminate targeting of civilian
infrastructure — clearly a serious violation of international humanitarian law.
Unfortunately, there have been other attacks, in Al-Hudaydah and Taiz, that
have claimed numerous civilian lives. We call on all parties to adhere to international
humanitarian law and to protect civilians, especially women and children.
On a more positive note, we welcome the recent formation of the new
Government of Yemen as an essential step to the implementation of the Riyadh
agreement. Regardless of the Government’s current challenges, we hope that this
step will contribute to a comprehensive political solution in Yemen, with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women. In that regard, we remind all parties
that there is no military solution to the conflict, and we call upon them to agree on
the joint declaration without delay.
Regarding the humanitarian situation in Yemen, we are very concerned about
the rising food insecurity there — almost 50,000 people are estimated to be facing
famine by July. This calls for immediate, unhindered humanitarian access and
stepping up humanitarian assistance, as well as ensuring that fuel and commercial
items are imported.
We are concerned about the possible impact of the designation by the United
States of Ansar Allah as a foreign terrorist organization, especially as it relates to
the economic situation and the delivery of humanitarian aid. It might also complicate
United Nations efforts to negotiate a political solution.
As a final note, we underline the obligation of all parties to prevent violations
of international human rights law and to ensure accountability for all violations and
abuses. We also reiterate our full support of the recommendation to the Security
Council of the Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts on Yemen —
to integrate the human rights dimensions of the conflict in Yemen more fully into
its agenda.

21-006249/37

S/2021/56

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme, for their briefings.
We are very concerned about the already catastrophic worsening situation
in Yemen. The much-needed political process and humanitarian response are
under threat.
France strongly condemns the 30 December attack in Aden against the new
Government of Yemen, to which we express our full support. The attack caused
the deaths of more than 20 civilians, including three humanitarian workers. That
is unacceptable. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian workers, is an
absolute priority. We support the independent work of the United Nations Panel of
Experts to identify those responsible, who must be sanctioned and tried.
I welcome the formation of the new Government of Yemen. I also welcome
the presence here today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
Yemen. The Government will have to work towards an inclusive political solution
to the crisis. It will have the serious responsibility of working for the Yemeni
people in putting an end to the seizure and misappropriation of public funds and
humanitarian assistance.
We therefore urge all parties, in particular the Houthis, to renounce the
escalation of violence, to move away from the military approach and to engage, in
good faith, in direct talks under the leadership of Special Envoy Griffiths, who has
our full support. Within the Security Council and beyond, all international players
must make every effort to reach a ceasefire agreement and a negotiated solution.
France is mobilized to support those efforts.
The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, as Mr. Lowcock and Mr.
Beasley aptly described. With each passing day, the famine is becoming an even
more implacable reality for many Yemenis. The parties must ensure the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to all those in need and respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law. In that regard, we are extremely concerned about the
serious humanitarian consequences that could result from the recent decisions taken
by the United States.
Finally, it is essential to allow the United Nations-mandated inspection
mission to immediately access the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Urgent action is needed if
we want to avoid a disaster.
France will remain fully mobilized and engaged to promote peace in Yemen
and de-escalation at the regional level.

10/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
Allow me to begin by welcoming to this meeting Mr. Ahmed Awad Ahmed
Binmubarak, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Yemen. I also thank
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, David Beasley, for their briefings.
I join other colleagues in conveying my heartfelt and sincere condolences
to the Government and the people of Yemen and to the families of those who were
killed in the attack at Aden International Airport. I also wish a speedy recovery to
those who were grievously injured in that heinous attack.
India strongly condemns the attack and views it as a deliberate attempt to
undermine the ongoing peace efforts in Yemen. The targeting of the civilian airport
and the killing of innocent civilians is unacceptable and cannot be justified for any
reason whatsoever. The perpetrators of this heinous act should be held accountable,
and I urge the international community to support the Government of Yemen in its
efforts to do so.
Similar missile attacks within Yemen and across the border into Saudi Arabia
continued unabated in 2020. A strict implementation of the arms embargo, as
envisaged in resolution 2216 (2015), and its effective monitoring are necessary to
create the conditions for the complete elimination of such threats in future.
We are also saddened by the tragic death of staff members of the International
Committee of the Red Cross in the airport attack. These recurring incidents highlight
the safety and security issues faced by humanitarian workers in Yemen. India
commends the valiant efforts of all humanitarian workers to ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Yemeni people in need, despite the daunting challenges
they face.
However, this indiscriminate act should not be allowed to overshadow the
recent significant achievements in the pursuit of peace in Yemen — the formation
of the new Cabinet and the security redeployments in southern Yemen, as envisaged
under the Riyadh agreement.
India welcomes those positive steps, which have triggered a wave of hope.
We appreciate the role played by Saudi Arabia and others in facilitating these
developments. We also commend the new Government’s resolve to continue its
efforts to achieve peace and stability in Yemen, despite the recent attacks.
In 2020, there was also an increase in threats arising out of Yemen on
commercial ships navigating the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. India is deeply
worried by that trend, which threatens not only the safe passage of commercial
vessels but also maritime security in the region. That issue deserves the Security
Council’s immediate attention and calls for greater deliberation.
We also remain concerned by the uptick in incidents of violence in AlHudaydah and Taiz, which has resulted in civilian deaths, especially of women and
children. Those attacks are a flagrant violation of the ceasefire provisions of the
Stockholm Agreement, and I urge all parties to fulfil their commitments under the
Agreement. The preservation and full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
is even more critical today as there are predictions of a widespread famine in Yemen
in 2021. It is extremely important that the Al-Hudaydah port and the other Red Sea
ports remain operational to facilitate humanitarian shipments to Yemen.
21-0062411/37

S/2021/56

In his briefing, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock referred to the plight of
the millions of Yemenis who face severe food insecurity and the Yemeni children
who suffer from acute malnourishment. I cannot overstate the need for prioritizing
humanitarian assistance to the people of Yemen. Having provided food and medical
aid amounting to $5 million in the past, India will continue its assistance to the
people of Yemen.
India’s relationship with Yemen is centuries old, and its cornerstone is our
people-people ties. The two countries are connected through the Indian Ocean,
which has contributed to the flow of people between the two nations. In the past,
Indian freedom fighters visited Aden to support Yemen’s independence; today
Yemeni students come to India to study. There are nearly 300,000 Indians of Yemeni
origin living in India, and 200,000 Indian-origin diaspora members in Yemen. A
large number of Indians were working in Yemen until 2015, when we were forced to
evacuate them. That strong connection with Yemen makes the instability, violence
and suffering in Yemen painful for India and all Indians.
If we are serious about finding a long-term solution to Yemen’s challenges,
then the Council should press urgently for a sustainable and comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict. I reaffirm India’s steadfast commitment to a Yemeni-led
and Yemeni-owned political process with the goal of achieving an inclusive and
peacefully negotiated settlement to the conflict. We urge all Yemeni parties to work
efforts towards such a settlement.
We take note of Special Envoy Martin’s efforts to initiate direct talks between
the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah to finalize the joint declaration. We believe
that creating a conducive environment for such talks is also vital. The cessation of
violence and other confidence-building measures, like prisoner exchanges, can help
create such an environment. We encourage all parties to explore those measures.
Before I conclude, let me also welcome the reconciliation and rapprochement
among Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries and the signing of the AlUla Declaration at the recently concluded GCC Summit in Saudi Arabia. India
acknowledges the key role of a unified GCC in promoting peace, stability and
prosperity in Yemen. We also look forward to enhancing India’s institutional
dialogue and partnership with the GCC in the coming months.

12/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to start by thanking each of our three briefers this morning for the stark
and really powerful messages they put before us. I also want to thank each of them
for the courage and conviction that they bring to this table, and I think none of us
today can be in any doubt that we simply have to step up to meet our responsibilities
as a Security Council as we look at Yemen. In particular, I want to thank Executive
Director Beasley for the extraordinary work that his aid workers are doing on the
ground. But I will also say to him that I was very marked by his own remark today
about the safety of his workers, and one thing I want to assure him of is Ireland’s
support and concern for his work in Yemen.
I would like to acknowledge also the presence today of newly appointed
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister Binmubarak. I welcome the Minister to the
Council. We congratulate him and his colleagues on his appointment. And I know we
will hear from him a little bit later in the meeting. He has extraordinarily important
responsibilities, unfortunately at very difficult and dark times, but Ireland certainly
will work with him to be a constructive partner and to bring hope to the Yemeni
people.
It is deeply regrettable that the first meeting of the Security Council on Yemen
in 2021 takes place in the shadow of such a heinous and indiscriminate attack as took
place at Aden International Airport in December. There is no other way to put it:
that was an unacceptable act of violence against civilian targets. It was also a direct
attack on the Yemeni Government, represented at this meeting today. But it was also,
as I see it, an affront to United Nations efforts to support an inclusive peace process.
We support calls for an independent investigation of the attack, and we look forward
to developments in that regard.
We want to offer our sincere condolences to the people of Yemen and to those
who have lost loved ones. We wish a swift recovery to all the injured. Of those who
tragically lost their lives, I know there were a number of International Committee of
the Red Cross staff members. Their deaths serve to remind us of the daily courage
and extraordinary commitment of all humanitarian workers in areas of conflict.
Deputy Minister Yasmin Al-Awadhi, one of the few women in the new Government,
was also sadly killed. We deeply regret all loss of life.
The Aden attack is a stark and terrible reminder of the urgent need for a
political solution to the conflict in Yemen. We know, we have said it again and
again, that there can be no military solution — so today again, we call on all actors
in Yemen to return to the negotiating table and to demonstrate a genuine, sincere
commitment to compromise and to dialogue.
We welcome recent progress towards the implementation of the Riyadh
agreement, including the formation of the new power-sharing Government, and call
on all parties to the conflict to build on that as an opportunity and to move towards
a comprehensive settlement to the conflict.
We fully support Mr. Griffiths’ efforts, and we call on all parties to the conflict
to engage urgently and seriously with his work, including by declaring an immediate
nationwide ceasefire. He himself used the term “cumbersome”, and frustrating as it
may be, we know it is the only way forward.
I want to underline today also that we want to see all obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human rights law respected.
21-0062413/37

S/2021/56

I want to underline today that we see a way forward that, in our view, must be
inclusive, if it is to succeed. A truly inclusive discussion on the parameters for peace
in Yemen simply must include the voices of women and young people, at every single
stage of the process. Evidence shows us again and again that ensuring women’s
empowerment and their full, equal and meaningful participation in decisionmaking is critical to conflict resolution, but also to the creation of sustainable and
lasting peace. We were disappointed to note the absence of any women in the new
Cabinet, and we hope that the important issue of women’s inclusion in key political
councils will be addressed in the very near future. As co-Chair of the Council’s
work on women and peace and security, along with our Mexican colleagues, we
plan to monitor that and to keep in touch with the Yemeni Government. We hope to
see progress.
A second terrible, horrific shadow stalks Yemen as we begin this year — that
of famine. Years of conflict have created this, the world’s worst humanitarian crisis.
Mr. Lowcock could not have been clearer with us today in again reminding us that
not just will over half the population face crisis levels of food insecurity or worse
by mid-2021, but that this is a growing and accelerating crisis happening before our
eyes. Faced with such catastrophe, the Council simply must resolve to spare no effort
to ensure protection and humanitarian assistance for the most vulnerable, including
all internally displaced persons and marginalized groups in Yemen.
We also believe we must make every effort to facilitate the ability of those
important humanitarian workers we heard our briefers speak about earlier to deliver
aid to those in need. Put simply, lives depend on that. We at this table all have a
shared responsibility to help with that.
We are deeply concerned by the implications of the decision of the United
States to designate the Houthis as a foreign terrorist organization. We share the
concerns we have heard expressed at this meeting this morning and by many other
leading humanitarian actors, including Martin Griffiths, David Beasley and Mark
Lowcock today. The potential humanitarian consequences of such a designation are
serious, as is the impact on prospects for progress on the political track in Yemen. We
believe it is incumbent upon the United States to ensure that all possible measures
are immediately taken to minimize the implications of that designation for the
Yemeni people.
Ireland is also increasingly alarmed at the situation regarding the oil tanker FSO
SAFER. That is the definition of a ticking time bomb, which threatens a catastrophic
environmental impact on Yemen, and indeed on the region. While we welcome the
incremental progress made, we call on all parties to engage in a constructive spirit to
ensure United Nations teams can access the tanker in the very near future.
In conclusion, the shameful humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen has persisted
for far too long and threatens to get worse as we just heard today. We call on all
parties to urgently do everything in their power to bring this conflict to an end
and to bring hope to the people of Yemen. Surely, the Council has heard enough
today to convince us of that urgency. Frankly, the Yemeni people surely have
suffered enough.

14/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I congratulate the Government and the people of Tunisia on the tenth
anniversary of the Tunisian revolution. My delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr.
Ahmed Awad Ahmed Binmubarak, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen, to this
meeting and thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley
for their useful briefings.
Kenya strongly condemns the attack on the civilian Aden International
Airport, which we regard as a fundamentally terrorist act, and condemn the use of
terrorism to advance any political position. The perpetrators of that attack should be
held to account by the Security Council and by all responsible States, in the region
and globally. We express our deepest condolences to the Government and the people
of the Republic of Yemen for the lives lost during that detestable attack.
Kenya commends the Government’s determination to continue working for
the Yemeni people despite the serious continuing threats to it and its personnel. We
welcome the news of the formation of a new Cabinet with the inclusion of members
from the Southern Transitional Council, as well as the disengagement of troops in
Abyan province and Aden city. Those events demonstrate the commitment by both
sides to the Riyadh agreement and constitute a significant step in the right direction.
We wish the new Cabinet every success.
While we acknowledge those important steps towards achieving security that
can be the basis of sustained peace, we urge all parties to remain focused on the
signing of the joint declaration for a nationwide ceasefire, which is a key priority and
a necessary deliverable in 2021.
Kenya assures the Special Envoy of its full support in the mediation process and
its actualization of a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned peace process. We appreciate
the briefing by Mr. Griffiths and note his openness to deal with all parties who can
bring peace and reconciliation to Yemen. However, we urge him to show caution in
the choices made under such an open approach.
While we understand that making peace requires settlement between
combatants, we also believe that the international community does not wish for peace
processes to reward terrorism by according perpetrators with political recognition
and the legitimacy it implies. A balance must be struck, in a clear manner, if we are
to have a sustained peace in Yemen that is a platform for the greater regional stability
the Council seeks. We hope that the process, in addition to mediating successfully
between the parties, will enable the dismantling of the institutions and networks that
facilitate radicalization and recruitment into terrorism in Yemen.
We urge the Council to take note of the role of external actors, particularly
States that have serious security interests in the region and be willing to undertake
actions that allow them to allow Yemen the benefits of a Yemeni-led and Yemeniowned peace process.
Despite the positive progress on the political front, the humanitarian situation
sadly continues to deteriorate. We appreciate the candour of Mr. Beasley in his
briefing on the challenges of providing humanitarian aid, not only in Yemen but
with regard to the expanding needs in different conflict zones. The scale of the crisis
is indeed being made worse, and the desperation being experienced can complicate
and reverse the Council’s duty to deal with threats to peace and security.

21-0062415/37

S/2021/56

We urge the upscaling of contributions by the existing donors, and also agree
with Mr. Beasley’s call for the more financially able countries in the region to do
even more to assist the people of Yemen overcome this emergency.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to Yemen’s peace and security
and all efforts in assisting its suffering people.

16/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the presence of the Yemeni Foreign Minister. We would also like
to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
and the Executive Director of the World Food Programme, David Beasley, for their
briefings and very useful remarks.
I begin by reiterating our full support for the Special Envoy in finding a political
solution to the situation in Yemen and by acknowledging the efforts of humanitarian
actors to reduce the human suffering amid the most serious humanitarian crisis
facing us today.
We therefore once again echo the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
That is essential in order to better address the pandemic, which is exacerbating the
grave situation in Yemen. Mexico condemns in the strongest terms the attacks on
Aden airport on 30 December and on the city of Al-Hudaydah on 1 January. We
extend our condolences to the Yemeni people and the families of the victims, and we
particularly regret the death of three aid workers of the International Committee of
the Red Cross.
For Mexico, the increase in violence in Yemen over the past month is of great
concern. We strongly call on the Houthi militias and all military groups in Yemen
to lay down their weapons and refrain from any act that incites violence against
the civilian population. Violence only breeds more violence. We therefore call on
the parties to engage in dialogue and actively participate in the political process
facilitated by the United Nations.
We acknowledge the efforts that culminated in the formation of the new
Cabinet of the Government of Yemen, which was recently sworn in and includes
representatives of the Southern Transitional Council, as part of the implementation
of the Riyadh agreement. We regret, however, that the Cabinet does not include any
women, and we underline the importance of promoting the meaningful participation
of women both in the Government and in all other aspects of the country’s political,
economic and social life.
Mexico is following closely and with great concern the humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which is impacting more than 80 per cent of its population. As we have
heard, the risk of famine seems imminent. The population affected by food insecurity
is unprecedented. There are more than 24 million people who are highly dependent
on the humanitarian assistance they receive. If that trend continues, in the coming
months, as we have heard, 5 million people will be at the most severe stage of food
insecurity. That is in addition to the presence of diseases such as cholera, malaria
and measles, among others.
The impact that the conf lict has had on education is also of major concern
to my country. The attacks on educational infrastructure represent a violation of
international humanitarian law, and their consequences have been devastating
for the education of thousands of girls and boys. Moreover, that increases the
risk of children becoming victims of sexual violence or targets for recruitment
by armed groups. Mexico urges the Government of Yemen to cooperate with
UNICEF and with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conf lict in order to restore and re-establish educational
services with the speed that the matter deserves, taking into account the priority
that the right to education represents.
21-0062417/37

S/2021/56

While commending the efforts of humanitarian organizations and United
Nations agencies, we recognize the need for humanitarian assistance to be
accompanied by a cessation of hostilities, political stability and measures to promote
economic recovery. In that context, we are very concerned about the impact that the
recent designation of one of the parties to the conflict as a terrorist organization will
have on much-needed humanitarian work. Such a designation will affect the funding
of humanitarian organizations and their ability to provide medical assistance, which
is contrary to their obligations under international humanitarian law. We therefore
stress that the space for humanitarian work in crises such as the one we are dealing
with today must be safeguarded.
Finally, we express our concern over the continuing delays in the inspection
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. It is urgent that the deployment of the United Nations
team be facilitated in order to avoid a possible environmental catastrophe, which
would further complicate the critical humanitarian situation in Yemen and the
whole region.

18/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Lieutenant
General Guha for their briefings on the situation in Yemen. My thanks also go to Mr.
David Beasley for his insightful presentation.
From one briefing to the next, we have listened to the leaders of United
Nations and humanitarian agencies describe an increasingly untenable situation in
Yemen, especially for the civilian population, who for 10 years have been suffering
the torments of war and its devastation. Every time we rejoice in a small glimmer of
hope, those hopes are quickly dashed. While the release of thousands of prisoners
and, most recently, the formation of the consensus Government, led by Prime
Minister Maeen Abdulmalek Saeed, represent genuine progress, the 30 December
attacks on Aden airport and near the presidential palace are very regrettable.
We therefore call on the new Yemeni Government to work, as a priority, to
restore security and stability in the country. We call on all parties to work together
for the return of peace in Yemen and for the good of all its people. In that regard, my
country calls on regional actors and Security Council members with influence on
the parties in conflict to step up their efforts to bring the parties closer together and
to support them in the negotiation process.
In that regard, my delegation would like to commend the mediation efforts
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which contributed to the formation of the unity
Government in Yemen.
Everything must be done to de-escalate the situation and give the negotiations
a real chance based on the proposals of Special Envoy Griffiths.
At this stage of my remarks, like the United Nations agencies on the ground, I
wish to draw the Council’s attention to the consequences that the recent designation
of the Houthis as a foreign terrorist organization could have. It could in fact have a
negative impact on the delivery of humanitarian aid in some regions of the country
and, as a result, hinder the political process.
There is an urgent need to address the already difficult humanitarian situation,
made more complex by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the lack of funding for
assistance programmes, the continuation of deadly military campaigns and food
insecurity. Recent figures published by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Food Programme and UNICEF indicate the emergence of
several pockets of famine and acute food insecurity in the country, which threaten
several million Yemenis, including women and children, during the current year.
That is why we are urgently appealing to donors to show more generosity towards
the Yemeni population so much in need. We especially call on the countries that
announced contributions at the donors’ conference for Yemen, particularly those in
the region, to honour their commitments in order to ensure the funding of the aid
programmes on which several thousand Yemenis now depend.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the Niger’s strong support for Special
Envoy Griffiths as well as the Heads of United Nations agencies, for their tireless
commitment to restoring dialogue among the Yemeni parties so as to lay the
foundations for a way out of the crisis, which has lasted too long and necessarily
requires the resumption of a genuinely inclusive political process, led by the Yemenis
themselves.
21-0062419/37

S/2021/56

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I would first like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and Executive Director Beasley for their introductory remarks. Norway
joins the Security Council’s consideration of the situation in Yemen after some six
years of conflict. The use of military force has led only to human suffering and the
destruction of an already fragile country.
Yemen is experiencing the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. Pockets of
famine-like conditions have returned to Yemen for the first time in two years. It
is crucial, perhaps now more than ever, for the parties to the conflict to agree to
meet in direct consultations, under the auspices of Special Envoy Griffiths, aimed
at bridging differences with regard to the joint declaration, and to agree on a
nationwide ceasefire, humanitarian and economic measures and the resumption of
political consultations.
The establishment of a unity Government in Aden and the steps taken to
implement the Riyadh agreement are highly welcome. We appreciate the efforts of all
parties in that regard, especially Saudi Arabia. It is now important to ensure further
and continued implementation as well as a commitment to stability in the south.
I echo the comments made by the briefers and colleagues and strongly condemn
the attacks on Aden airport and the presidential palace on 30 December, which left
several civilians dead or injured, including three humanitarian workers from the
International Committee of the Red Cross. That was an unacceptable assault on
the political process, civilians and humanitarian workers. Our thoughts are with
the victims’ families and relatives. We support the Panel of Experts on Yemen and
expect all parties to cooperate with it. We welcome an independent examination to
establish the facts around the attacks.
Furthermore, we are concerned by the imminent United States designation of
Ansar Allah, a group affiliated with the Houthis, as a foreign terrorist organization.
We fear that such an action may exacerbate the already dire humanitarian situation,
worsen the economy and impede the political process. It is important that any
measures taken do not negatively affect humanitarian activity and imports to Yemen,
including by commercial actors.
We see that the only way to resolve this crisis and bring peace and stability
to Yemen is through a broad, inclusive political process. Such a process cannot
be successful without the full, equal and meaningful participation of women. The
participation of women and youth in all stages of peace processes is imperative
to reach a sustainable peace. In that respect, we stand ready to assist the Yemeni
Government to implement its national action plan on women and peace and
security. We also remain particularly concerned by the blatant violations of
children’s rights in Yemen. The recruitment and use of children as soldiers must
stop immediately. Schools must be a safe place for children to learn, in line with
the Safe Schools Declaration.
The continuing cycle of violence and numerous reports of civilian deaths and
injuries in Yemen is of concern. It is imperative that all parties to the conflict respect
international humanitarian law and ensure the full protection of civilians, especially
children. We are alarmed by the humanitarian situation and risk of famine, further
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic and continued violence. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 47,000 Yemenis may be
at risk of starving to death by the end of June of this year, and another 5 million are
20/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

only one step behind — and that is if we keep the humanitarian contributions at the
current level.
This is appalling. We urge all donors, including regional ones, to make early
and generous contributions. The economic crisis and the devaluation of the rial is
further escalating an already critical situation. It is important to find ways to support
the Yemeni rial and prevent further suffering of the Yemeni people.
The most shocking component of this humanitarian crisis is that it is entirely
caused, and prolonged by, the conflict. This means that it is also entirely preventable.
We urge all parties to allow sufficient imports of food and fuel supplies and to
facilitate full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access. But, ultimately, we call on
all parties to end the conflict. That is a duty owed to the people of Yemen.

21-0062421/37

S/2021/56

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We welcome the participation of the Foreign Minister of Yemen in this videoteleconference. We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths for his update on the
efforts being made to bring the positions of the parties to the Yemeni conflict closer
together and plans to resume the negotiation process. We understand that there is
little reason for optimism at this time. However, we call on the Special Envoy not to
lose hope and to continue his efforts, and we will support and assist him.
We also thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, David Beasley, for their clear-sighted,
impassioned, but, unfortunately, disheartening briefings on the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. I believe the reason for that is clear.
This Security Council meeting is taking place against the backdrop of a
dangerous escalation in Yemen. We strongly condemn the attack on the international
airport in Aden. That criminal act, for which no one has yet claimed responsibility,
resulted in a large number of deaths. We convey our heartfelt condolences to
the families and friends of the victims, and we support conducting an objective
investigation into the attack. To date, the perpetrators have not been identified and
experts, including in Yemen, have put forward various versions.
At the same time, we hear accusations against one side that sound like a final
verdict. Theories such as “highly likely” are no longer acceptable to us and are
unconvincing. We believe that making such allegations without having conclusive
evidence to support them can only complicate the search for a peaceful settlement and
put the sides on a confrontational track. The decision by the United States to designate
Ansar Allah as a terrorist organization may also have negative consequences for the
peace process in Yemen. It may both exacerbate the humanitarian situation in the
country and undermine United Nations efforts to launch negotiations between the
opposing sides. Since the decision has not yet come into force, we call on the United
States to reconsider it.
We stand at a crucial juncture. If we make irreparable mistakes now, it will
jeopardize an eventual settlement and reverse many years of efforts on this track.
Current developments serve to underscore the need for a prompt and
comprehensive political settlement, inter alia in the interest of countering the terrorist
threat. Once again, we reiterate our standing and unchanging position in favour of
putting an end to armed action in Yemen and starting inclusive negotiations. We
believe that numerous contradictions that exist in Yemen, including the issue of its
political and territorial structure, can be resolved only through inclusive dialogue,
which should take into account the legitimate interests of all leading political forces
in the country.
We again reiterate our full support for Special Representative Griffiths as he
works to establish a country-wide ceasefire, develop confidence-building measures
for the prompt launching of the negotiations of the consolidated delegation of official
Yemeni authorities and the Southern Transition Council, with the leadership of
Ansar Allah, to address issues concerning Yemen’s future political structure. On our
part, during our contacts with interested stakeholders, we will continue supporting
United Nations mediation in Yemen. We are convinced that the Security Council
should not take sides, but rather give a hand to the Special Envoy and help the sides
terminate the armed conflict — for instance, by creating a constructive environment
22/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

for inter-State relations in the region. As for the remaining issues, Yemenis will be
able to solve them in the course of negotiations.
In that regard, we welcome the formation of a new coalition Government
of the Republic of Yemen, the first one to include representatives from Yemen’s
southern regions. This important step towards the practical implementation of the
Riyadh agreement was negotiated at the talks involving official Yemeni authorities
and the leadership of Southern Transitional Council that took place in Riyadh. In that
regard, we commend the role of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which
greatly contributed to elaborating those agreements. We count on the continued
implementation of the Riyadh agreement, as that document is aimed at stabilizing
and normalizing the situation in the south of the country.
Yemen is generally recognized to be home to the largest humanitarian crisis
in the world. Therefore, humanitarian assistance to the country must be a priority of
our joint work. In that context, we call on donors, including those from the region
to enhance the required financial support for United Nations programmes providing
basic assistance, including those ensuring food security for the population, access to
clean water and medical services, which are so needed amid the coronavirus disease
pandemic. We recall that humanitarian assistance to Yemen from abroad must be
distributed on a non-discriminatory basis among the entire population of the country.
We once again call for rejecting unilateral steps that hinder the work of humanitarians
and negatively impact the international efforts to settle the Yemeni conflict.
We would like to stress that a political settlement in Yemen would make a big
contribution to de-escalation in the entire subregion. We again invite our colleagues
to pay attention to the need for comprehensive stabilization in the Persian Gulf area,
in particular on the basis of resolution 598 (1987) and national initiatives, including
the Russian collective security concept.

21-0062423/37

S/2021/56

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong,
I also wish to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for their updates. Their continued efforts are invaluable.
We also extend our gratitude to Mr. David Beasley for his participation and
sobering briefing.
The dire situation in Yemen persists. Coupled with the pandemic is food
insecurity and the threat of famine. Currently, many live in famine-like conditions.
We cannot wait for an official declaration, otherwise we would have unjustifiably
missed our window of opportunity. These conditions indicate that we must do more,
and we must do so now. It is to that end that we urge for donations to be made to
the humanitarian response plan, and for financial assistance to be given to support
the economy. The people of Yemen depend on imported goods, and at this moment
cannot afford them to survive. Humanitarian aid is critical to assuaging much of that
suffering, and it is in that vein that we call on all actors within Yemen, and those who
have influence over the situation, to encourage and facilitate the unhindered passage
of humanitarian aid, in accordance with international law.
It cannot be made any clearer that a political solution is the only option. The
worsening of the conflict and its consequences have shown that a military solution
will achieve nothing. We condemn the recent attack at Aden airport, which threatened
the lives of a civilian Government and killed or injured innocent civilians, including
humanitarian staff of the International Committee of the Red Cross. We express our
condolences to the families of the victims and to Yemen and its people, who have
suffered enough. We underscore that the perpetrators of this attack must be held
accountable, and we welcome efforts to establish responsibility for this brazen attack.
The parties to the conflict must prove their commitment to the peace process
and refrain from any action that undermines the political process, runs counter to
calls for a nationwide ceasefire and amounts to violations of international law. We
recognize the Special Envoy’s dedication to achieving a political solution, but we
underscore that, without political will and Yemeni ownership over the process, there
will be no sustainable peace. We have already seen that the parties are capable of
working together and negotiating to overcome differences and advance issues. Such
momentum should not be lost. The transient gains that one side may achieve as a
result of hostilities cannot compare to what can be achieved in a secure and stable
Yemen. Such an environment will benefit all Yemenis and promote economic growth
in the country and the wider region.
In that regard, we underscore the role to be played by those in the international
community, who must remain constructive and avoid all acts that may thwart the
peace process, pose threats to Yemen’s economy or exacerbate the suffering of the
people of Yemen.
The decision of the United States to designate Ansar Allah as a foreign terrorist
organization poses a serious threat to the humanitarian situation and the political
process. We call for serious consideration of this decision to avoid worsening an
already dire humanitarian situation.
In conclusion, we call for concrete steps to be taken towards ensuring the
assessment mission to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The issue has been ongoing for
far too long, and we move closer to an avoidable disaster with each day that goes by.
All the relevant actors must work with the United Nations in good faith to resolve
this issue.
24/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

We reaffirm our support to the Special Envoy and his team as they work
towards concluding the joint declaration. We urge the parties to engage constructively
on that and to prioritize Yemen and its people in doing so.

21-0062425/37

S/2021/56

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock and David Beasley, Executive Director of the World Food
Programme, for their valuable briefings on developments in Yemen. I also welcome
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Awad Ahmed Binmubarak, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Republic of Yemen.
At this, the first meeting of the Security Council on Yemen in the new year, I
would like to send a message of hope and solidarity to the Yemeni people. I hope that
they will enjoy peace and see security and stability restored.
First, I wish to reiterate that Tunisia condemns the attack against members
of the Yemeni Government that occurred on 30 December 2020 at Aden airport, an
attack in which dozens of civilians and some Government officials were killed or
injured. I extend my sincere condolences to the Yemeni people and the families of
the innocent victims, and I wish the injured a speedy recovery.
We also welcome the implementation of the Riyadh agreement by the Yemeni
parties, represented by the legitimate Government and the Southern Transitional
Council. The agreement constitutes an important step on the road to strengthening
and unifying Yemeni efforts to fulfil the Yemeni people’s desire for security, peace
and stability.
In that context, we applaud the formation of the new technocratic Yemeni
Government headed by Maeen Abdulmalek Saeed and the consensus and harmony
that prevailed throughout the process. We also commend the Government on its
move to Aden in spite of all the difficulties and challenges it has faced. That moves
attests to its genuine determination to put an end to the Yemeni crisis and prioritize
the best interests of the Yemeni people. I also hail the pivotal role of Saudi Arabia in
sponsoring the agreement between the parties.
In the same vein, we reiterate our support for the call by the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy for a ceasefire, and we urge all parties to the conflict to
immediately begin observing a humanitarian truce in accordance with resolution
2532 (2020). As we have noted on previous occasions, there can be no military
solution in Yemen, and the current crisis can be overcome only by committing to
a comprehensive and lasting political solution negotiated peacefully under United
Nations auspices, on the basis of the agreed terms of reference and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015).
In that regard, we reaffirm our support for the efforts of Special Envoy
Griffiths to finalize a joint declaration on a comprehensive ceasefire and to facilitate
the resumption of political negotiations between the parties to the conflict, in order
to lay the groundwork for a definitive solution that guarantees the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen.
Tunisia also emphasizes that it is crucial to promote the participation of
Yemeni women at all stages of the political process, as doing so will improve the
chances of forging a lasting and comprehensive peace that reflects the consolidated
perspectives of all social groups, without discrimination.
The humanitarian crisis in Yemen is still a matter of grave concern. The
deteriorating economic and living conditions, the continued rise in food prices
and the collapse of the Yemeni currency raises the spectre of famine, which now
threatens the lives of millions of Yemenis.
26/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

In that context, we underscore that it is imperative to continue providing
humanitarian supplies, keep ports open, remove obstacles and allow aid to be
distributed and delivered to those in need of it. We once again call for civilians to be
spared, civilian infrastructure not to be targeted and compliance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In view of the deteriorating public health situation and the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, we also call for an increase in medical assistance to
address this crisis and for vaccines to be administered as soon as possible to save the
lives of millions of Yemenis.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that the FSO SAFER oil tanker must be inspected
and repaired without delay, given the serious environmental, humanitarian and
economic threats it poses in the Red Sea, especially as the tanker’s hull continues
to deteriorate.

21-0062427/37

S/2021/56

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley
for their compelling briefings.
I want to be clear that the United Kingdom strongly condemns the appalling
attack in Aden on the 30 December. The deaths and wounding of so many civilians
and the targeting of the newly formed Cabinet are unacceptable. Among the dead was
a Deputy Minister, three members of the International Committee of the Red Cross
and a journalist who was there to document a positive moment. Our condolences to
all of their families.
The United Kingdom assesses that it is highly likely that the Houthis were
responsible for that cowardly and craven attack. Only they had the means, the motive
and the opportunity for this clear and deplorable attempt to destabilize the newly
formed Yemeni Government. We welcome the Panel of Experts investigation into
this incident, and we hope that the Panel’s results will be published swiftly.
The Houthis’ attack casts a dark shadow over a group that claims to be
committed to pursuing peace in Yemen. The United Kingdom reiterates its firm
support and its gratitude for the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths and urges all
parties to engage in the United Nations-led negotiations rather than resorting to
violent methods.
As the Special Envoy said, this attack mars what is otherwise an extremely
positive development, that is, the formation of a new Cabinet. It includes members
from across the political spectrum under the auspices of the Saudi-mediated Riyadh
agreement, although the lack of women is notable.
The United Kingdom wholeheartedly welcomes the Cabinet’s courageous
return to Aden to restore services and supports the efforts of the Prime Minister to
bring about the security and economic stability that the Yemenis need. We condemn,
too, the ongoing cross-border attacks by the Houthis against Saudi Arabia and share
United States concerns about the Houthis commitment to peace.
We have taken note of the United States decision to designate the Houthis
and welcome the United States commitment to work with the United Nations, nongovernmental organizations and donors on implementation. It will be critical, as
we heard from Mr. Lowcock, that there be exemptions immediately put in place to
ensure humanitarian activity and that commercial imports can continue unimpeded,
and for the peace process to continue unhindered.
As Mr. Lowcock said, we enter 2021 facing a humanitarian emergency with
Yemen. And as we heard from Mr. Beasley, Yemen is in imminent danger of the
worst famine in decades. Sixteen thousand five-hundred Yemenis are already living
in famine conditions, a number which is set to triple by June 2021 — with more
numbers in the pipeline. Despite this, 2020 ended with a United Nations appeal that
was only half funded. As we heard, that has a drastic impact on the humanitarian
response and its ability to save lives.
As we heard, too, rapid economic decline is driving this crisis, compounded by
severe humanitarian access constraints, particularly in the Houthi-controlled north.
Aid and humanitarian workers must be able to reach those in need and do so safely.
Swift action is needed now — before it is too late — on the economy, humanitarian
funding and humanitarian access in order to avert catastrophe in 2021.
28/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

While the Yemeni rial’s value temporarily stabilized after the formation
of the new Government, it is now depreciating again. Food security is already
getting worse in the absence of external financial assistance to the Central Bank of
Yemen to support food importers. The new Government has the opportunity now
to demonstrate the leadership required to stabilize the economy and seek financial
assistance. We urge the new Government and agencies to swiftly build relationships
with the United Nations and the wider humanitarian community. We will call on
the Government to urgently set out plans for how it will pay salaries and support
currency stability, working with key donors on setting out a financing plan for the
Central Bank and for a package of reform measures.

21-0062429/37

S/2021/56

Annex XVII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I want to thank the briefers and my colleagues for this important discussion
today. I particularly want to thank our briefers for their willingness to be frank and
share their honest views with the Security Council, and especially with the United
States today. I will have more to say on that in a minute.
I think, though, that given what we just heard, it is important that I begin by
saying that the United States remains committed to working with our international
partners and the Yemeni Government to bring peace and security to Yemen. We
must not allow this war to continue indefinitely, and I know the Council fully agrees
that this conflict cannot, and must not, become normalized. There is no military
solution to the conflict, and we definitely support all efforts to bring the parties to a
political consensus.
I have to say, though, that the United States view is that it is sad, but true,
that the political process, which has now been ongoing for many years, has produced
limited results, despite the heroic efforts of the Special Envoy and his team. That
compelled the United States to believe it had to look at additional steps to further
the political process, without which, we agree, there will be no resolution in Yemen.
So, as we heard, to that end Secretary Pompeo announced on 10 January
his intention to designate Ansar Allah as a foreign terrorist organization under
United States law. The Secretary took that action because Ansar Allah engages in
terrorist activity — terrorism — including attacks threatening civilian populations,
infrastructure and commercial activities. Members of the Council, I know, are well
aware of those reprehensible acts.
The United States is the largest global humanitarian donor, and we understand,
we recognize and we hear the concerns that this designation will have an impact on
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. As such, as Secretary Pompeo indicated, we are
planning to put in place measures to reduce the impact of the designation on certain
humanitarian activities and commercial imports into Yemen. I want to reiterate that
we have expressed our readiness, our willingness, to work with the United Nations,
international and non-governmental organizations and other international donors to
address those implications. Those conversations have begun and are continuing.
As we heard, as part of this effort, we will simultaneously, with the
implementation of the designations on 19 January, have the Department of the
Treasury be prepared to provide licenses, pursuant to its legal authorities, related to
the official activities of the United States Government in Yemen. Those activities
include our assistance programming funded by us, as well as our contributions —
and I would remark, we are the largest donor and have a very important interest in
seeing this unfold correctly — as well as to ensure that the official activities of other
international organizations, such as the United Nations, continue.
Let me say that I heard, with great respect, the comments from Executive
Director Beasley, the Under-Secretary-General and the Special Envoy. I want to
assure everyone in the Council and our briefers that their views and concerns are
informing how we approach the designation implementation. We are listening. But
we believe that this step is the right move to send the right signal, if we want the
political process to move forward.
Let me add that the United States joins the others on the Council in condemning
the attacks in Aden on 30 December. I know we are all deeply saddened by the loss
of life, and the United States expresses our sympathies to the families of those who
30/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

were killed. As others have said, this horrific attack took place at a time when there
ought to have been celebrating over Yemeni Cabinet officials returning to Aden.
Instead, we heard about the tragic deaths. The Yemeni and Saudi Governments,
as well as multiple experts, have directly tied this attack to Ansar Allah. And we
believe and note the United Kingdom’s comments and strongly support them.
I conclude by saying we are encouraged that the Houthis have finally agreed
to the scope of the work for the United Nations assessment mission to the FSO
SAFER oil tanker and that the United Nations Office for Project Services is planning
to deploy the team in the coming months. We must now ensure that the assessment
actually takes place and puts an end to months of the Houthis stalling. We urge the
Houthis to ensure the assessment moves forward in a timely manner.
Again, let me reiterate that we know that Yemen currently faces the world’s
largest humanitarian crisis. The United States reiterates the importance of
humanitarian actors being able to conduct their work to deliver life-saving assistance,
and we call on all parties to the conflict to respect international humanitarian law.
The Houthis in particular continue to obstruct aid and use it as a political tool,
causing undue and immense harm to Yemeni citizens. It is critical that aid reach
those in need, reliably and quickly, and we call on all parties to support relief efforts
while also isolating and exposing Ansar Allah for the terrorist organization that it is.
Let me end by again expressing my deep thanks to the briefers for their
presentations today. I look forward to further discussion with Council colleagues.

21-0062431/37

S/2021/56

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Pham Hai Anh,
I would like to welcome to this meeting His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Awad
Ahmed Binmubarak, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Yemen.
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the
World Food Programme, for their comprehensive briefings.
We join Special Envoy Griffiths in welcoming the positive developments in
the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, including the formation of the new
Government in Yemen. That is an important step towards enhanced stability and an
improvement in State institutions, as well as for a lasting political resolution to the
conflict in Yemen.
However, we remain worried about multiple challenges, especially the
prolonged conflict and crisis that the country continues to face in 2021. We strongly
condemn the recent attacks in Aden that killed nearly 30 people and injured more
than 100 others, including Government officials and aid workers. We extend our
deepest condolences to the Government and the people of Yemen and to the families
of the victims. The perpetrators of these immoral and unacceptable acts must be
brought to justice.
The prolonged conflict has claimed more than 230,000 lives to date. It is
distressing to see civilians, especially women and children, continue to be targeted.
We therefore urge all parties to the conflict to strictly abide by international
humanitarian law and immediately stop targeting civilians. We emphasize the
importance of an immediate cessation of hostilities and the acceptance of the joint
declaration towards a nationwide cease-fire.
The coronavirus disease pandemic, the severe economic crisis, food insecurity
and the imminent risk of famine constitute major challenges for the country. We are
gravely concerned about their compounded impact and the increasingly deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Yemen. According to some reports, Yemen is the country
most at risk of a humanitarian catastrophe in 2021. Twenty-four million people need
aid or protection. Thirteen and a half million Yemenis — about 45 per cent of the
population — currently face acute food insecurity, including some 50,000 people
living in famine-like conditions.
The lack of funding has remained one of the greatest obstacles to the full and
effective implementation of humanitarian programmes in many parts of Yemen. It
must be addressed adequately and immediately.
It is also difficult for aid workers to deliver basic goods and assistance to those
in need in the north of Yemen. That situation further exacerbates the vulnerability
and predicament of people across the country.
It is imperative for all parties to give top priority to fostering favourable
conditions to ensure timely, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access and to
facilitating humanitarian operations in Yemen.
We reiterate our call for an early international donors conference for Yemen.
More than ever, the Yemeni people are in urgent need of support from the international
community so that acute food insecurity can be pushed back and humanitarian
programmes can become fully operational. We call on international organizations
32/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

and partners as well as countries of the region, which are the region’s hubs for food
security, to urgently assist Yemen.
We urge the parties concerned to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
and the Riyadh agreement in combination with United Nations mediation. We
reaffirm our support for Yemen’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
in that process. We also stress the importance of promoting and ensuring the
meaningful participation of women in the political process.
Before I conclude, I would like to reaffirm our support for the tremendous efforts
of the Special Envoy and his team, United Nations agencies and the Government and
the people of Yemen for peace, stability and development for Yemen and its people.

21-0062433/37

S/2021/56

Annex XIX
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
Yemen, Ahmed Awad Ahmed Binmubarak
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. Ambassador, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish you and the delegation of
Tunisia every success. I also take this opportunity to congratulate the new nonpermanent members of the Council.
I address you today from the interim capital of Aden, the city of peace,
civilization and life, and the capital of all of Yemen following the return to Aden
of the technocratic Government formed in accordance with the Riyadh agreement,
whose provisions the Council is called upon to implement. We have returned bearing
the banner of peace and with a responsibility to normalize the lives of our citizens;
serve our people and realize their hopes and aspirations to live in peace, one that is
comprehensive and lasting; restore security and stability; improve living conditions;
and confront challenges. We will do so together with our people, relying on the
support of our brothers and friends.
I address you today because God ordained that we survive the heinous
guided missile attack that was carried out by terrorists in an attempt to kill the
entire technocratic Government upon its arrival at Aden International Airport on
Wednesday, 30 December 2020. That attack was followed by a drone attack on the
Government residence in the Ma'ashiq area
The fact that the target was a civilian international airport packed with
passengers and those welcoming arriving passengers and that innocent civilians,
including journalists, students, humanitarian workers, Government officials, women
and children were killed, is sufficient evidence that this was a terrorist attack. The
perpetrators’ objectives confirm that a terrorist entity carried out the attack, which
investigations have conclusively proven was orchestrated and carried out by the
Iranian-backed terrorist Houthi militia. A copy of the report of the investigative
commission has been distributed to all members.
The terrorist attack on Aden International Airport was clearly a deliberate
attempt, in blatant defiance of the will of the international community, to quash the
last chance to achieve peace in Yemen, undermine the efforts of the international
community and create chaos to prolong the war. Thousands more would have been
killed and injured and the already deteriorating humanitarian situation would have
worsened if the perpetrators had achieved their objective, which they came ever so
close to doing.
From this platform, I call on the Security Council to unequivocally condemn
that terrorist attack in a manner commensurate with the horror of the crimes
witnessed by the whole world, thereby vindicating the innocents whose blood was
shed and deterring the would-be perpetrators of terrorist acts that imperil security
and peace in Yemen and the region. I also ask that you take a firm stand in dealing
with this heinous, bloody crime, which defies all human customs and values and the
rules of international humanitarian law and human rights law, and that you bring the
perpetrators to account.
Houthi militias continue to commit crimes and target civilians, civil
institutions and densely populated areas in Ta’iz and Al-Hudaydah governorates.
Since last December, multiple crimes have been committed. An athlete and his son
were killed and two other children were injured in an attack on a sporting club in
Ta’iz. A Houthi official in Ibb governorate raided a home in the absence of the head
34/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

of household and killed a pregnant woman in front of her four children. The Houthis
bombed a wedding hall in Al-Hudaydah, killing seven women and injuring dozens
more. The Haymah area in Ta’iz governorate was bombed, raided and destroyed, and
dozens of families were displaced. Civilians, mostly youth and children, were taken
hostage, and many of them were killed and their bodies were mutilated. There are
fears that the number of civilian casualties, particularly among women and children,
will rise, and that normal life will be disrupted.
These and other horrific crimes that have been committed in areas controlled
by those militias trouble the human conscience and encapsulate the tragedy of
millions of civilians, including women and children, and reveal a policy, approach
and daily behaviour rooted in killing, terrorism and criminality that is aimed at
forcing others to submit to their dynastic, sectarian project.
The Yemeni Government, fully cognizant of its responsibility to the Yemeni
people, is fully committed, under the leadership of President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour, to achieving a comprehensive and sustainable peace that is based
on solid, sound foundations and that will not give rise to conflict in the future. Such
a peace will fulfil the aspirations of Yemenis to build a modern, democratic civil
State that preserves the freedom and dignity of the people and in which the values of
justice, equality, the rule of law and the equitable distribution of wealth and power are
realized. The Government has made many concessions to achieve peace and ensure
that the language of dialogue prevails over the language of war and destruction
throughout previous rounds of consultation with the Houthi militias, in the hope
of reaching a comprehensive political settlement to end the conflict. However, that
positive and flexible approach has been met with the recalcitrance and arrogance of
those militias. Addled by illusions and calls for the divine right to govern and control,
the militias are holding State institutions hostage, pursuing military escalation and
prolonging their senseless war, thereby increasing the human suffering of Yemenis
day after day, in what has become the most tragic crisis on Earth.
Twenty-five months ago today, the Stockholm Agreement was signed. That
would not have been possible had the Yemeni Government not put the interests of the
Yemeni people above everything else, had it not strived to alleviate their suffering
and had it not continued to make concessions in order to ensure the success of United
Nations mediation of the three agreements, namely, the Hudaydah agreement, the
agreement on exchange of prisoners and the Ta’iz understandings. To this day, Ta’iz
continues to be subjected to systematic shelling, which has killed many children,
women and civilians. In contrast, the Houthi militias remain openly intransigent as
they pursue their efforts to limit implementation of the terms of the agreements and
even hinder any understandings on confidence-building measures.
As you know, Mr. President, the Houthi militias have been deploying their
forces in Al-Hudaydah, hampering the work of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) continuously since the beginning of
2019, impeding the delivery of humanitarian assistance, blocking the road to the
emergency assistance convoys that began immediately after the signing of the
Stockholm Agreement and continuing to plunder humanitarian aid and deprive
beneficiaries of the necessities of life.
The Houthis have been so resolute in their bid to thwart United Nations
mediation that they have even targeted the Government’s liaison officer in the
Redeployment Coordination Committee in Al-Hudaydah. They have continued their
violations, recently attacking the liberated areas on the western coast in an attempt
to expand their presence, in flagrant violation of the Hodeidah Agreement. These
militias have gone so far as to prevent UNMHA from conducting field visits in order
to carry out the necessary investigations into the recent escalation in the western
21-0062435/37

S/2021/56

coastal areas, including in Durayhimi. These violations continued with the Houthi
shelling of the wedding hall in Al-Hudaydah last week, which resulted in the death
of many innocent women and children.
This militia has committed crimes and grave violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, include bombing homes and places of
worship, violating the rights of religious minorities, displacing those who oppose
it, arresting and torturing journalists and political activists, placing cities under
siege, indiscriminately targeting civilians, planting landmines, using health-care
and educational facilities for military purposes, destroying the country’s economic
institutions, attacking civilian objects in Yemen and Saudi Arabia, undermining
security and stability in Yemen and the region, and threatening international
maritime navigation lines in the Red Sea and Bab Al-Mandab.
We therefore welcome the recent decision of the United States Government to
designate the Houthis as a foreign terrorist organization, in line with the demands
of the Yemeni Government and the consensus of the Yemeni people. That decision
proves that the Houthis are a terrorist group and not serious about achieving peace,
that they are attempting to prolong the war and that they have caused the world’s
worst humanitarian disaster, as they remain beholden to the subversive agendas of
Iran in the region.
We reiterate that the Yemeni Government is fully committed to facilitating
the activities of all international agencies, humanitarian organizations and trade and
banking institutions in order to maintain the steady flow of assistance and sufficient
provisions to all our people throughout Yemen, without neglecting any region. The
Prime Minister has formed a high-level Government commission composed of all
the competent authorities to take the action needed to address all challenges.
The last few years of the war sparked by the Houthi militia, along with the
spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, have exacerbated the humanitarian
situation, leaving about 80 per cent of the population in need of some form of
humanitarian assistance and 14.3 million people in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. Human suffering continues, including food insecurity, one of the most
formidable challenges that the Yemeni Government is working to overcome with the
support of coalition partners and all its friends in the international community.
Regrettably, Yemen was grappling with those challenges even prior to the
Houthi coup in 2014. Statistics from the latest Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification report underscored the importance of redoubling efforts to alleviate
the suffering of Yemenis. Food insecurity has many serious consequences that affect
not only the lives of the present generation, but also the future of coming generations.
That is why we once again call for a transition from emergency response programmes
to programmes aimed at building resilience and promoting sustainable development.
Moreover, the continued collapse of the national economy will further
compound the humanitarian disaster, hence the need for financial resources to be
mobilized urgently at the international level in order to support the Government
programme and efforts to address economic challenges and its policies and plans to
stabilize living conditions.
I take this opportunity to convey my thanks and appreciation to all humanitarian
and relief workers for their tireless efforts to alleviate the suffering of Yemenis and
to deliver humanitarian assistance to the those in need, despite the obstacles and
difficulties that have been put in their way and the threats that have been directed
towards them by Houthi militias, including the recent restrictions that were imposed
on the work and activities of organizations in areas still under Houthi control. Those
restrictions prevent those organizations even from holding virtual meetings using
video-teleconferencing technology.
36/37

21-00624

S/2021/56

We reiterate our condolences to the International Committee of the Red
Cross for the deaths of three of its staff in the terrorist attack on Aden International
Airport and wish the wounded a speedy recovery. The Government will not hesitate
to provide those organizations with every form of support and assistance for their
work and to facilitate their various activities and projects.
The Houthi militias continue to prevaricate with regard to the FSO SAFER oil
tanker issue. They continue to manipulate the issue and are using it to bargain with
and coerce the international community, refusing to heed warnings that more than
1 million barrels of oil may soon leak from the tanker and oblivious to the severe
environmental, economic and humanitarian consequences that such a leak could
have for Yemen and the countries of the region. It is unacceptable that the Houthis
continue to procrastinate and string the United Nations along with illusions ahead
of each monthly meeting of the Security Council. We once again call on the Council
to place more pressure on the Houthi militias to grant the United Nations technical
team access to the tanker in order to inspect it, carry out initial repairs and remove oil
from it, without restrictions or conditions, in order to prevent this looming disaster.
The implementation of the Riyadh agreement has led to the formation of a
technocratic Government. This development has been welcomed by the international
community and all peace partners. The Government is currently operating from the
interim capital, Aden, determined and committed to taking forward the national
programme to which the Yemeni people aspire. The aim of that programme is to
strengthen security, stability and economic recovery; improve living conditions;
provide basic services to all Yemenis; relaunch State institutions, financial and
monetary policy tools, monitoring and oversight mechanisms and the accountability
framework; and combine military and security decision-making with a view to
unifying efforts to achieve sustainable peace and end the coup.
In that regard, we value the major role played by our brethren in the Coalition
to Support Legitimacy in Yemen, led by Saudi Arabia, in ensuring that the Agreement
succeeds and is implemented quickly. We consider it a model to be emulated and
proof that, where goodwill and noble intentions can be found, peace is not far off.
In that connection, despite everything that has happened, despite the pain and the
wounds, we continue to reaffirm that we are engaged and interacting positively with
all serious initiatives and calls to end the coup and achieve peace. We also reiterate our
support for the efforts of Mr. Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, to achieve a comprehensive, sustainable peace built on the agreed terms
of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementing
Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, chief among them resolution 2216 (2015).
We also welcomed the recent visit that the Special Envoy made to the interim capital,
Aden, his condemnation of the terrorist attack as a war crime and his visit to the
destroyed airport VIP lounge, so that he could see the scene of the horrific crime.

21-0062437/37
