_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ,_'_._R_eso_lu_ti_·o_n_s_ad_o_p_ted_o_n_t~e_re_po_rt_s ()_f !~e Second Committee_·_ _ _ _ _ __

(b) To keep the question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Madagascar under constant
review;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to apprise
the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1986, of the progress made in the implementation
ofthe present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December /985

40/231. Long-term and effective solution of the problems caused by natural disasters in Bangladesh
The General Assembly,
Aware of the grave devastation and substantial loss of
life and property caused by the cyclone that struck large
areas of Bangladesh on 25 May 1985,
Having heard the statement made on 12 November
1985 by the representative of Bangladesh, 165 in which he
enumerated the enormous losses suffered by Bangladesh in
the cyclone as well as the adverse consequences of recurring natural disasters, particularly cyclones, tidal waves
and ftoods, for the economic development ofthat country,
Concerned about the serious damage to infrastructure
caused by such natural disasters, which has a far-reaching
impact on the implementation of the national development plan in that country,
Considering that Bangladesh is one of the least
developed countries, and that its situation has been worsened by the frequent recurrence of natural disasters having
devastating consequences,
Aware that the coastal areas of Bangladesh are particularly vulnerable to natural calamity resulting in
widespread human and material loss,
Recognizing the relief and rehabilitation efforts of the
Govemment of Bangladesh to alleviate the sufferings of
disaster victims, and its programmes for a more permanent solution,
Noting with appreciation the support and solidarity displayed by the countries ofthe South Asían region in assisting Bangladesh in the immediate aftermath of the cyclone
of 25 May 1985,
Recognizing that natural disasters constitute a development problem of great magnitude, the solution of which
calls for substantial resources, requiring national efforts to
be supplemented by intemational financia! and technical
assistance,
Aware that considerable expertise and technical capabilities are available within the organizations of the United
Nations system and other multilateral organizations to
strengthen the preparedness and prevention capability of
disaster-prone countries through the promotion of a longterm and effective solution ofthe problems caused by natural disasters,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the intemational community for its interest in and support to Bangladesh in its
relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts following
the natural disaster;
2. A/so expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the support provided by him, particularly through
the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordi165
Officia/ Records of the General Assemblv, Fort1e1h Sesswn. Sccond
Committee, 32nd meeting, paras. 14-16.
•

166 A/39/382.

185

nator and other operational agencies ofthe United Nations
system in Bangladesh;
3. Appeals to ali Member States, specialized agencies,
and other organs and bodies ofthe United Nations system,
as well as intemational economic and financia! institutions, to respond urgently and generously to assist Bangladesh in its plans and programmes to secure a long-term
and effective solution of the problems caused by natural
disasters;
4. Requests the relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system and other multilateral organizations to take appropriate measures to provide
assistance to Bangladesh for disaster preparedness and prevention programmes, taking into account the existing coordinated efforts of Member States;
5. Requests the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator to assist, in co-operation with other
relevant agencies, the Govemment of Bangladesh in prcparing a time-bound plan in this regard;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/232. Assistance to Mozambique
The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 (1976) of 17
March 1976, in which the Council appealed to ali States to
provide financia!, technical and material assistance to
enable Mozambique to carry out its economic development programme, and requested the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, to organize, with immediate
effect, such assistance,
Recalling further its resolution 39/ l 99 of 17 December
1984 and its earlier resolutions, in which it urged the international community to respond effectively and generouslv
with assistance to Mozambique,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 166 submitted pursuant to its resolution 38/208, to
which was annexed the report of the mission to
Mozambique,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life and the destruction of
essential infrastructures such as roads, railways, bridges,
petroleum facilities, electricity supply, schools and hospitals, as identified in the reports ofthe Secretary-General, 167
Further concerned about the present difficult economíc
situation of Mozambique, as illustrated in the summary
report of the Secretary-General, submitted pursuant to íts
resolution 39/199, 168
Noting with deep concern that Mozambique has continued to suffer from a prolonged drought causing heavy
losses in human lives, food production and livestock and
resulting in dislocation of its affected people,
A/so noting with deep concern the extensive damage
caused by the cyclone "Demoina" at the end of January
1984,
Noting that Mozambique faces an emergency food situation of an exceptional scale and needs imports of 638,000
tonnes of cereals in 1985/1986 to meet its food requircments, according to govemment estimates,
167 A/38!201-E/1983/69 ami
sect. XIII: A/19/382.
108 A 401•+41, sect. Xl

orr 1 and 2. annex l. sect. E: A1Jg ~ 1 I•

186

General As..<1embly- •·ortietb Session

-------·---·-----··· - - - - - - - - - - - = - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Recognizing that substantial intemational assistance is
required for the implementation of a number of reconstruction and development projects,
l. Strongly endorses the appeals made by the Security
Council and the Secretary-General for intemational assistance to Mozambique;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the measures he has taken to organize an intemational
economic assistance programme for Mozambique;
3. A/so expresses its appreciation for the assistance provided to Mozambique by various States and regional and
intemational organizations and humanitarian institutions;
4. Regrets, however, that the total assistance provided
to date falls far short of Mozambique's pressing needs;
5. Appea/s to the international community to provide
adequate food aid to Mozambique to prevent further starvation and malnutrition;
6. Draws the attention of the intemational community
to the two areas for immediate action - the supply of
crude oil and petroleum products and the supply of basic
inputs and consumer goods for the agricultural sector that are critica! for the functioning of the economy;
7. A/so draws the attention of the international community to the additional financia), economic and material
assistance identified in the annex to the report ofthe Secretary-GeneraJ 166 as urgently required by Mozambique;
8. Calls upon Member States, regional and ínterregional organizations and other governmental and nongovernmental organizations to provide financia!, material
and technical assistance to Mozambique, wherever possible in the forro of grants, and urges them to give priority
to the inclusion of Mozambique in their programmes of
development assistance;
9. Urges Member States and organizations that are
already implementing or negotiating assistance programmes for Mozambique to strengthen them;
l O. Strong/y appeals to the intemational community to
contribute to the special account for Mozambique established by the Secretary-General for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Mozambique;
11. Invites the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization-to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance
to Mozambique, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective intemational programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
financia!, technical and material assistance to
Mozambique;
(b) To keep the situation in Mozambique under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, the specialized agencies, regional and other intergovemmental organizations, intemational financial institutions and other bodies concemed, and to apprise the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session
169 See Ojfidal Records of the Economit and Social Council, 1985, Supp/e·
ment No. 9 (E/1985/29), para. 11 'i.
170 A/40/441, sen. XV

of 1986, ofthe current status ofthe special programme of
economic assistance for Mozambique;
(e) To prepare, on the basis of sustained consultations
with the Govemment of Mozambique, a report on the
development ofthe economic situation and the implementation ofthe special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December / 985

40/233. Economic assistance to Vanuatu
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/198 of 17 December 1984 on
economic assistance to Vanuatu, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize the
necessary resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Vanuatu,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 31/ 156 of 21 December
1976, 32/185 of 19 December 1977, 34/205 of 19 December 1979, 35/61 of 5 December 1980, 37 /206 of 20
December 1982 and 39/212 of 18 December 1984,
relating to the special needs and problems of island developing countries,
Noting the difficult problems faced by island developing
countries, owing mainly to their smallness, remoteness,
constraints in transport, great distances from market
centres, highly limited intemal markets, lack of natural
resources, heavy dependence on a few commodities,
shortage of administrative personnel and heavy financia!
burdens,
Taking into account the fact that Vanuatu is an island
developing country, that it is a geographically remote
archipelago with a small population, that it has demographic disadvantages, that its dependence on imports is
overwhelming and that it has a scarcity of adequate transportation and communications links, ali of which pose
special development problems, making the provision of
services difficult and entailing very high overhead costs,
Noting that the Committee for Development Planning,
as stated in its report on its twenty-first and resumed
twenty-first sessions, of which the Economic and Social
Council took note in its decision 1985/182 of 25 July
1985, reached the conclusion that Vanuatu qualified for
inclusion in the list of the least developed countries on the
basis ofthe existing criteria and in the light ofthe available
data, 169
Noting further the damage caused by two major cyclones
in January 1985 and the resulting additional constraints
on the economic development of Vanuatu,
1. Calls the attention of the international community
to the summary report of the Secretary-General; 110
2. A/so calls the attention of the intemational community to the projects listed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, 171 endorsed by the Assembly in resolution 39/198,
which still require funding;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for
Vanuatu;
4. A/so expresses its appreciation to those States and
organizations which have provided assistance to that
country;
171 A/39/388, annex.
