A/66/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

69

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 30 November 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/66/338
and A/66/367)
Draft resolutions (A/66/L.19 and A/66/L.20)
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Yesterday the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People convened a
meeting to commemorate the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People. China’s premier,
Wen Jiabao, sent a message of congratulations to the
meeting reiterating China’s unwavering support for the
Palestinian people’s just cause of restoring their
legitimate national rights.
The Middle East question not only has a major
impact on the situation in the region but also has a
bearing on international peace and stability. The
question of Palestine is at the centre of the Middle East
question. Against the backdrop of the profound
transformations that are taking place in the region, the
question of Palestine has once again become the focus
of wide attention.
A political settlement of the question of Palestine
is in keeping with the universal aspirations of all
countries in the region and the rest of the international
community, and is key to long-term peace and security
in the Middle East.

At present, the Middle East peace process is
stalled, and the peace talks between the Palestinians
and the Israelis remain bogged down by issues such as
the construction of settlements. China is deeply
concerned at this development. We have always
maintained that the parties concerned should resolve
their disputes through political negotiations under the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Middle East road map for peace, with the ultimate goal
of establishing an independent Palestinian State, in the
framework of the vision of two States, Palestine and
Israel, living side by side in peace.
China supports the efforts made by the Quartet to
promote the resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli peace
talks. We urge Israel to immediately cease the
construction of settlements. We call on the Palestinians
and the Israelis to work actively, in cooperation with
the efforts of the international community, to promote
peace and create conditions conducive to rebuilding
mutual trust and breaking the impasse.
The Palestinian bid for United Nations
membership recently won extensive understanding and
respect from the international community. Palestine has
become a formal member of UNESCO.
China has always supported the Palestinian
people in their just cause to restore their legitimate
national rights. China maintains that the establishment
of an independent State is the lawful right of the
Palestinian people and the basis for the implementation
of the two-State solution. China supports the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-61572 (E)

*1161572*

A/66/PV.69

establishment of an independent Palestinian State that
enjoys full sovereignty, with East Jerusalem as its
capital and based on the 1967 borders. China supports
Palestine’s membership in the United Nations.
China also maintains that peace talks are the right
way to ultimately achieve the two-State solution. China
supports the appropriate settlement of final status
issues by the Palestinians and the Israelis through
political negotiations.
China welcomes the internal reconciliation
agreement reached by the Palestinian factions. We hope
that they will continue to bridge their differences
through dialogue and consultation and advance the
implementation of the reconciliation agreement.
China welcomes the prisoner swap agreement
between Israel and Hamas and its implementation. This
move is conducive to an easing of the situation.
The security and humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip remains a serious challenge. China hopes
that the parties concerned will exercise restraint, avoid
escalation of tension in the Gaza Strip, implement in
good faith the relevant United Nations resolutions, lift
all the blockades in the area and create favourable
conditions for the early relaunching of peace talks.
The Syria-Israel track and the Lebanon-Israel
track are important components of the Middle East
peace process and play an indispensable role in the
overall settlement of the Middle East question. China
firmly supports the just causes of Syria and Lebanon to
preserve their sovereignty and territorial integrity and
recover their occupied territories.
China supports the strategic choice made by the
Arab States in their pursuit of a comprehensive and
lasting peace in the region.
The Middle East question cannot be resolved
without the strong support of the international
community. In the light of the overall interests of
maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East, the
international community should redouble its efforts to
promote peace, speed up the political process for the
settlement of the Middle East question and avoid the
escalation of turbulence in the region. China supports
the United Nations in playing a bigger role in resolving
the Middle East question.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a country with a strong sense of responsibility,

2

China has made vigorous efforts to promote peace and
negotiations in its own way and advance the Middle
East peace process. China will continue to work with
the international community and the parties concerned
and to play a constructive role in the early achievement
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I thank the President for
convening this important meeting to discuss the
situation in the Middle East in the General Assembly.
As we all know, this year marks an unforgettable
milestone for the Middle East and the North Africa
region, with the occurrence of a series of movements
towards democratization in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and,
most recently, Yemen. The Arab Spring was realized by
peoples’ desire for freedom and democracy. I would
like to take this opportunity to renew Japan’s
commitment to supporting reforms designed to achieve
the transition to democracy in the region.
Japan is deeply concerned about the recent
escalation of tensions between the parties caused by
decisions of the Government of Israel, such as the
acceleration of settlement activities in East Jerusalem
and the temporary freeze on the transfer of tax
revenues that Israel collects on behalf of the
Palestinian Authority. The settlement activities are a
violation of international law, and the tax transfer
freeze has worsened the Palestinian Authority’s
financial situation and the well-being of Palestinians in
the affected areas. Japan therefore reiterates its strong
call to Israel to reverse those decisions, which are
exacerbating tensions between the parties.
Japan is also concerned about the provocations
through the use of force between Israeli and Palestinian
militants and calls upon both parties to exercise
maximum self-restraint and to avoid causing further
victims.
Japan has supported the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority towards establishing statehood and is
committed to continuously providing assistance to that
end, including through the promotion of the “corridor
for peace and prosperity” initiative.
The Middle East peace negotiations have been
stalled for more than a year. Japan fully understands
the Palestinians’ earnest aspiration to build their own
State and strongly endorses a two-State solution under
which Israel and a future independent Palestinian State

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

would coexist side by side in peace and security. Japan
shares the vision that in a two-State solution the
borders should be defined through negotiations and
based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed swaps,
in a way that will ensure the peaceful coexistence of a
viable Palestinian State and the State of Israel, within
secure and recognized borders.
In that connection, Japan highly appreciates the
vigorous endeavours of the members of the Quartet,
including the Quartet’s statement of 23 September (see
SG/2178) and its timetable. Japan welcomes the fact
that separate meetings took place between the Quartet
members and the Israeli and Palestinian parties on
26 October and 14 November, respectively. We
strongly expect that those meetings will be an
important step towards the resumption of direct
negotiations. Japan is contributing to the efforts of the
international community to bring about the realization
of a two-State solution.
The year 2011 will also be remembered as a year
of historic change by the people of Libya. Japan
congratulates them on their achievement of freedom
and democracy and will spare no effort to assist them
in their endeavours to rebuild their nation. Japan
welcomes the establishment, on 22 November, of the
interim Government led by new Prime Minister
Abdurrahim El-keib and has high hopes that the
Government will pave the way for the reconstruction of
the country, including through the preparations for
elections to be held next June.
Finally, let me touch upon the ongoing situation
in Syria. Japan is deeply concerned about the
continuing bloodshed in that country and has
repeatedly called on the Syrian authorities to
immediately cease the use of force against its own
people. It is extremely deplorable that the situation in
Syria remains unresolved as of this date despite all the
efforts undertaken by the international community,
including the economic sanctions imposed by a number
of countries. Japan emphatically urges the Syrian
Government to accept the proposal of the Arab League
and swiftly implement all items of the action plan set
forth therein.
Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran):
At the outset, on the occasion of the International Day
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, I wish to
express our solidarity with the people of Palestine and
our admiration for their tireless efforts and unwavering

11-61572

determination in pursuing their national aspirations and
defending their inalienable rights to statehood and the
exercise of sovereignty. I also wish to express our
appreciation to the Chair and members of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People for the informative report they
presented to us (A/66/35) and for their tireless efforts
to address the onerous circumstances that the people of
Palestine are enduring.
For the sake of brevity, I would like to present
our views and perspectives on Palestine and the current
situation in the Middle East in the following
enumeration.
First, the Islamic Republic of Iran believes that a
settlement of the Palestinian crisis can be achieved
only if the inalienable rights of the people of occupied
Palestine are fully recognized, restored and maintained.
Regrettably, due to a lack of attention to its root
causes, this crisis has remained unresolved for more
than six decades. There have been numerous reasons
for that failure. They include the Israeli regime’s
continued occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories and its persistent violations of the
Palestinian people’s rights, among them the right to
self-determination and especially the legitimate and
inalienable right of Palestinian refugees to return to
their homeland.
We believe that the only solution to the
Palestinian issue and for achieving peace is the
restoration of Palestine’s sovereignty and ending the
occupation. The Palestinian people should be allowed
to freely express their opinions on their fate and future
and on the kind of State and Government they want,
through a referendum in which all Palestinians
participate.
Second, we condemn the Israeli blockade of Gaza
on land, sea and in the air. We believe it is an
aggressive and savage action that breaches all
international laws and norms, constitutes a crime
against humanity and poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, as well as to regional
stability. The blockade also constitutes collective
punishment, which is unconditionally prohibited in
article 33 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
deals with the rights and obligations of belligerent
parties.
Third, the popular uprisings in the Middle East
demonstrate a pressing need for change. The

3

A/66/PV.69

aspirations of peoples to democracy, the rule of law
and independence and their rejection of foreign
domination, as well as their attachment to Islamic
values, cannot remain unheeded. We believe that
addressing the legitimate demands of the people
through a peaceful and democratically led political
process, without foreign intervention, is the only way
to emerge from such crises and to avoid violence.
Fourth, one of our prime foreign policy
objectives is to strengthen trust between the Islamic
Republic of Iran and our neighbours and other
countries in the region through active engagement,
interaction and partnership. The countries of the
Middle East have common interests in the region’s
security and long-term stability, and each should play
its part in promoting regional socio-economic
development. Obviously, a stable and economically
flourishing and prosperous Middle East would create
an ideal situation for every country in the region to
progress along the path of development and economic
growth. Our continued commitment to brotherly
relations and engagement with our Arab neighbours
and regional partners in the areas of trade, economic
development and infrastructure projects is therefore a
goal seriously pursued by my Government.
Fifth, arrogant Powers have made some attempts
to sow discord and create divisions among nations in
the Middle East. They try to divide peoples by
fomenting sectarian, ethnic and religious differences,
despite the fact that people in the region with diverse
ethnic and religious backgrounds have coexisted in
harmony for centuries. They want to damage brotherly
relations among people and States in the region by
creating false fears, such as Iranophobia, with the
purpose of selling to those countries more and more of
their lethal and sophisticated armaments and
unnecessarily militarizing the volatile Middle East.
That is a very dangerous trend and should be
strenuously avoided.
Sixth, any foreign military adventurism on the
part of Powers from outside the Middle East, and any
military intervention by countries within the region,
should be avoided for the sake of regional peace and
stability. We must avoid making the Middle East a
platform for military adventurism and expansionist
policies.
Seventh, Iran is among the nations that lead in
rejecting and opposing all kinds of weapons of mass

4

destruction, including nuclear weapons. As a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Islamic Republic of Iran has on
many occasions, including in this body, declared loudly
and clearly that nuclear arms, as inhumane weapons,
have no place in our defence mechanisms.
Furthermore, Iran has striven to help realize a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East within the United
Nations framework.
Finally, the Israeli regime unlawfully possesses
nuclear weapons and is the unique source of
destabilization in the Middle East, given its dark
history of aggression and the crimes and atrocities that
it has committed in the region over past decades. We
expect that the Assembly will condemn the occupying
regime for its possession of nuclear weapons, urge it to
abandon such weapons, call on it to accede to the NPT
without delay, and demand that it promptly place all of
its nuclear facilities under the comprehensive
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Indeed, peace and stability cannot be achieved in the
Middle East while Israel’s massive nuclear arsenals
continue to pose a threat to the region and beyond.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to thank the
President for arranging today’s meeting. For
clarification for the many people who wonder why we
are not talking of other issues of the Middle East, the
reason is that agenda items 36 and 37 normally refer to
the Middle East and the question of Palestine as they
interact with Israel, Syria and Lebanon. As such, the
matter remains within those parameters.
This is an annual remembrance. Let us remember,
then. It is a remembrance of the protracted suffering,
desolation and dispossession of the Palestinian people
and their continuing ordeal and oppression under
occupation.
Each year we gather to highlight the common
underlying theme — our desire for lasting peace in the
region. Such a peace never comes. Reprehensibly, our
annual debates in the General Assembly coincide with
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, but this Day reaffirms our collective inability
with regard to the peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine.
On this Day, the President of my country has
issued a message. I would like to read part of it to the
Assembly.

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

“Pakistan has a natural and historical
affiliation with the cause of Palestine, which is
reflected in our active participation in all the
initiatives taken for a just and lasting resolution
of this problem. Pakistan has a deep commitment
to a just, peaceful and lasting settlement of all
issues. The framework for such a solution already
exists in the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

amounting to two thirds of the total tax collection of
the Palestinians. That amounts to fiscal strangulation of
Palestine, which is a violation of basic human rights.
We call upon Israel to release all Palestinian funds
immediately and not to repeat this act of inhumane
punishment. We also call upon Israel and the family of
nations here to ease the blockade of Gaza and allow the
free flow of people and commerce to the entire
occupied Arab territories.

“Pakistan strongly commends the impressive
march of the Palestinian people on the road to
statehood. Important achievements in the areas of
economic management, security and governance
have established a solid edifice for the State of
Palestine.

We believe that the present stalemate cannot be
broken without sustained and meaningful engagement
by the international community. The international
community must promote the freezing of all Israeli
settlement activity, help Palestinians strengthen their
state-building institutions and ensure progress on
Palestine’s United Nations membership status and its
enjoyment of the benefits of civilization and civilized
behaviour and life.

“We support the recognition of the State of
Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations.
Let there be no doubt on that. On the occasion of
the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, the Government and people of
Pakistan reiterate their commitment to support
their Palestinian brethren in their just struggle for
self-determination and to have a State of their
own, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.”
But those prospects remain unchanging and grim.
The peace process leading to a final settlement is
effectively stalled, as signified by the continuing
expansionist policies of the Israelis. Sadly, the
deterioration of living conditions in the occupied
territories has not been reversed. Israeli defiance of the
international community on the issue of settlement
activity and the high level of impunity are completely
halting the peace process and inflicting innumerable
hardships on the Palestinian people under continued
illegal occupation.
To make obstacles to peace insurmountable, the
Israeli settlement policy continues unabated. The
recent commissioning of 1,557 new housing units in
East Jerusalem and 673 units elsewhere has provoked a
stop of all activity of the peace process. Israel must
stop building new settlements or using that activity as a
political tool in the stalled peace process. That activity
and the peace process will not move together.
Palestinians should not be expected to negotiate when
their land is being confiscated and annexed in the name
of new settlements.
Let me express further consternation at recent
reports that suggest that Israel is withholding revenue

11-61572

Our collective deliberations in the General
Assembly should also send a strong message to the
Security Council and to the Middle East Quartet, which
has been inactive so long, on fulfilling their longstanding commitments with regard to a final
settlement. The Quartet’s statement of 23 September
(see SG/2178) may have been positive in intent, but the
Quartet’s initiative has been neutralized by the Israeli
decision to build new settlements in the occupied
territories.
How long must the world wait? A lasting solution
of the wider Arab-Israeli conflict is essential to achieve
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. For that, it is
imperative to address its root cause — the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories. The solution therefore
requires Israel’s complete withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and all other occupied Arab territories,
including the Syrian Golan. Accordingly, parallel
progress on the Syria-Israel and Lebanon-Israel tracks
is essential, and must be continuous in order to achieve
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
People of all races and religions in the Middle
East have suffered for the past six decades. Many
generations in the region have completed their life
cycles in the shadows of extreme violence and absolute
insecurity. Only our firm resolve, concerted action and,
above all, political will to build lasting peace can save
succeeding generations from further tragedies and

5

A/66/PV.69

further tribulations such as those suffered by their
ill-fated predecessors.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): The global agenda is
currently full of important developments, among which
the historic transition in the Middle East and North
Africa comes to the fore, with its global ramifications.
The people of the Middle East rightfully deserve a
dignified life and the dividends of democracy and
peace.
The Arab-Israeli conflict must be resolved and
the Palestinian people must be able to fully exercise
their inalienable rights. The course of change and
transformation in the region spurred by the aspirations
of the peoples of the Middle East and North Africa to
freedom, democracy, human rights and higher
standards of living has once again proved the fact that
the just expectations of the Palestinian people can no
longer go unanswered.
It is our foremost objective to find a solution to
the Palestinian question on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative, as well as to ensure the realization of an
independent Palestinian State, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security. Ensuring national
Palestinian unity is another main priority.
Turkey rejects violence in any shape or form, and
by any party, as unacceptable. We believe that there is
no genuine alternative to a negotiated settlement. There
is no doubt that a meaningful engagement that inspires
confidence in both Palestine and Israel cannot begin
while settlement activity continues. We call on Israel to
fulfil its responsibilities stemming from international
law concerning lasting peace in the Middle East and to
put an end to all its activities that are destroying the
basis for peace.
Meanwhile, the situation in Gaza continues
unabated, which is an embarrassment to the
international community. The unlawful blockade of
Gaza, which is keeping more than 1.5 million
Palestinian men, women and children trapped, must
end. The relevant Security Council resolutions must be
implemented without further delay. The international
community must ensure that there is accountability
both for the blockade and for Israel’s attack on the
international humanitarian aid flotilla last year, which
left nine civilians dead and many wounded on the high
seas.

6

Turkey welcomes and strongly supports the
Palestinian application for United Nations membership
submitted by President Mahmoud Abbas on
23 September and believes that it is high time for
Palestine to take its rightful place in the international
arena among the community of nations. With that
understanding, we congratulate the people of Palestine
on their membership in UNESCO and hope that all
sides concerned will duly take into account the will
that the international community has displayed with
regard to that membership.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies at the heart of
all of the problems in the Middle East. There is no
acceptable alternative to a just and comprehensive
settlement. The status quo is not viable. Let me
reaffirm once more Turkey’s strong support for the
realization of a just and lasting comprehensive peace in
the region, based on the two-State solution.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Allow me, at
the outset, to express our sincere appreciation for the
scheduling of this discussion on an important subject
that demands our collective attention — the situation in
the Middle East. Today’s debate, following the
commemoration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, are timely and appropriate.
The West Asian region, a cradle of human
civilization, is of importance and concern to the entire
international community, including India. The region is
home to nearly 5 million Indians and is an important
source for meeting India’s energy needs. As a nation
with age-old historic and cultural ties with the Middle
East, India has an abiding interest in the early
resolution of all pending issues that have troubled the
region since the inception of the United Nations.
The situation in the region is quite different from
what it was when we discussed this topic last year in
the General Assembly. While the issue of Palestine has
taken a decisive, historic turn since its application, on
23 September, for full membership in the United
Nations, the region is also witnessing unprecedented
events. People in many countries of the region are
demanding the right to shape their own future.
Speaking a day after President Abbas filed the
application, my Prime Minister, Mr. Manmohan Singh,
said in the General Assembly on 24 September (see
A/66/PV.22) that India had been steadfast in its support
for the Palestinian people’s struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine, with

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with
Israel, as per the relevant resolutions of the
Organization, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map. The Prime Minister added that we looked
forward to welcoming Palestine as an equal Member of
the United Nations.
While the Security Council could not reach
unanimity on the application of Palestine for full
membership in the United Nations, the overwhelming
vote in Paris on 31 October in favour of Palestine’s
membership in UNESCO demonstrated that the
international community supported the recognition of
Palestine as an equal member of the comity of nations.
We remain convinced that Palestine meets all the
criteria for United Nations membership, as set out in
the United Nations Charter, and deserves to become a
full-fledged Member of the Organization. We hope that
the Council will be able to support that soon.
For peace and security on the ground, however, it
is necessary that direct talks between Israel and
Palestine resume without any further delay. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the efforts of the Quartet.
We hope that the Quartet will pursue with both parties
the timeline set in its statement of 23 September (see
SG/2178).
The biggest stumbling block to direct
negotiations is the continuing settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We call upon Israel
to stop the settlement activities. That will facilitate the
resumption of negotiations, in which all final status
issues should be addressed.
We also call on Israel to release Palestinian tax
revenue to the Palestinian Authority, which is already
facing a severe shortage of funds.
Equally important is the implementation of a
reconciliation agreement between Palestinian factions
that leads to the formation of a unity Government.
We also welcome the negotiated prisoner swap
between Israel and Hamas and hope that it will ease
tensions and build confidence. It is also necessary that
the cycle of violence between the Gaza Strip and
southern Israel come to an end, given the security
concerns of Israel. The blockade of Gaza has created
difficult humanitarian conditions and needs to be lifted
completely.

11-61572

India, for its part, has continued its development
support to the Palestinian Authority. In 2009 and 2010,
we increased our annual contribution to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to $1 million, in
addition to a special contribution of $1 million to
UNRWA in response to a flash appeal in 2010. This
year, we have requested that UNRWA utilize the funds
to provide a daily food assistance supplement for
50 school days to more than 76,000 students attending
UNRWA schools in Gaza. For the past two years, India
has also contributed $10 million annually in untied
budgetary support to the Palestinian Authority.
Progress on the Lebanese and the Syrian tracks is
the essential core to achieving a comprehensive and
durable peace in the region. Developments in the
Middle East since February underline the need to
reinvigorate the search for that comprehensive peace,
while the countries in the region undertake inclusive
political processes and implement reforms to meet the
legitimate aspirations of their peoples. It is important
that the grievances of the people are addressed through
dialogue and negotiations, rather than by resorting to
arms.
It is the responsibility of all countries to create
conditions that enable their peoples to freely determine
their pathways to development. That is the essence of
democracy and fundamental human freedoms. No
action should be taken from the outside that
exacerbates problems and gives space for the rise of
extremism. The international community should stand
ready to assist countries in those efforts, while
respecting the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all countries.
As my Prime Minister said in the General
Assembly on 24 September, societies cannot be
reordered from outside through military force.
Observance of the rule of law is as important in
international affairs as it is within countries.
India is ready to play a supportive role in this
collective endeavour to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia is deeply concerned about the
continued deadlock in the Palestinian-Israeli track of
the Middle East settlement. Bilaterally and
multilaterally, including within the Quartet of
international intermediaries, we are working actively to

7

A/66/PV.69

break the deadlock and relaunch a substantive
negotiation process to create an independent,
territorially integrated and viable Palestinian State,
based on the 1967 borders, with agreed land swaps.
Based on our principled position, which is
founded on our recognition in 1988 of Palestinian
statehood, we support Palestine’s application for full
membership in the United Nations and voted for the
acceptance of Palestine into UNESCO. Russia remains
a principled advocate of the political-diplomatic road
to resolving the Palestinian issue. It is important that
the Palestinians themselves consistently emphasize that
their overtures to the United Nations do not remove
from the agenda a negotiated settlement of the conflict
with Israel.
As the President of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Medvedev, stressed in his letter to the head of the
Palestinian Authority, Mr. Abbas, on the occasion of
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People,
Palestine’s
achievement
of
national
sovereignty with international recognition will make
possible a comprehensive and fair solution in the
Middle East.
Today our common task is to work to ensure the
relaunching of the peace process between the
Palestinians and the Israelis on the basis of familiar
international law. A significant role in that process
should be played by the Quartet, which has proven
itself a trustworthy part of the mechanism providing
outside support for the Middle East peace process.
In its statement (see SG/2178) after its ministerial
meeting in New York on 23 September, the Quartet
sent an unambiguous signal on the need to relaunch
negotiations as soon as possible. The New York
statement sets out a platform based on international
law and a timetable for achieving a settlement. The
Quartet members are continuing to work intensively
with the parties, regularly holding working meetings
with them that aim to bring their positions closer
together and to promote the resumption of dialogue.
Recently, in October and November, special
representatives of the Quartet met in Jerusalem with
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators.
Russia’s proposal to convene an international
conference on the Middle East in Moscow, at an
appropriate time agreed by the parties, is still on the
table.

8

A proper atmosphere for renewed talks is not
encouraged by Israel’s settlements and its withholding
of Palestinian tax and customs duties from the
Palestinian National Authority. That is a counterproductive
attempt to punish the Palestinians for their
international activities and is contrary to all logic.
Those measures are moving the Middle East further
from peace, rather than closer to it.
Russia supports efforts to overcome internal
Palestinian division. Without unity, no progress
towards an Israeli-Palestinian settlement will be
possible. We have made our contribution to
consolidating Palestinian ranks by organizing an
intra-Palestinian meeting in Russia in May. It is to be
sincerely hoped that the Palestinians can succeed in
taking serious steps to restore national unity on the
basis of United Nations principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative. That will garner the support of the
international community.
Another important factor is the continued
stalemate in Gaza. Terrorist attacks against the south of
Israel and Israeli raids on the Gaza Strip are causing
civilian suffering and must cease. We support Israel’s
steps to loosen the Gaza blockade somewhat, but
relieving the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
will be possible, we believe, only if the blockade is
completely ended.
In conclusion, I would like to note that no matter
how great the turmoil we are seeing in the Middle East
today, it must not distract us from the urgency of
achieving a comprehensive Arab-Israeli settlement.
The necessary prerequisites for that exist in
international law, the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Mr. Al-Yarboey (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I am
grateful for the opportunity to speak on the important
issue of the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, an issue that has undergone
radical changes over recent years.
There have been major political changes in the
Middle East recently. At the beginning of this year, we
saw a number of revolutions take place. Some of them
succeeded in effecting real changes, while others
continue to foster turmoil. The goal is one and the
same, as the Middle East is brimming with great hopes
and aspirations for reforms so that our peoples will be

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

able to take their rightful place in history and respond
to the challenges facing us and humankind at large.
The State of Qatar strongly wishes to maintain
friendly relations with all kindred Arab countries. We
share a common vision of the most important issues in
the Arab world. Qatar will always stand by any Arab
people having urgent legitimate aspirations. We believe
that the only way to ensure the stability of Arab States
over the short and long terms is to adopt continuous
reforms to respond to the aspirations of our peoples.
No State can live in isolation from current
political movements and changes, because the peoples
of the world have discovered that they are able to
demand their rights to freedom, dignity and social
justice and can courageously open channels of positive
dialogue so as to engender much-needed reforms in a
safe and gradual manner. Our hope is that Arab
countries will be able to respond to the demands of
their peoples. Still, we cannot impose our views on
anyone.
While new topics have emerged, other, older ones
remain the same, with no progress in sight. The most
pressing question in the Middle East is the question of
Palestine. It includes the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories in the West Bank, the Syrian Golan and the
Sheba’a farms in southern Lebanon, the stifling Israeli
blockade of the Gaza Strip, the suffering of the people
of Gaza under the occupation and Israel’s continuous
violations of their national and human rights.
We call on the international community to work
towards putting a stop to Israel’s repeated attacks on
the Palestinian people and for the lifting of its cruel
blockade of Gaza, where people are suffering under
inhuman, tragic living conditions. Israel must also stop
its continued settlement activity, accede to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency and subject its military installations to
international monitoring, as those issues continue to
pose obstacles to lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East.
The State of Qatar holds the principled position
that only a solution to the Palestinian question will
ensure lasting peace and security in the Middle East
and the rest of the world. We strongly support the right
of the Palestinian people to regain their inalienable
national rights and to establish their independent State
with Jerusalem as its capital.

11-61572

We also support Palestine’s legitimate right to
become a full Member of the United Nations. The
people of Palestine should receive the support of all
Member States. We congratulate the Palestinian people
on having become full members of UNESCO. We
reiterate our solidarity with the unity of the Palestinian
people and call for the prompt formation of a
Palestinian national unity Government in order to
preserve the unity of Palestine and ensure the
realization of the overall interests of the Palestinian
people.
Finally, the State of Qatar, as part of the Gulf and
Arab region, seeks, in its foreign policy, to participate
actively with the international community to achieve
peace, security and development on the basis of the
values and principles of justice, respect for human
rights and the peaceful settlement of international
disputes, in accordance with international law and by
ensuring the peaceful coexistence of all countries of
the world in peace, security and prosperity.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
I shall now give the floor to representatives who
wish to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are truly concerned about, and puzzled by,
the attempts on the part of the delegations of Australia
and Japan to insert the Syrian internal developments
into today’s debate, which is devoted to finding ways
to end the Israeli occupation of Arab lands and stop
Israel’s aggressive and inhuman practices. That clearly
shows that the objective of Australia and Japan is to
divert attention from Israel’s occupation and practices,
which violate the most basic norms of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn the fact that, in this Hall,
the representative of Australia revoked all rules of
diplomacy and blatantly interfered in the internal
affairs of a sovereign State and a founding State
Member of the United Nations, and has attacked a
symbol of that nation’s sovereignty, namely, the head
of State. Such irresponsible statements, which are a
serious precedent in the practices of the Organization,
are an irresponsible incitement to violence. They send
a negative message in support of armed terrorist groups
that seek to destabilize Syria and the region. They are
also a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and existing diplomatic norms.

9

A/66/PV.69

The representative of Australia talked about
Syria, Yemen, Iran, Egypt, Tunisia and Libya today.
However, he pointedly abstained from addressing the
item under consideration, which is putting an end to
Israel’s occupation of Arab lands, its inhuman and
aggressive practices and its violation of all relevant
international resolutions and international norms and
instruments.
We had hoped to hear statements from the
representatives of Australia and Japan condemning
such Israeli violations, including the occupation of the
Syrian Golan and the racist practices against the
Golan’s people. We also hoped that they would be just
as keen to defend human rights and international
legitimacy in their votes on the draft resolutions
condemning the Israeli occupation and practices.
Regrettably, however, that has not happened. On
the contrary, the representative of Australia spoke
ardently about what he called Israel’s security, the
aggressor and the killer, while at the same time
condemning and deploring the launching of rockets,
without mentioning the inhuman blockade imposed on
Gaza for years. He merely timidly said that more must
be done to relax the blockade. Indeed, that is true
hypocrisy, shows utter disregard for the principles of
international justice and the United Nations, and
represents a blatant application of double standards.
The President took the Chair.
Syria, which is determined to continue on the
path of reform under the leadership of President Bashar
Al-Assad, stresses that it will not allow any foreign
intervention in its internal affairs. Furthermore, the
reforms that we seek are in response to the will of the
Syrian people, independent of any foreign pressure,
evaluations and agencies that have no place whatsoever
in our internal affairs.
Mr. Mostahkam (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation asked for the floor to clarify its views with
regard to the reference made by one delegation in
today’s debate to the incident that occurred yesterday
in front of the British embassy in Tehran.
In that regard, I would like to state that the
Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its regret over those
incidents and reaffirms its full commitment under the
relevant international instruments to take all
appropriate measures to protect the premises of
diplomatic missions against intrusion or damage and to

10

prevent any attack on the persons of the staff members
of the missions. Measures have already been taken by
the judicial authorities to thoroughly investigate the
incident in question and identify the culprits.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/66/L.15, A/66/L.16,
A/66/L.17 and A/66/L.18)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 37, entitled
“Question of Palestine”, in order to take action on draft
resolutions A/66/L.15, A/66/L.16, A/66/L.17 and
A/66/L.18.
Before the Assembly takes action on the draft
resolutions one by one, members are reminded that
they will have an opportunity to explain their vote on
all four draft resolutions before and after action is
taken on all of them.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolutions A/66/L.15, A/66/L.16, A/66/L.17 and
A/66/L.18.
We turn first to draft resolution A/66/L.15,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/66/L.15, or previously mentioned during
its introduction, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/66/L.15: Belarus
and Zimbabwe.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.15. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/66/L.15 was adopted by
115 votes to 8, with 53 abstentions (resolution
66/14).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Croatia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]

11-61572

The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/66/L.16, entitled “Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat”. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/66/L.16, or previously mentioned during
its introduction, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/66/L.16: Belarus
and Zimbabwe.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.16. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

11

A/66/PV.69

Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, New
Zealand, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Colombia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/66/L.16 was adopted by
114 votes to 9, with 54 abstentions (resolution
66/15).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Croatia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/66/L.17, entitled “Special information programme
on the question of Palestine of the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat”. I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/66/L.17, or previously mentioned during
its introduction, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/66/L.17: Belarus
and Zimbabwe.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.17. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia

12

and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Honduras, Tonga
Draft resolution A/66/L.17 was adopted by 168
votes to 8, with 3 abstentions (resolution 66/16).

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

[Subsequently, the delegation of Croatia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.18, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to inform
the Assembly that, since the introduction of draft
resolution A/66/L.18, Belarus and Zimbabwe have also
become sponsors.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.18. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

11-61572

Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Tonga
Draft resolution A/66/L.18 was adopted by
167 votes to 7, with 4 abstentions (resolution
66/17).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Croatia indicated
that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. White (Australia): Australia moved from a
negative vote to an abstention on resolution 66/17, on a
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
because we have been a consistent supporter of a
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
resulting in a negotiated two-State solution that allows
a secure Israel to live side by side with a secure and
independent Palestinian State, and because of our
assessment that we are at a critical juncture when the
international community needs to underline the
imperative of a meaningful peace process.
Australia joins the calls for both parties to act on
the basis of their previous agreements. Australia
strongly supports references in the resolution to the
Quartet process and its road map, the IsraeliPalestinian Joint Understanding of Annapolis and the
Arab Peace Initiative. Each of those documents reflects

13

A/66/PV.69

the commitment by the international community to
seeing a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East. Such a peace can only be achieved through direct
negotiations between the two parties. Negotiations
should proceed on the basis of the 1967 borders and
mutually agreed land swaps.
We do, however, have continuing concerns about
the language in the resolution, which could be seen to
pre-empt the results of negotiations between the
parties. The resolution does not give sufficient
recognition to Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
Israel continues to suffer from rocket attacks, and
weapons continue to be smuggled through Gaza.
Australia also believes that resolutions referring to the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion on the
security barrier (see A/ES-10/273) should reflect its
non-binding character.
Australia urges both parties to return to direct
talks as a matter of urgency and to refrain from actions
that prejudge the outcomes of negotiations or threaten
to undermine the opportunity to achieve a durable
peace. That includes the new construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements and outposts, which
are counterproductive to the peace process.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): The
United States remains troubled by the annual,
repetitive and disproportionate number of one-sided
resolutions in the Assembly condemning Israel. There
are a total of 17 such resolutions this year, six of them
under today’s agenda items, all of them unbalanced in
their explicit or implicit one-sided criticism of Israel.
All parties to the tragic conflict have direct
responsibilities for ending it. We are disappointed that
this body continually singles out Israel, without
acknowledging the obligations and difficult steps
required of both sides. In addition to their bias, the
resolutions go against our collective efforts to advance
a peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The United States accepts the principle that the
General Assembly may look into the practices of
individual States. However, in contrast to the 17 annual
resolutions against Israel, this body has this year only
adopted six other resolutions critical of specific
Member States, with four of those focused on severe
human rights abuses.
I would like to highlight three annual resolutions
that are particularly troubling, the Division for

14

Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat (resolution 66/15),
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People (resolution 66/14) and
the Work of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories (A/C.4/66/L.13). Those three resolutions
renew mandates for United Nations bodies established
more than a generation ago, wasting valuable
resources, expending limited time and perpetuating the
perception of systematic and inherent United Nations
bias against Israel.
We reiterate our call for all Member States to
evaluate how the continued support and funding of
those bodies actually contribute to a solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict. As President Obama said in this
Hall two months ago,
“The measure of our actions must always be
whether they advance the right of Israeli and
Palestinian children to live lives of peace and
security and dignity and opportunity. And we will
succeed in that effort only if we can encourage
the parties to sit down, to listen to each other and
to understand each other’s hopes and each other’s
fears.” (A/66/PV.11, p. 13)
It is impossible to see how support for those
resolutions contributes to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. They undermine efforts to
promote the resumption of negotiations, and therefore
damage the institutional credibility of the United
Nations. They presuppose the outcome of permanent
status issues that properly belong in direct
negotiations, making it that much more difficult for the
parties to address them.
Those who support a Palestinian State should do
all they can to support the parties’ efforts to bring
about a just and lasting peace and avoid actions that
hinder them. The United States sees no contradiction
between support for the Palestinian people and support
for Israel. As President Obama also stated in
September,
“the question is not the goal that we seek. The
question is: How do we reach that goal? …
Ultimately, it is the Israelis and the Palestinians
who must live side by side. Ultimately it is the
Israelis and the Palestinians — not us — who
must reach agreement on the issues that divide

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

them: on borders and on security, on refugees and
on Jerusalem.
“Ultimately,
peace
depends
upon
compromise among people who must live
together long after our speeches are over, long
after our votes have been tallied.” (ibid., p. 12)
We cannot support those resolutions, but the
United States will continue to work with the parties,
with the Quartet and with our international partners to
resume negotiations on the basis of the 23 September
Quartet statement (see SG/2178), which provides a
clear and credible path to the negotiating table.
Ms. Karim (Singapore): Singapore voted in
favour of resolution 66/14. We voted in favour based
on the understanding that the reference in paragraph 2
to “the achievement of the two-State solution on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders” should be interpreted in
the same manner as set out in paragraph 1 of resolution
66/17, namely, “the two-State solution of Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security
within recognized borders, based on the pre-1967
borders”.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 37.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/66/L.19 and A/66/L.20)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/66/L.19 and A/66/L.20.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions A/66/L.19 and A/66/L.20 .
The Assembly will turn first to draft resolution
A/66/L.19, entitled “Jerusalem”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/66/L.19, in addition to those delegations listed in
that document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Brunei Darussalam, Mali, Viet Nam
and Zimbabwe.

11-61572

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.19. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

15

A/66/PV.69

Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Haiti, Panama,
Tonga
Draft resolution A/66/L.19 was adopted by 164
votes to 7, with 5 abstentions (resolution 66/18).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Croatia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/66/L.20, entitled “The Syrian Golan”. I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Since the submission of
draft resolution A/66/L.20, in addition to those
delegations listed in that document, the following
countries have also become sponsors: Brunei
Darussalam, Mali, Oman and Zimbabwe.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.20. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,

16

Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Côte d’Ivoire, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/66/L.20 was adopted by 119
votes to 7, with 53 abstentions (resolution 66/19).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Croatia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
delegations of Argentina and Brazil on the item “The
situation in the Middle East”. In particular, I wish to
explain the votes of the delegations of Brazil and

11-61572

A/66/PV.69

Argentina with respect to resolution 66/19, on the
Syrian Golan.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.

Brazil and Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution because they believed that its essential
character is linked to the illegality of the acquisition of
territory by force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
of the United Nations prohibits the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity of a State. That is
an imperative standard of international law.

I now call on the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

At the same time, I wish to clarify the position of
our delegations with respect to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our vote does not prejudge the content of
that paragraph, in particular the reference therein to
“the line of 4 June 1967”. Brazil and Argentina believe
that it is important to make progress on the SyrianIsraeli track of the Middle East conflict in order to put
an end to the occupation of the Golan Heights.
On behalf of the Governments of Brazil and
Argentina, I would therefore once again like to urge the
Israeli and Syrian authorities to renew negotiations in
order to find a permanent settlement to the situation in
the Syrian Golan in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.
Mr. Mostahkam (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted in favour of the resolutions just
adopted by the General Assembly under agenda items
36 and 37, on the situation in the Middle East and the
question of Palestine, respectively. However, we would
like to express our reservation on the parts of those
resolutions that may be construed as recognition of
Israel.
Furthermore, where there are references in those
resolutions to the issues of the peace process and the
two-State solution, although our views on those
important matters have already been articulated in our
statement during the debate on the question of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East, my
delegation wishes to put its views on record once
again. It is our view that a durable peace in Palestine
will be possible only through justice, an end to
discrimination, an end to the occupation of all
Palestinian territories, the return of all Palestinian
refugees, the use of democratic means to determine the
wishes of the Palestinian people and the establishment
of a democratic Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its
capital.

11-61572

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation expresses its deepest
appreciation to the General Assembly for having
adopted the resolution on the Syrian Golan yet
again — as it has every year since 1981. That was the
year when the Israeli occupation forces first imposed
Israeli law on the occupied Syrian Golan, prompting
the Security Council to adopt its famous resolution 497
(1981), declaring the Israeli decision to impose its laws
there to be null and void and without any legal effect.
Against that historical backdrop, let me once again
thank the General Assembly for having stood up for
right, justice and law by adopting resolution 66/19,
entitled “The Syrian Golan”, and the other resolutions
under the two agenda items entitled “Question of
Palestine” and “The situation in the Middle East”.
The continuing support from the international
community for those important resolutions is an
expression of how strongly Member States adhere to
the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter. It is also an expression of their rejection of
foreign occupation and their support of our right to
regain lands occupied by Israel since 5 June 1967.
There is no doubt that the vote for those resolutions by
such an overwhelming majority sends a clear
international message to Israel. The message is that
occupation, killings, the policies of expansionism,
aggression and racial discrimination, settlement
construction and the building of separation walls in a
quest to establish a fait accompli, as well as the
annexation by force of lands belonging to others, have
all been rejected by the international community as
violations of all international norms and instruments,
including first and foremost the United Nations Charter
and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. In that
light, all those Israeli practices deserve nothing but the
condemnation and denunciation of the international
community as a whole.
The world agrees that a just and comprehensive
peace will come about only if it is based on the
implementation of the well-known terms of reference
for peace, including resolutions of international
legitimacy. That necessarily requires a return of all
Arab occupied lands, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, to the borders of 4 June 1967, and the

17

A/66/PV.69

establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, because the ongoing
occupation and the aggressive, inhumane practices on
the part of Israel run contrary to the peace that we all
desire. That demands the use of all possible means to
end the heinous occupation and its practices as soon as
possible.
Let me reiterate Syria’s thanks to the States that
sponsored the resolution on the Syrian Golan and those
who voted in favour of it. I renew my country’s call for
a just, comprehensive and lasting peace based on
resolutions of international legitimacy, especially
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 497 (1981), the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative. However, no peace can come
about unless Israel becomes a partner that believes in
the peace process and that can muster the political will
to engage positively in it, rather than procrastinating
and repeatedly wasting opportunities for peace.
I also stress that Syria strongly insists on the full
liberation of the Golan from Israeli occupation, back to
the lines of 4 June 1967, ridding it of settlements and
the militias of armed settlers, by using all means
available under international law, to which all of us
here subscribe.
In conclusion, it is noteworthy and highly
regrettable that some States that repeatedly speak about
human rights and the protection of civilians, and
actively encourage the imposition of sanctions and
even a blockade against my country, have abstained in
the voting when the issue involved protecting Syrian
civilians suffering under the Israeli occupation of the
Golan. Other States also voted against the resolution.
That in itself confirms that statements by
representatives of those States were not wellintentioned, nor were they statements of positions of
principle. Such behaviour and practices have long been
rightly called political hypocrisy. It exemplifies
applying short-sighted double standards and utter bias
to important issues like the Syrian Golan, the question
of Palestine and Israel’s policies in the territories it
occupies, and reflects a skewed preconception
regarding the use of aggression in international
political relations.

18

The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): The resolutions that
have just been adopted by the membership are
consistent with the objective of peace, the two-State
solution and upholding international law. That action is
a huge investment in peace, and not against it.
Upholding international law is, as I have said, a major
contribution to peace, unlike obstructing the law
through such actions as building illegal settlements.
Yesterday, one delegation exposed all of us to a
distorted narrative of history. The answer to that
distortion came loud and clear today from the
Assembly’s members through their massive positive
vote in favour of those resolutions. We thank the
Assembly for its vote and we are grateful for its
support.
I must also express the gratitude of the people of
Palestine and their leadership for yesterday’s decision
in the Icelandic Parliament to approve a
recommendation that its Government recognize the
State of Palestine. The march of recognition is
continuing.
This session of the General Assembly is very
memorable for us, the Palestinian people and our
leadership; we will not forget it. The history of our
region has been defined as before 23 September 2011
and after it. We have entered, as Palestinian people, the
time of our nation’s independence, the time of the
independence of the State of Palestine and its inclusion
in the community of nations as a Member State and as
a Member of the United Nations. It is only a matter of
time before we all succeed in accomplishing that
objective. I hope that by next September I will be
sitting according to alphabetical order in the General
Assembly, as a representative of the State of Palestine,
which will be a Member of the United Nations.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
36.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

11-61572
