S/PV.7044

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7044th meeting

Friday, 18 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev/Mr. Musayev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Women, rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected situations
Letter dated 3 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/587)

13-52011 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1352011*

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Women, rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict-affected situations
Letter dated 3 October 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/587)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, the
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Montenegro, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uruguay and Viet
Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of the
Council, I welcome Ms. Pillay, who is joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Geneva.

18/10/2013

the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Mari Skåre,
Special Representative for Women, Peace and Security
of the Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Miroslava
Beham, Senior Gender Adviser on Gender Issues of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/614, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/525, which contains the report of the
Secretary General on women and peace and security.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Brigitte
Balipou, of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, to participate in this meeting.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/587, which contains a letter dated
3 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

2/75

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2122 (2013).
The principal objectives of the debate are to review
progress and address gaps in and challenges to the
implementation of commitments on women, peace and
security, as well as to discuss the specific measures that
need to be adopted in order to foster transitional justice
and rule of law actions.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. I now give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Azerbaijan for organizing this debate on the theme
of women, the rule of law and transitional justice. I
commend the Security Council for having adopted
resolution 2122 (2013) today, underscoring the central
importance of women’s participation in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
I welcome the call for concrete actions not only to
increase the number of women in peacemaking but
also, crucially, to improve the way gender issues are
addressed by peace and security institutions, including
the Council itself. These priorities are also featured
in my seven-point action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding.

S/PV.7044

transitional justice. Gender-responsive transitional
justice measures can also help to redress historic
gender-based injustices and combat the security threats
and other obstacles that often restrict women’s full
engagement in public life.
The United Nations is developing good practices
to embed gender dimensions in transitional justice and
peacebuilding. We are working to ensure that women
are represented on all United Nations mediation support
teams. All United Nations-led or co-led peace processes
are reaching out to women’s civil society organizations.
Our United Nations Global Focal Point on Police, Justice
and Corrections is integrating gender perspectives
into all aspects of our rule of law activities. We have
significantly increased the percentage of female police
peacekeepers and are helping local security sectors
tackle sexual and gender-based violence. We have also
completed a study on ways to enhance women’s access
to justice in conflict-affected settings.
Human rights mechanisms are also critical. I am
pleased that the Committee on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women is advancing
a new general recommendation on women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations.
Notwithstanding these advances, the fact remains
that while we have seen a slow but steady increase in
women leaders in business and politics, this progress
has not been matched around the peace table. Gains in
the representation of women are often achieved through
the use of temporary special measures, including
quotas. Similar special measures could help to increase
the number of women at all levels of mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

The rule of law, women’s access to transitional
justice and women’s participation are deeply connected.
Women must be involved at every stage of efforts to
reassert the rule of law and rebuild societies through
transitional justice. Their needs for security and justice
must be addressed. Their voices must be heard. Their
rights must be protected.

I am pleased that my report (S/2013/525) will
be introduced today by Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of
UN Women. This is her first such appearance before the
Security Council. My report this year notes progress,
but also calls for a more determined global effort to
improve the protection of women and girls and enhance
women’s participation and leadership.

I urge the Council to deal with the full range of
women’s rights violations that occur during conflicts.
The mandates of political and peacekeeping missions
should support national prosecutions for serious
international crimes against women, and special
measures should be taken to provide women with
opportunities to engage in the design and delivery of

I have sought to lead by example by appointing
more women to senior positions throughout the United
Nations. For the first time in history, five United
Nations peacekeeping operations — in South Sudan,
Liberia, Cyprus, Haiti and Côte d’Ivoire — are led by
women. Last year, Ms. Aïchatou Souleymane — who
now heads our efforts in Côte d’Ivoire — served as

13-520113/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

acting Joint Chief Mediator in Darfur. This year, I
appointed Mary Robinson, my Special Envoy to the
Great Lakes Region of Africa, as the United Nations
first woman lead mediator in a peace process.
We have more distance to travel, but we have never
been this far before. Women’s participation in peace
efforts is a matter of gender equality and universal
human rights, and crucial to achieving sustainable
peace, economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Today’s resolution makes that point loud
and clear.
Societies emerging from conflict face a wealth
of challenges unique to their circumstances, but all
encounter a crucial moment at which they can begin
again, draw lessons from the upheaval and gain
a new path of stability and progress. Transitional
justice, with its various mechanisms to promote
reconciliation, redress and compensation, has proven
to play a critical role. But the success of such processes
depends fundamentally on their inclusiveness and the
involvement of women, of minorities, of aggrieved
parties, and of all stakeholders.
The year 2015 will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace
and security. The Council has called for a high-level
review meeting to mark that occasion. I am confident
that with the Council’s continued support, we can
achieve concrete results and measurable change in the
lives of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
settings.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour to address
the Security Council and to present this year’s report
of the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security (S/2013/525).
Like the Secretary-General, I thank the presidency
of Azerbaijan for hosting this debate and for
introducing the topic of women, the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict-affected situations. I
thank the other speakers, especially the SecretaryGeneral and Ms. Navi Pillay, High Commissioner on
Human Rights. I also thank Ms. Brigitte Balipou, a
trailblazing women’s rights lawyer from the Central
African Republic, who will be speaking today for
civil society, which is very significant. I also join the

4/75

18/10/2013

Secretary-General in welcoming the adoption of a new
recommendation on women in conflict prevention,
conflict and post-conflict situations by the Committee
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, which is another important milestone.
Above all, I thank the entire Council membership
for demonstrating its determination, by adopting
resolution 2122 (2013) today, to put women’s leadership
at the centre of all efforts to resolve conflict and
promote peace. The resolution is about the leadership
of women as peacemakers. It puts the onus on all of
us — the Security Council, the United Nations, regional
organizations and Member States — to create the space
and provide seats at the peace table for women. I know
for sure that women are adequately trained for these
roles. They are available and willing to be appointed at
the highest levels. It is up to us —the United Nations,
UN Women and Member States — to ensure that women
are there at the peace table as mediators. Their teams
must encourage negotiating parties to invite women to
the table and address women’s issues in ceasefire and
peace accords. This is in the best interest of lasting
peace.
It is critical that the Security Council members
ask for briefings on the specific impacts of conflict on
women, which the resolution facilitates, and that they
ask that all conflict-related crimes perpetrated against
women be reported by international commissions of
inquiry, sanctions committees and other accountability
bodies. Friends of peace processes and hosts of donor
conferences are also urged to provide additional
financing for the inclusion of women’s groups and
women leaders. Women’s rights organizations must be
supported in their efforts to build constituencies for
peace and justice.
Of course, the inclusion of women alone will not
solve all our problems. There is a need for much more
to be done if peace processes are to be effective and
inclusive. Gender analysis must be used to identify the
impact on women’s rights of all peace-related decisions.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda shows progress and good practice over the
past year. Ninety-three percent of directives for
police components in missions now include specific
instructions to address women’s security; this is
already 40 per cent more than last year. International
commissions of inquiry now routinely include gender
crimes investigators.
13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

I warmly welcome the appointment of Mary
Robinson as the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral to the Great Lakes Region, and thank Aïchatou
Mindaoudou Souleymane for her work as Acting African
Union-United Nations Joint Special Representative for
Darfur. We are now seeing what could be described as
a generation of gender-responsive mediation practice
from these and other peace leaders. Elements of this
practice include holding early and regular consultations
with women leaders and women’s rights groups;
securing a gender advisor for the mediation team; and
ensuring that crimes against women are addressed in
ceasefire and peace negotiations. I include here the
efforts this past year of a growing number of senior
officials — including Margaret Vogt in the Central
African Republic and Special Envoy Prodi in the
Sahel region — to ensure more inclusive and genderresponsive practices.
This year, 3 out of 10 peace agreements in United
Nations-supported processes included provisions on
women’s political participation or protection. That is an
important improvement. The Council will agree with
me that such provisions should be included in all peace
accords.
We also see that post-conflict countries that are
using temporary special measures, such as electoral
gender quotas, have more women in parliament, well
above the global average of 21 per cent. But the report
of the Secretary-General also shows that we cannot be
complacent, because gains made can also be lost. And
we see that over the past years, the numbers of women
at senior levels in the United Nations — for instance,
in field missions — have remained relatively stagnant.
While there has been some progress in political and
peacebuilding missions, there has been a decrease in
the share of women in top mission leadership positions.
With the Council’s help, I am determined that we make
progress. As UN Women, we will be supporting that
process.
Mass atrocities, including violence targeting
women and girls, have occurred in the past year in
the context of such diverse situations as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and Syria.
That has to be a challenge that we face together. In other
contexts, such as Afghanistan, there has been increased
targeted killing of women leaders and human rights
defenders. In some areas of peacebuilding there is an
increase in spending on gender equality and women’s

S/PV.7044

empowerment, which we must applaud. Therefore, we
are seeing both progress and challenges.
At this point, the support recommended by
the Secretary-General in his report has not been
provided as foreseen, rarely reaching the 15 per cent
minimum. I am therefore committed to reaching those
targets. The Secretary-General’s report also sets out
strategic measures for all stakeholders to accelerate
implementation, many of which are reflected in
today’s resolution. Those measures focus on removing
obstacles to women’s peace leadership and on building
the capacities of the Security Council and the United
Nations system to address gender issues across all peace
and security work. There is also a call for a global study
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to help
us all prepare for the 2015 ministerial meeting of the
Council on this topic.
Before I conclude, let me touch again on today’s
topic. In recent years, the Security Council has paid
increased attention to transitional justice, recognizing
that victims have a right to truth, justice and reparations.
Respect for the rule of law is therefore connected to
every aspect of peacebuilding. But the President of
the Council is right in asking what the meaning of the
rule of law is without respect for women’s rights. In
some contexts, the law itself is gender-biased. It fails
to criminalize some forms of violence against women.
Even where laws are consistent with international
human rights standards, authorities may be inconsistent
in their application. We know very well that there is
a climate of impunity for crimes committed against
women.
I welcome resolution 2106 (2013), adopted last
June, to strengthen capacities to stop the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of warfare. I stand shoulder to
shoulder with my colleague Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in the fight against
impunity for such war crimes. Her support and
collaboration are valued.
I want us to remember today that the public and
visible forms of gender-based violence in wartime are
based on the private violence against women in many
homes, and on the serious inequalities between men
and women.
Women’s leadership and collective action have
changed the world by combatting violence against
women and building equality. Women’s leadership is

13-520115/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

central to reconciliation and conflict resolution, and
to peacebuilding efforts that bring results for families
and communities. That is why I wish members good
progress in this area. I welcome today’s resolution on
women’s peace leadership. When we next report to the
Council, we would like to show that we have made even
more progress and that, together with the Council, we
have made the world a better place for women.
The President: I thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to address this open debate on women and
peace and security. I shall briefly address four main
points: first, the situation of women’s human rights in
conflict; secondly, ensuring that gender considerations
are taken into account during transitional justice
processes, and making sure there is accountability
for crimes suffered by women; thirdly, the value of
comprehensive human rights-based approaches to
transitional justice; and, lastly, much-needed efforts
to create closer links between the peace and security,
human rights and development agendas to fully seize
the opportunity offered by transitional justice processes
for women.
First, the protection of women’s human rights in
conflict remains a challenge. Let me provide just a
couple of examples. In September, the International
Commission of Inquiry on Syria submitted its most
recent report to the Human Rights Council, which
stressed the prominent role that the use and threat of
sexual violence were playing in the conflict. The report
also showed how vulnerable the women and girls in
refugee camps were to sexual exploitation, forced
marriage and trafficking.
Also in September, I reported to the Human Rights
Council on the fact-finding mission of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to the Central African Republic, which reported
a high rate of sexual violence against women. Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović
visited the Central African Republic in August and
confirmed those findings. The Human Rights Council
has adopted a resolution establishing a Special
Rapporteur on the Central African Republic. My Office
will encourage close attention to the situation of women
and girls in the work of that mandate.

6/75

18/10/2013

Secondly, the establishment of the rule of law and
transitional justice processes are crucial to ensuring
accountability and delivering justice, truth and
reparations for violations suffered by women. They are
also crucial to deter the continuation of such violations
in future. Today we observe considerable progress in
several areas.
The full, free and informed participation of women
in national consultations is increasingly regarded as
instrumental for the design and implementation of
comprehensive, context-specific, gender-sensitive
transitional justice strategies. To give just one
example, at the beginning of October, the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights visited Yemen and
commended the authorities for conducting a national
dialogue in which 30 per cent of the participants were
women.
Increasingly, the mandates, compositions and
operations of truth and reconciliation commissions
and similar bodies are designed to ensure that
women’s and girls’ experiences are taken into account.
In his recent report to the Human Rights Council,
the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth,
justice, reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence
highlighted the increased attention being paid by truth
commissions to women’s rights.
Similarly, there have been increasing efforts to
systematically include gender considerations in the
work of commissions of inquiry, including having
experts on gender appointed to the secretariats of the
ongoing commissions of inquiry working on Syria
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Given
the role that those mechanisms can play in laying the
ground for transitional justice processes, such expertise
can make an important contribution to bringing about
gender-sensitive justice and redress. We closely
collaborate with UN Women in that area.
There is now much greater recognition of the need
for and the potential of gender-sensitive reparations.
My Office has undertaken consultations with survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda, and Kosovo as per
resolution 1244 (1999). We have produced reports that
include recommendations to inform reparations effforts
there. In the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, my Office is concluding a pilot project that
consists of grants to five local organizations to provide
support and assistance to survivors of sexual violence.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

A guidance note on reparations for victims of conflictrelated sexual violence is being prepared jointly by my
Ofice and UN Women, which will be available shortly.
In several countries, there have been targeted
efforts to encourage the prosecution of perpetrators
of sexual and gender-based violence. For example,
the Joint Human Rights Office of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has supported legal clinics that
represent victims of sexual violence. It has also trained
police, prosecutors and magistrates to better handle
sexual violence investigations and trials. As a result
of those and other efforts, an increasing number of
convictions has been registered. While all that progress
is encouraging, we must also be aware that there is
still a long, hard road ahead before we can claim to
be providing justice, accountability and seizing the
potential of transitional justice processes for women
fully.
Thirdly, as we continue to advance along that
road, we must focus our efforts within international
human rights norms and standards, including the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). I join the
Secretary-General and Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka
in noting the importance of a resolution adopted this
morning in Geneva by the CEDAW Committee, which
is a general recommendation on women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations. I
support the Committee’s view that efforts to ensure
judicial accountability and to uncover the truth about
past violations must take into account a whole range of
violations, as well as the underlying structural sexual
and gender-based discrimination that made them
possible. I also believe that, according to the spirit and
letter of CEDAW and other human rights instruments,
efforts to halt violations must be framed around an
obligation to address structural and systemic gender
inequality and discrimination through comprehensive
legislative, policy and institutional reforms.
Developments in the Middle East and North
Africa region exemplify the need for transitional
justice processes and institutional reforms that are
mindful of the interdependence and interrelatedness
of human rights. In some countries of that region,
women parliamentarians face fierce opposition when
they propose laws that address women’s rights, while
in others public spaces for women are shrinking due to
threats and intimidation. It is crucial that while we look

S/PV.7044

into quotas and other mechanisms to support women’s
participation in political systems in countries emerging
from conflict, we also need to consider how illiteracy,
poverty, discrimination and violence conspire to
prevent their effective participation.
My Office will raise awareness about CEDAW’s
new general recommendation and promote its
implementation. My Office will also submit to the
Human Rights Council at its September 2014 session an
analytical study on gender-based and sexual violence in
relation to transitional justice. Those are ongoing efforts
to ensure that the human rights reports and briefings
that reach this Council fully integrate women’s rights,
including through specialized capacity-building tools
and activities for human rights officers. My Office, in
cooperation with UN Women, is also undertaking an
internal lessons-learned exercise on the provision of
gender and sexual and gender-based violence expertise
to commissions of inquiry in order to help further
progress in ensuring that their work is gender-sensitive.
Finally, I fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for closer links between the United
Nations peace and security, human rights and
development work. A human-rights-based approach
is crucial to successfully address the root causes of
conflict and threats to women’s security. It is also crucial
to seize the opportunity offered by transitions, which
include transforming gender relations, dismantling
negative gender stereotypes, reforming legislation that
discriminates against women, supporting women’s
autonomy in private and public spaces and, eventually,
building just and equal societies where peace and
development can prosper.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Balipou.
Ms. Balipou (spoke in French): I would like to
start by expressing my gratitude for the opportunity to
address the Security Council. I speak today on behalf
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security. I am also here in my capacity as a magistrate
in the Central African Republic, a board member of
Femmes Africa Solidarité and a founding member of
the Women Lawyers Association of the Central African
Republic. The Working Group welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2013/525) on women and peace
and security, which provides clear analysis and data on
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), while
also identifying remaining gaps and challenges. We

13-520117/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

would also like to welcome Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, the new Executive Director of UN Women.
I wish to convey to the Council greetings from
the Central African Republic, which over the past two
decades has experienced a crisis that has undermined
both its unity and national cohesion. Since 24 March,
the situation on the ground has spiralled out of control
and into a full-blown conflict, which has impacted the
entire civilian population and especially women and
girls, who have been subjected to rape and other forms
of sexual violence on a large-scale. The recruitment of
child soldiers has also taken on major dimensions. We
live in fear. We are being killed indiscriminately in large
numbers; we have been impacted by rampant looting;
we lack food and supplies; our children have not been
able to go to school since March; and our country is
being destroyed. The Central African Republic needs
urgent security and humanitarian intervention. Our
human rights are being violated right before the eyes of
the international community.
The Security Council has today taken significant
steps to fully implement resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. The new resolution 2122
(2013) lays out key commitments regarding women’s
participation. It is quite clear to our colleagues from
civil society who work on a daily basis to implement
the framework resolutions on women and peace
and security that the main challenges in terms of
participation continue to be unmet, especially when
it comes to the participation and inclusion of women
in all conflict prevention, resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction.
It is high time to dismantle the barriers to the full
participation of women at all levels of decision-making.
It is also high time, 13 years after the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), for consistent
resourcing and sustained political will to support the
legitimate role of women in preventing and ending
conflicts and in rebuilding countries following conflicts
such as that currently plaguing my own country, the
Central African Republic.
We women of the Central African Republic demand
full involvement in peace negotiation processes. It is
high time to ensure respect for women’s fundamental
rights and to guarantee effective responses to women’s
protection concerns. Such calls are echoed by women
in Syria, Afghanistan, Myanmar, Colombia, Libya,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and every
community affected by armed conflict.
8/75

18/10/2013

In support of the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and of ensuring that its implementation
reflects the full scope of framework resolutions on
women, peace and security, today I will address
the following key points regarding justice, conflict
prevention, demilitarization and disarmament, security
and comprehensive multisectoral responses.
First, on the issue of justice, the agenda for today’s
debate, “Women, rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict-affected situations,” is of great importance to
my country. This vision of justice is rooted in peace
efforts and requires that peace agreements not include
amnesties for crimes against women. Such justice is
achieved by ensuring gender parity in transitional
justice systems, including reconciliation, and women’s
political participation as political candidates and voters.
These efforts should guarantee reparations for crimes
under international law, including those that seek to
eliminate rather than perpetuate gender inequalities.
That in turn depends on non-discrimination, equal
citizenship rights for women, access to safe public
transportation, the effective delivery of basic services
such as health care, water and electricity, and witness
and victim protection programmes. Due to the conflict,
our justice system in the Central African Republic has
been almost completely destroyed, making it impossible
for someone like me, a magistrate, to serve the people. It
is currently impossible for women to access justice. The
judicial infrastructure in the Central African Republic
needs to be rebuilt, the perpetrators of violations must
be held accountable before the law, and resources must
be allocated to enable the documentation of crimes.
Secondly, conflict prevention lies at the core
of the women, peace and security agenda and of the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
requires us to undertake an in-depth analysis of the
causes of conflict, which includes the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, acute societal
inequalities, and the inability of States to protect their
population. The prevention of armed conflicts requires
strengthened investment in ensuring women’s rights,
equal ducation, and a women-led civil society. These
issues are critical to preventing wars and conflicts. In
the Central African Republic, it is vital that the root
causes of conflict be addressed and that rising religious
tensions be assuaged through open dialogue. We call
for the full participation of women’s civil society
organizations in the planning for the legislative and
presidential elections to be held in 2015.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

My third point concerns demilitarization,
disarmament
and
security
sector
reform.
Demilitarization must be an essential element in
conflict prevention. Traditional security areas, such
as disarmament, demobilization and security sector
reform, must be made accessible to women. We ask
that this be taken into consideration during the planned
deployment of African Union peacekeeping troops to
the Central African Republic and of any other additional
forces.
Fourthly, with regard to multisectoral responses,
the entire population of the Central African Republic
is critically in need of humanitarian assistance, the
delivery of which requires a secure environment. In
communities ravaged by armed conflict, humanitarian
responses must be mobilized in line with international
humanitarian law and established good practices, taking
special account of gender in the design, delivery and
evaluation of programmes. This is key to ensuring the
safety of girls and women through the implementation
of effective protection and prevention measures so as
to enable them to access necessary services and to
advance women’s leadership at all levels, including in
situations of forced displacement. Securing additional
comprehensive multisectoral responses through
sufficient funding and by ensuring the availability of
medical, legal, psychosocial and livelihood services is
crucial for women’s empowerment in conflict and postconflict situations.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
is too urgent to continue to wait. Women’s civil
society groups must be engaged as key partners and
be deeply involved in peace, mediation, negotiation
and governmental processes. Women’s rights must
be prioritized by implementing national and regional
action plans pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as at the regional level by holding regular meetings with
women’s groups and women leaders, and by ensuring
that women’s priorities are substantively incorporated
in all key negotiations. Political and financial
resources must be allocated to women’s civil society
organizations, and the principles of resolution 1325
(2000) must be embedded in the post-2015 development
goals and indicators.
I appeal to the Council to ensure that the conflict
in the Central African Republic is not forgotten, and to
take swift action in that regard. Each day of inaction
is a day of too many lives lost needlessly. We call on
members of the Security Council to be role models by

S/PV.7044

consistently and fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000).
The President: I thank Ms. Balipou for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the Members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join in the
expressions of gratitude for the statements that we
have heard today. I particularly want to thank you, Sir,
for holding this debate, and the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN Women, Ms. MlamboNgcuka, High Commissioner Pillay and Ms. Balipou for
their valuable briefings. I think it is right that we have
applauded them. I would also like to thank everybody
who has come to participate in and to bear witness to
the debate today. For those who cannot see, the debate
will also be recorded on camera. The Chamber is full
and their presence adds weight to what we have decided
and to what we will discuss in the Chamber throughout
the day.
I want to welcome the adoption today of resolution
2122 (2013) on women, peace and security. The
resolution reinstates and reiterates the central role
of women in resolving conflict and helping to build
a sustainable peace. I want in particular to highlight
three aspects of the resolution.
First, it places women, peace and security front and
centre in the Council’s work. The Secretary-General
has outlined what that means for the Council and his
own personal commitment to this, but it also means in
a very practical sense that the Council will now receive
more regular briefings and more updates from United
Nations bodies and officials on this subject. That means
that it is central to our work.
Secondly, the resolution highlights the need for
women’s participation in areas affected by conflict.
We have asked that special representatives and special
envoys in all United Nations missions regularly consult
women’s organizations early on in their deployment.
Their voices must be heard and needs taken into account
in all conflict-resolution and peacebuilding processes.
Thirdly, the resolution makes clear the Council’s
commitment to a meaningful review of the
implementation of this agenda in 2015, as the SecretaryGeneral emphasized in his remarks earlier. The
review must be based on clear data. We have therefore
requested the Secretary-General to commission a
global study on the remaining gaps and challenges. I

13-520119/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

18/10/2013

welcome the constructive work of all Council members
on the resolution and hope that we will continue to
work in a productive manner as we move towards the
2015 review.

the leaders of change, as those to be protected rather
than respected and included as equal participants in all
decision-making processes. As Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka
said, women are central to leadership.

I now turn to the theme of the debate, “Women,
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations”. Throughout the world, security and justice
systems fail women time and time again. In conflict
and post-conflict settings where institutions break
down and violence is rampant, existing injustices
are often exacerbated. However, transitions out of
conflict provide opportunities to strengthen women’s
leadership, empowerment and rights, while restoring
the rule of law and governance systems. Rebuilding
justice and the rule of law if fundamental to protecting
women’s equal rights and creating a more stable, secure
and just society.

Since the end of the Cold War, women have
represented only 4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements, less than 3 per cent of mediators of peace
talks and less than 10 per cent of anyone sitting at
the table to negotiate on behalf of a party to conflict.
Excluding 50 per cent of society will never lead to
stable and lasting peace. Peace can be achieved only
with women’s active participation and leadership.

As the Secretary-General has highlighted, women’s
representation in the justice sector is crucial and helps
increase the reporting of crimes. Barriers must be
removed so that women can access justice in formal and
traditional settings. For example, we have seen success
through the use of mobile corts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and paralegal support groups
in Nepal. In addition, the most basic needs must be
provided for, from access to safe public transportation
to the effective delivery of services, such as water and
electricity, as Ms. Balipou so eloquently highlighted in
her statement earlier.
The United Kingdom has established a team of
experts on the rule of law. That team, which includes
lawyers, gender advisers and experts in the protection
of witnesses, provides training and mentoring to
national authorities to help them develop appropriate
laws and build their capabilities. The teams also worked
on the front line with grass-roots organizations, local
peacebuilders and human rights defenders. They have
already been deployed to the Syrian borders, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Libya, Mali and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The United Kingdom welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/525) and the important
recommendations that it makes. We welcome the
ongoing work of UN Women, and we recognize that the
continuing challenges in implementing the agenda lie
beyond the topic of today’s debate.
In conflict settings worldwide, women continue to
be seen merely as victims of violence rather than as

10/75

The United Kingdom welcomes the Council’s
consultation with women’s organizations during its trip
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo earlier this
month. We also commend the recent work of Ms. Mary
Robinson. I agree with the Secretary-General that
hers was an excellent appointment on engaging with
women’s civil society in the Great Lakes region. I hope
others will follow by example.
We have two years before the Council’s highlevel review, in 2015, to demonstrate our collective
commitment to the agenda. Ahead of that, let us all,
Member States, the Council and United Nations entities,
invigorate our efforts and give the issue the attention it
deserves and take the action that we have committed to
at the Council today.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I welcome
the chance to participate in this debate on issues that
are central to the mission of the United Nations and to
the future of us all. I thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2013/525), his presence here today
and the personal commitment he has made to women
and peace and security.
I also would like to thank Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka for her testimony and for her tremendous
leadership of UN Women. We know that the best is
still ahead, and we are delighted to have her in that
role. I would like to thank High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay, who has spent her whole career
pressing the agenda, with significant returns. I also
thank Ms. Balipou, not only for her remarks and for
undertaking an arduous journey to be with us here
today but also for advocating with such eloquence on
behalf of women’s participation and on behalf of the
rule of law, which go very much together in the Central
African Republic and beyond. What she does takes
courage, an we commend her for it.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark measure.
It affirmed the principle that women’s participation
in conflict prevention, mitigation and recovery was
vital to the maintenance of international security and
peace — not a sideshow, but vital. That reality is in
turn linked to the achievement of all eight of the
Millennium Development Goals, whether directly, as
in women’s empowerment, or as a logical consequence,
as in the areas of universal education, maternal health,
child mortality and environmental protection. Progress
towards one of those essential Goals will make gains
easier in the others. All are connected to women’s
participation in peace and security.
Today’s debate, as we know, focuses on one
particular aspect of that linkage, which is the rule
of law. That focus is appropriate because the law is
diminished in any country where half of the population
is denied the chance to shape it. Years ago, I bore witness
as a journalist to the brutal violence in the Balkans.
There mass rape was used as a tactic of war, and the
means of accountability had to be created through
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. However, it was created only after tens of
thousands of people had already died. We have learned
through hard experience that wars are increasingly
carried out less by professional troops than by irregular
forces, leading to more civilian casualties, economic
disruption and displaced families. During the chaos of
armed conflict, legal systems are often bypassed, and
sexual predators, we found, do their worst.
In the wake of such suffering, we understand that
inadequate governance and limited resources may
complicate the task of recovery and healing. There is,
however, one standard that we can live up to regardless
of the situation. That is the principle of inclusion.
Whether a country is rich or poor, there is no excuse for
denying women fair representation when negotiating
the terms of the peace, when enacting laws or when
forging a conflict-free future.
The United Nations should be a standard setter and,
according to the Secretary-General’s September report,
some important progress is being made. In the past
year, as we have heard, women were included in every
formal peace-negotiating process led or co-led by the
United Nations. Gender experts were present in 85 per
cent of delegations. In each case, representatives of
women’s civil society groups were consulted. Women
are playing a more prominent role in crisis prevention,
most notably in Darfur and the Great Lakes region. Since

S/PV.7044

2009, gender crimes investigators have been a part of
all United Nations commissions of inquiry, and as was
said, this year 3 out of 10 peace agreements in United
Nations-supported processes included provisions for
women’s political participation or protection. That is
more than the year before.
An analysis of women and security is now included
in most reports by peacekeeping and special political
missions. The Secretary-General has established, and
my Government and other Governments vigorously
support, the policy of zero tolerance towards
sexual-related abuses committed by United Nations
personnel, something that still happens with alarming
incidence.
Less impressive, however, is the level of women’s
participation in police and military deployments. The
figures of 10 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively,
remain well below the modest target of 20 per cent
that had been set for next year. Just as disappointing,
only 4 of the 27 peace-related field missions are led
by women. Moreover, we have all deplored the horrific
sexual crimes being carried out daily in Syria, where
rape has again become a routine weapon of war.
The Council is just back from the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where we met
with internally displaced persons, peacekeepers and
civil society who described a near pandemic of sexual
violence associated with the conflict there. Clearly,
the involvement of women in peace and security is a
goal that must be approached from many directions
simultaneously. That is why the United States
encourages every country to develop an action plan.
My Government announced its own blue print
two years ago, after broad consultations with civil
society. The plan lays out a comprehensive strategy
for incorporating women in efforts to prevent conflict,
provide humanitarian protection, foster food security
and ensure fair treatment under the law. That plan is
backed by leaders across the United States Government.
President Obama is personally determined to change
the DNA of the United States Government so that the
inexorable link between women’s inclusion and lasting
peace is a premise, or an axiom, brought to every
policy discussion. President Obama and Secretary of
State Kerry have ordered its full integration into our
diplomacy. The Defence Department is spreading the
message of gender awareness to partners across the
globe. Our Justice Department is working with police,
prosecutors and judges to increase accountability for

13-5201111/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

sexual violence, and the Centers for Disease Control
have launched a system for monitoring abuse against
women and girls. As the Secretary-General’s report
acknowledges, there remain troubling gaps in what we
know about women and security, but one thing we have
learned is that there is a correlation between gender
inequity and the potential for civil strife.
Let us consider, for example, the Central African
Republic, which ranks 138th out of 146 on the United
Nations Development Programme’s Gender Inequality
Index. Even before the explosion of violence, teen
pregnancy was out of control and the rate of unhealthy
births and maternal deaths was far too high. The
situation is now a catastrophe as rebels have replaced
law with anarchy and, as we have heard, a quarter of
a million people have been driven from their homes.
The depth of that crisis underlines the importance of
Ms. Balipou’s presence here today. It is vital that her
message of inclusion be heeded.
The Secretary-General’s report reminds us that
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must go
forward with both the short and long terms in mind.
Our ultimate goal is a transformation in how people
everywhere think about security. Our daily focus is on
the incremental changes that will lead us in the right
direction. Because of UN Women and its partners,
numerous productive initiatives are under way. Those
range from the peacebuilding efforts of women in
Mali to new legal protection measures in Colombia to
smoother access to justice in Haiti to the enhanced role
for women in the police of Zimbabwe. Women are also
playing an important part in preparing for elections in
Sierra Leone and in harnessing new communications
technology to monitor and report on violations in the
Sudan and other areas of conflict.
There is cumulative power in the new voices being
heard, and when opportunities arise some civil society
leaders are making the leap from outside advocacy to
positions of political power. We have seen in Kenya
civil society deeply engaged in a five-year campaign,
endorsed by the United Nations, to enshrine the rights
of women to own land, live equally in marriage and
be free from the threat of violence, and on the election
day this past spring a record 87 women were chosen
for Parliament — a number that, pursuant to the
country’s new Constitution, will increase further in the
years ahead. We also commend Rwanda, 62 per cent
of whose parliamentarians are now women, which is a
remarkable statistic.

12/75

18/10/2013

We know too that what begins as a single voice
can sometimes become a mighty chorus. Like many
here, I recently had the honour of meeting Malala
Yousafzai, the young Pakistani with the soft smile
and the steel spine, as well as a powerful message of
inclusion. Whether discussing the right of a girl to sit in
a classroom or the right of a woman to lead her country
in the quest for security and peace, the principle is the
same and the dividend for peace, for dignity and for
prosperity of women’s inclusion is obvious.
At least since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
13 years ago, the international community has agreed on
the direction in which we want to move. As we continue
to go forward, let us confront honestly the obstacles
that remain before us. Let us create a spin-free zone on
resolution 1325 (2000) and its implementation and let
us not conflate effort with results. They are different.
Let us instead take concrete steps so that women share
fully in efforts to avoid and contain conflict, just as
they inevitably share in the suffering when such efforts
are poorly designed or when they fail.
Make no mistake — the engagement of women
in peace and security does not reflect a desire for
disengagement by men. The principle that guides
us is respect for the rights and dignity of all. To end
and recover from strife we seek the leadership and
participation of each gender and every nationality. Just
as all benefit from peace, so all must help to create
peace.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia obviously
welcomes Azerbaijan bringing the Council’s focus
to the critical intersection between the rule of law,
transitional justice, and the women, peace and security
agenda.
I thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their determined
efforts, and Ms. Balipou for her inspiring struggle on
the front lines. I welcome Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, the new
Executive Director of UN Women. We look forward to
receiving regular briefings from her and other senior
United Nations officials on the gender dimensions of
conflict and across the thematic work on our agenda. It
is integral to our work that they regularly provide such
input.
Thirteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
recognized the central role of women in the maintenance
of international peace and security. But as the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/525) makes clear, while there

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

has been some progress, typically the linkages between
women’s participation and the work of the Council are
not made. The consistent inclusion in mission mandates
of women, peace and security objectives is fundamental
to addressing that. Indeed, if the Council is to remain
a responsive role model, it is critical that timely
and relevant information and analysis be provided
systematically by all United Nations actors deployed in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. Australia
commends the adoption today of resolution 2122 (2013)
for clearly articulating that.
It has long been recognized that women’s
engagement in conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding efforts is more likely to lead to
sustainable peace and security. Of the over 2 million
refugees from Syria today, 78 per cent are women and
girls. Having fled the violence in Syria, they are now
attempting to navigate a tidal wave of threats, including
sexual violence, mass forced displacement, early and
forced marriage, forced pregnancies and exploitation.
Those circumstances must not prevent their vital
contribution to reconstructing a safe and functioning
Syrian society, and we must ensure that their leadership
is harnessed as part of the solution.
For countries emerging from conflict, peace
processes often lead to institutional reforms that
establish new political, economic and social orders.
Women’s early participation in peace talks is critical
not only to their effectiveness, but to underpinning
women’s longer-term empowerment. Formal peace
processes must reflect the reality that women are
already undertaking peace work in their communities
and serving as agents of change as part of efforts to
keep the fabric of conflict-affected societies together.
Local justice remains critical to the long-term
healing and reconciliation of communities, and affected
States must ensure accountability for conflict-related
crimes. But to be effective, that must include justice
for crimes of sexual violence. Fifteen years since the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
included sexual and gender-based offences as crimes
against humanity and war crimes, the inclusion of such
offences in transitional justice arrangements must be
mainstreamed. From prosecutions to truth commissions
to reparations programmes, effective transitional
justice mechanisms must incorporate the situation of
women.
Engaging women as leaders is critical to building
sustainable peace. We must identify and address

S/PV.7044

impediments that prevent women from participating
in decision-making. We commend Mary Robinson’s
appointment as Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region
and her long overdue approach to consulting early with
women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
support the United Nations ongoing dialogue with
women’s civil society organizations as a barometer
of progress and a critical source of knowledge on the
effectiveness of missions.
In post-conflict settings, women’s full and effective
participation is fundamental to efforts to rebuild the
justice sector and to security sector reform. In Solomon
Islands, Australia supported, through the Participating
Police Force, the post-conflict recruitment and
retention of female officers to the local police force.
The early involvement of women and the integration of
a gender-perspective led directly to the establishment
of critical domestic violence and sexual abuse services.
Also, more fundamentally, it underwrote the broader
processes of community rebuilding.
Of course, ensuring women and girls’ safety and
security in conflict is instrumental to laying the ground
for gender equality initiatives. We look forward to the
contribution that the implementation of the Arms Trade
Treaty can make to reducing gender-based violence
in conflict settings, and we strongly encourage its
ratification.
To conclude, the high-level review of resolution 1325
(2000) in 2015 will provide a necessary opportunity to
take stock of our successes and to address the ongoing
gaps in implementing our agenda. The Council’s
dedicated field mission ahead of that will be important
in providing us with direct insights to help inform
those discussions. But of course, for women in conflict
situations, our review of the effective implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda cannot wait.
We must continue, across the whole breadth of the
Council’s work, to rigorously strengthen the Council’s
consideration of the gender dimensions of conflict.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to convey to you, Sir, on behalf of the
Moroccan delegation, our gratitude for the convening
of this debate. I thank for their briefings SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women.
I welcome Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka’s appointment and
assure her of our full cooperation and support as she
discharges her mission. We also thank Ms. Brigitte

13-5201113/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

Balipou, Chair of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for her constructive contribution.
My delegation welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on women, peace and security (S/2013/525)
and the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) on the issue.
The report takes stock of the actions and initiatives of
Member States in the framework of implementation
of the resolution, especially in strengthening women’s
participation in decision-making, integrating genderspecific issues in peacekeeping operations and
training staff who participate in those operations.
The report confirms that much work remains, despite
the significant progress of women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations and their representation in the
decision-making process.
The signing of peace agreements and ceasefire
agreements and the implementation of national action
plans and programmes for the protection of women in
conflict-affected countries have made it possible to
identify, in a more appropriate way, the ways and means
likely to promote women’s rights and to strengthen their
participation in efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
and in post-conflict reconstruction.
My delegation supports the initiatives of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict to assist States in strengthening the rule of
law, transitional justice and security sector reform. My
delegation also supports the elaboration by the Standing
Committee on Women, Peace and Security of the
strategic framework intended to assist Member States
in achieving their interim objectives, in preparation for
the meeting planned for 2015 on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at national, regional and
international levels.
Effective and optimal empowerment of women
in the context of peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction involves the collective and coordinated
action of the international community and the United
Nations system, through strengthening protection and
prevention measures adapted to specific contexts that
will facilitate the implementation of the resolution.
The establishment of genuine peace requires
the establishment of inclusive and durable political,
economic and social structures. Within that
framework, local women’s entities are a driving
force in empowering women and strengthening good
governance. My delegation welcomes the work carried
out in the framework of the United Nations system

14/75

18/10/2013

to strengthen women’s capacities and involvement in
mediation and peacebuilding processes. Similarly, it
supports the implementation of the Secretary-General’s
seven-point action plan (see S/2010/466), which enables
greater consideration of gender issues in peacebuilding
operations.
As for protection, my delegation notes with concern
that refugee or displaced women continue to suffer most
from generalized insecurity, difficult living conditions
and limited access to humanitarian assistance. The
same is true for refugee women who lack documents
and often face gender-based discrimination, especially
in accessing basic social services. In that connection,
it is essential that Member States — especially the
States parties to the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees — comply with their obligations
and register refugees in their territory. Registration and
identification programmes can have a positive impact
in empowering women refugees.
My delegation welcomes the efforts undertaken
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) in the protection of women in armed conflict
and the consideration of gender-specific issues in the
framework of the maintenance of peace. We stress that
it is important that DPKO strengthen its work on the
ground, in coordination with the relevant parties.
While the responsibility to put an end to the tragic
consequences of armed conflict for women and children
lies with States, coordinated and sustained action
among the various national and United Nations actors
involved in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is necessary to strengthen existing initiatives.
Firm political will and full commitment of Member
States to the measures in resolution 1325 (2000)
will guarantee the active participation of women in
national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Before delivering my statement, I would like to say
that this morning, my delegation had requested the
right to explain its vote. I would like to believe that an
unintentional error caused that opportunity to be lost.
Our motive was not to explain why we voted in favour
of resolution 2122 (2013), but rather to explain why we
did not sponsor it, which would have been our normal
inclination, given our strong commitment to resolution
1325 (2000). The reason was that despite my delegation’s

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

reiterated proposals for a slight nuance in the language
of the eighth preambular paragraph, to accommodate
it in our national legislation, our proposals were not
heeded, and we merely wanted to have that recorded.
I now turn to my statement. I wish to thank you,
Sir, for convening this open debate. Anecdotally, it
brings back memories of my presidency of the Council
exactly one year ago, when a presidential statement
was adopted (S/PRST/2012/23) even before the debate
was held, for it was postponed until November due to
Hurricane Sandy, which caused so much damage to the
city that it prevented the scheduled meeting. That is
why we welcome the convening of the debate and the
adoption of the new resolution, which strengthens the
conceptual framework of the Council’s groundbreaking
resolution 1325 (2000) on the issue, as well as several
subsequent resolutions and presidential statements.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/525) and for presenting it to the Council. We
also thank the new Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her presentation.
I thank Ms. Navanethem Pillay for her valuable
contributions to the topic in the Council today, and I
especially thank Ms. Brigitte Balipou for providing
so eloquently a collective vision of civil society
organizations, whose participation we have consistently
supported. I also note that we value the concept paper
prepared by the presidency (S/2013/587, annex).
Each year the Council has continued to build upon
the core premise of resolution 1325 (2000), because we
are convinced that without women’s security, there can
be no lasting peace. We think that the timely theme of
today’s debate, on women, rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict-affected situations, will generate
added value.
Although so far the Council has held seven debates
on the issue of the rule of law, there is still a way to go
to achieve overall accountability for crimes affecting
women and girls. Nor have we made sufficient progress
in achieving women’s full participation in the processes
of transitional justice. Similarly, there is room to
improve the analysis of sex-differentiated effects on
women and girls when the rule of law is violated during
and after conflicts.
We have previously said that, based on our own
experience, the boundaries between peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and economic, social and legal
transformations are not clear. Therefore, we think it is

S/PV.7044

of the utmost importance to advance the fight against
impunity, improve access to justice for women and
strengthen the justice system infrastructure to deal with
such crimes, both nationally and internationally. With
regard to our own country, we have adopted legislation
on femicide and established courts for the prosecution
of that crime, as well as justice centres for onsite legal,
judicial and medical services, including psychosocial
support for women and their children. We agree with
the Secretary-General’s recommendation that we must
step up efforts to meet and fund the recovery needs of
women and girls, especially those who have become
heads of households.
Moreover, my country wishes to acknowledge
the work of UN Women, whose establishment was a
singularly important institutional step forward, among
other things to promote the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We support greater participation by women
in peacebuilding and strengthening civil capacity after
conflicts to be consistent with the issue of women and
peace and security. We believe that it is necessary to
recognize women as builders of peace and stability.
The resolution that we adopted today contributes to
reducing the vulnerability of women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. We recognize the
need to receive timely information in order to intervene
early and save lives. In that sense, preventing conflicts
is the best way to protect all civilians from the horrors
that accompany armed conflicts, in particular women
and girls.
Finally, we believe that the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), in 2015, will
provide not only the Security Council but the entire
United Nations system an opportunity to review the
levels of implementation of that resolution and to renew
commitments to combat violence, including sexual
violence. We urge all Member States and the United
Nations system to facilitate greater participation by
women in that area.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to thank the Secretary-General and everyone
who, based on their experience and commitment, has
contributed to the need to make progress in realizing
the full equality for women.
In that connection, I should like to recall what
Patrick Cammaert, former Deputy Force Commander
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, said in 2008: it

13-5201115/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

is more dangerous to be a woman than a soldier in a
modern conflict.
Argentina would like to emhasize the need for a
gender perspective and for crimes against women to be
incorporated into the agenda of peace negotiations. To
that end, we need women in decision-making positions
and at all stages of the peace process. We know that
women are victims of widespread violence at the hands
of all parties involved in a conflict. We also know that
sexual violence in conflict is not a new phenomenon,
rather it is a powerful weapon used to destroy not
merely the life of a woman but also to destroy families,
communities, ethnic groups or entire nations.
Although we still hear that violence is as old as war
itself and that women’s bodies have been a battlefield
for centuries throughout the world, the experience in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda served to scuttle
the cynical acceptance of sexual violence as a natural
phenomenon in armed conflicts, and of rape as a weapon
of war of devastating power. The atrocities documented
at the time and the survivors’ testimonies of massive
violations — rapes in camps, mutilations, sexual
slavery and forced pregnancies — moved humankind’s
ethical consciousness, while sexual violence in
armed conflicts seized being an invisible crime or
an immutable tradition. The International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone decisively made progress in classifying sexual
violence, in particular rape in conflict situations, as
torture, a war crime and a crime against humanity.
With complete clarity, the International Criminal
Court Statute would subsequently establish that acts
of rape, sexual slavery, prostitution, forced pregnancy
or sterilization or any other form of sexual violence of
comparable severity constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
In accordance with that progressive increase in
awareness, the Security Council’s trajectory shows an
awareness and increasing commitment to preventing
and eradicating sexual and gender-based discrimination
in situations of conflict and post-conflict situations,
as well as a commitment to ensuring that when sexist
crimes are committed, the perpetrators will not enjoy
impunity, that there is justice and redress for the
victims and that societies can achieve a lasting peace
based on authentic reconciliation that is born of an
understanding of the truth and a recognition of the
fact that nobody has the right to deny another human

16/75

18/10/2013

being of their life, their freedom or their dignity, nor
can they impede their participation by way of any type
of discrimination in any area of society.
From resolution 1208 (1998), on security for
refugees, which underscores the special security
needs of women in camps, to resolution 1314 (2000),
which underscores the importance of prevention,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration policies
including a gender perspective, it is clear we have
made progress. However, it was particularly through
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions
focused on the situation of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations that the Council underscored,
as priorities in achieving lasting peace, the promotion
and protection of women’s human rights and their equal
participation in transitional justice and reconciliation
processes, as well as a human rights perspective and a
gender perspective in all the efforts and programmes
for development, peace, security and the building and
strengthening of the rule of law.
It is true that much remains to be done. Despite
all the progress made — as we recently noted in our
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region — weak States, authoritarian
Governments, corrupt systems and a widespread
culture of impunity serve to perpetuate inequality and
violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations, and that enables other types of inequality,
discrimination and violence to exist in society. We have
worked very hard to put an end to rape as a weapon of
war and to the wrongful response of impunity for its
perpetrators. While those efforts have contributed to
reducing impunity’s negative effects, we are aware that
the problem has still not been eradicated.
We cannot lock ourselves inside a laboratory to
restore and recognize women’s human rights or to build
a genuine rule of law. In that connection, I would like
to end with the testimony of women from various parts
of the world. In this century, in one country in Africa,
1,152 women were raped every day — that is 48 every
hour or four every five minutes. In another area of that
continent, a woman reported that, when women tried
to escape, their children were killed. She said that they
raped lots of women and girls and were happy when
they raped them. They even sang while they raped
them and told them they had the right to do whatever
they wish with women. In another country, a women’s
organization told us that the criminal code there still
interprets rape as a form of adultery. If a women cannot

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

prove that there was no consent and if there are not at
least four witnesses who confirm her testimony, women
are punished for adultery by whipping or stoning. In
a country in Asia, we heard recently from a group of
women who were subjected to sexual torture. Their
genitals were burned, they said. They were forced
into prostitution by security forces, rebel groups and
members of peacekeeping missions. In Europe, a
women from the former Yugoslavia testified that in the
camps the soldiers raped her all day long. She would
fall asleep, but when she awoke a different soldier
would be in her bed.
In the Middle East, many women do not turn to the
justice system for the crimes they have been subjected
to because they say that they are scared — scared of
exclusion, of being victimized again, or of being victims
of honour crimes. In my region of Latin America and
the Caribbean, a woman in a conflict situation said that
a woman can never report a rape to her national police;
it would be like being raped all over again.
Finally, I would like to share the sentiments
expressed in 2012 by a group of women Nobel Peace
Prize laureates — Jody Williams, Shirin Ebadi, Mairead
Maguire and Leymah Gbowee — that a world without
war and violence against women is possible and that
“[o]ur collective efforts have brought gender
violence to the forefront of policy and public
discussions. Now, our united actions will stop rape
in conflict”.
However, we still have much to do to achieve
women’s effective equality as people with rights and
to achieve equal representation in decision-making
arenas, and for those reasons, we welcome the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2122 (2013)).
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome
the convening of this debate under your auspices,
Mr. President. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing and for his strong leadership in
advancing the agenda on women and peace and security.
Pakistan welcomes the statements made this morning by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director
of UN Women, and by Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
also appreciate the important civil-society perspective
shared with us by Ms. Brigitte Balipou.
Appreciable progress has been made over the years
in promoting the agenda on women and peace and
security, but much remains to be done to fully translate

S/PV.7044

the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
decisions of the Council into more tangible results on
the ground. We do have a solid and comprehensive
normative framework in our hands; resolution 2122
(2013), adopted today, further consolidates it. We
should now focus on its implementation, which is key
to overcoming operational gaps and challenges, and
to delivering on our promise of peace and security for
women, who are the most vulnerable group in armed
conflicts. In conflicts, violence against women is
widely used as an instrument of war. Urgent steps must
be taken to stop gender-based and sexual violence and
end impunity for perpetrators of sexual crimes.
Pakistan fully supports the objectives of the agenda
on women and peace and security. We have played an
important role in advancing those goals as a major
participant in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Pakistani women peacekeepers have served as police
officers, doctors and nurses in missions in Asia, Africa
and the Balkans. Gender sensitization is a mandatory
part of our peacekeepers’ training.
We speak on the subject from experience, and
our feedback to the Security Council is positive. The
Council’s decisions and direction are helping women
caught in situations of armed conflict. We believe
that the Council should continue to address those
issues in accordance with its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. The
mandate for women and peace and security pertains to
conflict and post-conflict situations on the Council’s
agenda. We should all adhere to the parameters of that
mandate, which has set new standards, established new
practices and raised expectations for improving the
situation of women. Diverging from it would dissipate
the consensus around the issue.
The rule of law is one of the key elements in
the promotion of the agenda on women and peace
and security. Gender-responsive transitional justice
and reform of the justice and security sectors are
prerequisites for promoting and protecting women’s
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations. The
rule of law and transitional justice should continue to
be developed so as to protect the rights of women in
such situations. The emphasis should be on addressing
the root causes of conflicts. Chronic conflicts and
relapses into conflict blight some societies, countries
and regions and keep them in a state of perpetual
instability. The resolution of conflicts is, therefore, the
best way to promote and protect the rights and interests

13-5201117/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

of women in conflict situations. We must harness all
our resources to prevent and resolve conflicts.
Given women’s strong stake in peace and in how
peace is negotiated, kept and consolidated, the role
of women as peacemakers and peacebuilders must
be integrated into the various stages of engagement,
outreach and decision-making. Increased integration in
pursuing the agenda on women and peace and security
is useful for enhanced coordination and for avoiding
duplication and the overlap of efforts and resources.
However, too much integration can also carry the risk
of losing the original focus on the primary objectives of
that agenda. Including peripheral issues in the Council’s
work relating to women and peace and security would
not only blur the focus but affect implementation.
The discourse on women and peace and security
has followed two broad trends — women seen primarily
as victims of conflict, on the one hand, and women
as stakeholders and drivers of change, on the other
hand. Both aspects are interrelated and require equal
attention. As the Secretary-General said this morning,
it is important that women’s representation around the
peace table be enhanced. But to enable women to act as
agents of change, we need to invest more in capacitybuilding and training and in the economic and political
empowerment of women.
We believe that the real value of thematic discussions
in the Council is to help identify the related aspects
in the Council’s country-specific work in practical
terms. It is there that the gaps in implementation lie
and it is there that action is needed the most. As the
Council saw first hand during its recent mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there are
continuing challenges in implementing the women and
peace and security agenda on the ground. A proactive
rather than a reactive approach is required to enhance
implementation. Considering women as agents of
change is an affirmation of such a proactive approach.
We hope that some of the practical recommendations
contained in the resolution adopted today will infuse
new momentum and vigour into our collective efforts
to promote the women and peace and security agenda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to express
my pleasure in participating in today’s debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on women and peace and security

18/75

18/10/2013

(S/2013/525), which enlightens us with regard to
the implementation of that resolution at all levels.
I also thank the Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay; and the representative of Femmes Africa
Solidarité, Ms. Brigitte Balipou, for their informative
briefings.
At the outset, the Government of Rwanda once
again condemns all forms of violence against women
and girls worldwide, especially in conflict and postconflict zones. As previously stated in the Council,
we believe that sexual violence in conflict should be
qualified as sexual terrorism.
Our Government considers violence against
women and girls as an assault on human dignity. Over
the years, we have created a favourable environment
for gender equality, women’s empowerment and
children’s rights. We have demonstrated a strong
political will to end the scourge by adopting supportive
policies and legal frameworks, which include a gendersensitive Constitution and laws on the prevention
and punishment of gender-based violence and on the
protection of children from violence. As Ambassador
Power stated, our new parliament — our lower Chamber
of Deputies — attests to the fruitfulness of the policies
on our agenda, as recent elections raised women’s
representation in that body at 64 per cent.
At the institutional level, Rwanda’s security organs,
in collaboration with other Government agencies, local
communities and civil society, have launched initiatives
to prevent and respond to violence that targets women
and girls. The one-stop centres run by the national
police offer a wide range of free services for victims
of gender-based violence, and we have set up gender
desks in police stations and army posts nationwide, and
at the national prosecution agency, for the purposes of
offering gender-sensitive services to victims.
At the continental level, Rwanda is among the
leading the police-contributing countries, with female
police and correctional officers serving in the United
Nations peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions
in Liberia, Haiti, the Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire and Chad.
Those officers actively contribute to combating and
raising awareness on violence against women in the
communities they serve. They also serve as advisers
on gender-based violence and share best practices with
other officers and local authorities.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

For those reasons, we support the full
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1960
(2010), which insist that all peacekeeping mandates
incorporate provisions that specifically identify
steps to address sexual violence, including the clear
identification of women’s protection advisers alongside
gender advisers and human rights protection units.
Let me also emphasize that, in our efforts to
promote the women and peace and security agenda,
in 2010, my country adopted a national action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). To that
end, we have adopted a range of policies to prevent and
respond to violence against women and girls. One of
the foremost priorities is to protect and rehabilitate the
dignity of victims. We commend those countries that
have also adopted national action plans and urge those
that have not done so to make it a priority.
Let me also express my delegation’s support for
the principle of zero tolerance advocated by the United
Nations and call for the principle to be more rigorously
enforced. During the 1994 genocide perpetrated
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, women and girls were
forced to endure inhuman and degrading atrocities.
Tens of thousands were raped and left for dead. That
memory — that history — inspires Rwanda in its
unyielding and heartfelt commitment to fight against
impunity, especially when it comes to crimes against
women and girls.
Rwandans have come to understand first hand
the importance of strengthening internal justice
mechanisms and building institutions that enhance
accessibility to justice. We believe that the fight against
impunity is primarily the responsibility of States. The
international community, including the United Nations,
should support national jurisdictions and help them to
build capacity where gaps exist, by providing guidance
and direction drawn from best practices in the field.
That is not to suggest, however, that those international
justice mechanisms are irrelevant; indeed, a political
international mechanism or tribunal could complement
the work of national jurisdictions in the fight against
impunity and bring perpetrators of crimes against
humanity and genocide, including crimes against
women and girls, to justice.
As we gather today, 13 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we believe that it is fair to make
an assessment of how effective the implementation
of the resolution has been, and possibly draw lessons
for the way forward. Despite the improved practice in

S/PV.7044

the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we note
that there remains a deficit in opportunities for women
to exercise leadership and that there is a continued
underrepresentation of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, protection and peacebuilding
processes. Both the international community and
Member States will need to deploy greater efforts to
address those issues and maintain previous gains with
a view to reducing the inequalities observed at various
levels in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2122 (2013) and hopes that it will help speed up
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda articulated in resolution 1325 (2000).
Specifically, we are pleased that the resolution
advocates for improving the quality of gender analysis
by calling for gender expertise in all United Nationsled commissions of inquiry, transitional justice
mechanisms, groups of experts of the relevant Sanctions
Committees and mediation processes; by supporting
special representatives, special envoys and mediation
support teams and political and peacekeeping missions
in that regard; and by deploying gender advisers and
women protection advisers. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendations, including his
call for an independent review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in preparation for its highlevel review in 2015. We hope that such a review will
provide in-depth analysis and recommendations for the
best way forward.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement.
China welcomes the presence at today’s debate of
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN
Women; Ms. Pillay, High Commissioner for Human
Rights; and the NGO representative, Ms. Balipou. We
listened attentively to all of their briefings.
Respecting and protecting women’s rights and
interests is not only the epitome of the civilization and
progress of human society, but is also closely related
to world peace and development. The international
community should not only be concerned with
protecting women’s safety and upholding their rights
and interests in conflict and post-conflict situations;
it should also devote attention to ensuring that women
can play their unique roles in peace processes.
In order to promote women truly shouldering their
peacekeeping roles and playing at important part in
peacebuilding processes, the various United Nations

13-5201119/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

bodies and entities should work in accordance with their
respective mandates, with a clear division of labour and
as one. I wish to highlight the following four points.
First, it is national Governments that have the
primary responsibility to protect women’s safety and
their rights and interests. The international community
should support the countries concerned in their efforts to
that end by providing constructive assistance. External
support should fully respect national sovereignty and,
in keeping with specific national conditions and needs,
focus on capacity-building and stepping up assistance,
with a view to helping the countries concerned
overcome financial and technical difficulties.
Secondly, the Security Council should play its
unique role fully, while strengthening its coordination
and cooperation with related organizations and
agencies. As the primary institution for maintaining
international peace and security, the Council should
focus on conflict prevention, dispute mediation and
post-conflict reconstruction so as to foster an enabling
political, security and rule-of-law environment for
safeguarding women’s security, rights and interests.
The General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council, UN Women and
other United Nations agencies should discharge their
respective responsibilities while working closely with
one another with a view to generating synergies.
Thirdly, strengthening the rule of law represents
both an important link in post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts and an important foundation for safeguarding
and upholding women’s rights and interests. To prevent
women from once again falling prey to various atrocities,
it is essential to ensure their equal participation in the
process of reforming the security and justice sectors,
while maintaining parallel progress on the tracks of the
rule of law, political and economic development and
national reconciliation, thus providing a comprehensive
guarantee for the respect and protection of women’s
rights and interests.
Fourthly, the effective participation of women is
an important foundation for realizing sustainable peace
and social stability. Women should become important
participants in conflict prevention and mediation,
and they should enjoy adequate rights when it comes
to decision-making and participation in post-conflict
peacebuilding and national development. That is in
the interests of changing their vulnerable status, while
maintaining their rights and interests in practical terms.

20/75

18/10/2013

Women’s development is the foundation for truly
realizing their empowerment. The international
community
should
promote
socioeconomic
development and thereby effectively enhance the status
of women and promote their positive contributions to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s debate on
women and peace and security, with a focus on the rule
of law and transitional justice in situations of armed
conflicts. I should also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his very constructive introductory
statement. I also thank the other speakers — Ms. Pillay,
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. MlamboNgcuka, UN Women Executive Director; and
Ms. Balipou, representing civil society — for the their
statements, which have made meaningful contributions
to our debate.
The adoption by the Security Council of resolution
1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions demonstrates
the Council’s continuous concern at the violence against
women in conflict and post-conflict situations. An
assessment of the implementation of those resolutions
shows that, while they have contributed to promoting
gender equality in prevention, participation, protection,
peacebuilding and restoring the rule of law, as noted
in the report of the Secretary-General before us today
(S/2013/525), much remains to be done. The goal of the
United Nations in those resolutions is essentially that
of freeing women and girls from acts of violence of all
kinds and giving them the place that they deserve in
society — a goal that has yet to be reached.
The events unfolding in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the Central
African Republic — as Ms. Balipou mentioned — in
Syria and elsewhere around the world, where women
continue to be the special target of violence committed
by men, show that there is still a long way to go to protect
women in situations of armed conflict. Togo nonetheless
welcomes the fact that the United Nations, through
its peacekeeping operations, has made the protection
of civilians an essential element in the mandates of
peace missions. The deployment on the ground of
gender advisers arises from that determination to help
the victims and guide them to the appropriate support
services. My country would like to see the deployment
of such advisers mainstreamed throughout all missions,
with the staffing and resources that they need.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

As we all know, violence against women will not end
until those who commit and order it are found, arrested,
tried and sentenced. The fight against impunity cannot
be a matter of mere words; it must see be a commitment
by all political actors and parties in a crisis to work
to eradicate the culture of violence against women and
girls, especially rape, which has for some time been a
weapon of war.
This issue is at the centre of the majority of
Security Council debates, but we are still far from a
solution. The United Nations must stress the fight
against violence by supporting, through appropriate
mechanisms, the Governments of countries in conflict
situations or emerging therefrom to address the issues
of violence and impunity. We believe that restoring
judicial institutions and providing them with more
human and financial resources could contribute to
deterring serious violations of human rights and to
effectively punishing their perpetrators. The adoption
of national laws to repress such acts is also necessary.
Truth, justice and reconciliation commissions, which
have had a positive impact in such processes, must
serve as a framework for justice for all — justice that
establishes truth and repairs the damage.
It goes without saying that the fight against impunity
can be waged only in the context of a rule of law that
establishes effective transitional justice and promotes
the effective participation of victims, including women,
in the country’s reconstruction. Unfortunately, with
regard to participation, the fact is that women have
played a minor role, if they have not been totally
sidelined, in peace talks and reconciliation and in
political and economic activities. As an illustration, in
2012 women comprised fewer than 8 per cent of the
members of negotiating delegations in peace processes.
The Secretary-General’s report also indicates
that in the context of economic recovery and access
to resources during and after conflict, women have
also played a very limited role. My country believes
that women should enjoy, in peacetime and in conflict
situations, all economic and social rights, inheritance
and property rights, and access to basic services,
especially in areas of health and education.
However, we acknowledge the efforts of some
countries that have integrated gender issues into their
national legislation by setting a quota for women in
elected positions and high-level decision-making, as
is the case in such post-conflict countries as TimorLeste, Afghanistan, Liberia, Haiti and the Democratic

S/PV.7044

Republic of the Congo. Rwanda, of course, sets the most
progressive example in that respect. Togo encourages
the United Nations to assist countries that have not
yet done so to integrate into their national systems the
experience of those who have managed to increase the
role of women in peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction.
Women will not be protected in any lasting way until
in-depth legal and judicial reforms are undertaken by
countries emerging from armed conflict. Fortunately,
a number of countries have undertaken reforms in
accordance with the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other
relevant international legal instruments. Clearly, the
best way to protect women and fight effectively against
the effects of armed conflict on the lives of people in
conflict is to take measures to prevent the outbreak of
conflicts.
My delegation welcomes the fact that resolution
2122 (2013), which was adopted earlier today, focuses
on various aspects of the fight against violence against
women. We hope that it will have a positive impact on
the ground, in particular through its implementation by
all countries.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to thank the Azerbaijani
presidency for organizing this meeting. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General and others who spoke,
for their assessments and very useful information.
For over a decade now, resolution 1325 (2000)
has clearly confirmed its vital role and importance
in strengthening the role of women in the prevention
and settlement of armed conflicts and during postconflict reconstruction, as well as in their protection
during such conflicts. Unfortunately, despite numerous
efforts, women continue to fall victim to various forms
of violence. That is why we believe that more attention
needs to be given to all categories of such crimes.
Such a balanced approach is enshrined in resolution
1325 (2000). Cases of women and children being killed
and getting injured are a cause for serious concern,
including as a result of the indiscriminate or excessive
use of force. We think it is unacceptable to simply turn
a blind eye to such crimes or to justify them as so-called
inevitable acts of collateral damage, which contradicts
provisions in the Geneva Conventions.
One of the main characteristics of the world today
is the significant number of crises in which women

13-5201121/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

suffer. At the same time, not all of those situations
pose a threat to international peace and security that
would require intervention by the Security Council.
Let us recall that issues of gender violence fall within
the framework of mandates tackled not only by the
Security Council but also by the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council, and the Commission on the Status of Women.
We must abide by the existing principles of the division
of labour within our Organization, without duplicating
the efforts and competencies of the various bodies.
We believe that the Council’s effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) requires an
unwavering focus on a decisive mandate that approaches
women’s issues in the context of international peace
and security and other such issues within its agenda.
We have carefully familiarized ourselves with the
report of the Secretary-General prepared for today’s
meeting (S/2013/525). We should like to point out that
it is factually incomplete. We believe that in the future,
such reports should consider the nature of violence
against women in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security in a more balanced
way, as stipulated by resolution 1325 (2000).
As far as facts in the report are concerned, they
have been compiled on the basis of the first third of
the assessment indicators on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we still have questions
regarding the usefulness and relevance of individual
indicators, as well as the scope for applying them. We
believe that work on indicators, which is still undergoing
approval, must be transparent and open in nature.
After all, issues of international peace and security
are of interest to all States Members of the United
Nations. We do not share the report’s concept of
using national plans of action for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) as an assessment tool for
States’ policies to improve the overall status of women.
Relevant national plans ought to be prepared voluntarily
by those States that find themselves in situations of
armed conflict. If other States wish to elaborate similar
national plans, that is clearly their right. However, the
voluntary decision of individual States to do that should
not mean that everyone is obliged to do so.
We are convinced of the significantly positive
potential of women’s participation in various aspects
of the settlement of armed conflict and post-conflict
reconstruction. Women must not only be seen as victims

22/75

18/10/2013

of armed conflicts. That in itself is discriminatory.
The direct involvement of women in preventing and
settling armed conflicts is, in our opinion, an important
prerequisite for overcoming violence against women.
We wish to express our satisfaction that resolution 2122
(2013), adopted today, pays a significant amount of
attention to ways of including women in such processes,
in line with resolution 1325 (2000). Clearly, gender
issues must be taken into account when mobilizing
peacekeeping forces.
It is just as important to include such issues in the
mandates of relevant missions. We urge States to tackle
those issues not in a predetermined way, but by being
mindful of individual situations. Such a differentiated
approach must also be applied when giving the United
Nations system instructions on how to integrate gender
issues into their mandates. They have clear mandates,
and for the majority of them, issues of women, peace
and security are not an absolute priority but merely one
of a number of factors within the framework of action
aimed at preventing and resolving armed conflict and
post-conflict situations. Let us not forget that the leading
role in protecting women at all stages of armed conflict
lies with national Governments, while measures taken
by bodies of the United Nations system and by civil
society must be aimed at backing and complimenting
efforts made by States.
We do not share the point of view that establishing
a specialized Security Council mechanism for gender
issues would be useful. We believe that ensuring
the effectiveness of the existing mechanisms for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) does not hinge
on creating new bureaucratic procedures but rather
on improving the coordination and accountability
of existing mechanisms under the leadership of UN
Women.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing
today as well as for his tireless efforts to promote the
women, peace and security agenda. My delegation
also thanks the Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, and
Ms. Brigitte Bapilou for their informative and inspiring
presentations today.
While there has been significant progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) over the years,
persistent gaps and challenges remain. For far too
many women in conflict-affected societies, the mere
13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

protection of a woman’s basic rights, let alone gender
equality, remains a daunting challenge. In Syria,
women account for the majority of the casualties and
the displaced population. In the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, women continue to be victimized
in the conflict. Given this shared concern, I would like
to highlight the following four points.
First, the Council must continue to integrate women,
peace and security issues into its work in a substantive
way. As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/525)
elaborates, the Council increasingly incorporates
gender perspectives into its resolutions, in particular
through the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. That is a welcome development. However, it
must be done in a more systematic way if it is to be
truly effective.
We also support the Secretary-General’s call on the
Council to include women, peace and security aspects
in all thematic debates. If the Council’s efforts in those
areas are to be successful, they must be supported by
the timely delivery of information. We would welcome
more regular updates and briefings on the status of
women and girls in armed conflict from all United
Nations field missions. We also look forward to a highlevel global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in preparation for the high-level review in
2015.
Secondly, greater attention should be paid to
promoting women’s representation in post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding processes. Women’s
experiences in conflict are fundamentally different
from those of men. As such, women’s needs and
priorities should be reflected in peace and justice
deliberations. Transitional justice mechanisms need to
be more gender-sensitive. Women’s efforts to recover
from their experiences in conflict have often been
hampered by a lack of fundamental rights, such as the
right to citizenship. Such structural inequality should
be addressed by transitional justice.
Thirdly, all cases of sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations must be adequately
addressed. The suffering of women and girls, who
often fall victim to sexual violence in times of war,
has frequently gone unreported or unacknowledged.
Transitional justice is therefore important in bringing
perpetrators to account and ending impunity. We
also recognize the important role of the International
Criminal Court in ensuring accountability and justice
for such crimes.

S/PV.7044

Fourthly, we would like to underline the crucial
role played by women’s civil society organizations in
conflict-resolution and peacebuilding. In that regard,
the Republic of Korea attaches great importance to
the interactions between the Security Council and
women’s organizations. It is encouraging that the
Council’s recent field visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes included interactive
meetings with local women’s organizations.
Finally, we welcome the unanimous adoption today
of resolution 2122 (2013). We believe that this seventh
resolution on women, peace and security will be another
milestone on the road towards gender equality.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this debate. I also thank all those
who have spoken. I believe that the statements made by
my colleagues have proven, 13 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), what has become obvious
to everyone, namely, that no conflict can be resolved
and no transition sustained without the inclusion and
participation of half of humankind.
First, that is obvious to the Council, which in
two-thirds of its resolutions makes references to the
women, peace and security agenda. It also obvious to
the United Nations, where the presence of women in
mediation teams and field missions increases year after
year, although efforts still need to be made regarding
management positions. In that regard, I welcome the
work of UN Women and its activities to strengthen the
coherence of and coordinate efforts to promote women
within the United Nations. We also welcome the zerotolerance policy for United Nations personnel that is
being implemented by the Secretary-General, and
which has proven to be useful and should continue.
Such
improvements
have
had
normative
consequences. The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty
revealed the link between the spread of small arms
and light weapons and sexual violence. We have given
strong support to this part of the Treaty, which France
will soon ratify.
However, we all know that we only are half-way
there. Much remains to be done. While women now
have a place in most peace negotiations, their situation
remains ignored in the ensuing agreements, which too
often do not include specific provisions on women,
peace and security. Women should be consulted as fully
invested stakeholders. The United Nations must be
exemplary in that regard. The special representatives

13-5201123/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

and special envoys of the Secretary-General must
consult with civil society and women’s organizations as
soon as they arrive on the ground, and must continue to
do so throughout their mandate.
In New York, the issue of the participation of
women should be included more frequently in briefings
made to the Council by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs,
whose recommendations for better including women
in conflict-resolution processes always prove to be
valuable. Informal meetings of the Council with
women working in the field should be continued and
encouraged.
In that regard, we can refer to the example of Mary
Robinson, who brought together women’s organizations
from the Great Lakes region in July in Bujumbura.
We believe that hers is a model of inclusive and early
consultation that can be useful to everyone. We saw to it
that this good practice was continued during the recent
visit of Security Council members to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo when they met, in the eastern
part of that country, with women’s organizations
working to defend and promote the rights of women.
That and other crises demonstrate the urgent need
to act. This morning, we heard an eye-witness account
on the Central African Republic. We have heard that
the situation is tragic, encompassing sexual violence,
forced disappearances, recruitment of child soldiers
and, increasingly, religiously motivated violence. The
precarious situation of women is shocking. The Council
should remain apprised of the issue. Not only must we
take the situation of women into account; beyond that,
to the extent that the tragic situation of women in the
Central African Republic is only part of the broader
tragedy of the entire country, we must re-establish
security, peace and the rule of law there. France voted in
favour of resolution 2118 (2013) in that regard and will
stay the course, including, if necessary, by proposing a
peacekeeping operation in that country.
In Syria, women were the leading actors of the
peaceful revolution against the regime of Bashar
Al-Assad. Their vulnerability is today increasing
everywhere, placing them at the forefront of the victims.
They are the targets of both the fierce repression of the
regime against its own people and, now, of extremist
groups. In the refugee camps, their children are often
born stateless as a result of unequal citizenship laws.
We must listen to these Syrian women, who remain

24/75

18/10/2013

committed to building the future of Syria, and involve
them in the peace negotiations.
In that regard, I call the Council’s attention to
the letter by the representative of the Syrian National
Coalition, which provides a very good description of
the sufferings that the Al-Assad regime is inflicting on
Syrian women. Those violent acts, I remind members,
were reported by the Human Rights Council’s
Commission of Inquiry.
Justice remains the cornerstone of stabilization
in post-conflict situations. National Governments
of course have the primary responsibility for
prosecuting and punishing those resposible for sexual
violence. However, when States fail to live up to their
responsibilities, the International Criminal Court
should be able to play its full role. The Court is already
at work in the Central African Republic, in Mali and
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. France
believes that the Court should be seized of the matter
in Syria — as has now been amply justified. I should
like to underscore here that all those responsible for
violence against the Syrian people must one day be
accountable before justice.
To make the fight against impunity tangible, access
for women to the justice system is essential. Since
2011, in cooperation with UN Women, France has
had in place a programme for strengthening women’s
access to justice in Afghanistan. In the framework of its
plan of action, France has committed to a cooperation
programme in Africa and in the Arab world, working
in partnership with UN Women. We have recently
specifically allocated support for programmes in
Mali being implemented by local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), with a view to supporting the
participation of women in political processes. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we have similarly
allocated more than €2 million to support Congolese
NGOs to fight against sexual violence, strengthen the
participation of women in decision-making processes
and help women integrate on the socioeconomic level.
In that spirit, next December France will organize in
Paris a summit on peace and security in Africa, which
will provide an opportunity for all to express and
reaffirm their commitment to bringing about support
for resolutions on women and peace and security.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN Women and the High Commissioner

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

for Human Rights for their statements. I would also
like to express my gratitude to Ms. Brigitte Balipou of
Femmes Africa Solidarité for having given us the views
of civil society with regard to women, the rule of law
and transitional justice in conflict situations, which is
the very pertinent topic chosen by the presidency of
Azerbaijan for our public debate today. I would also
like to assure Ms. Balipou that her call with regard to
the tragic situation in the Central African Republic has
been heard.
Luxembourg wishes to associate itself with the
statement that will be made a later by the observer of
the European Union.
Justice in times of armed conflict or in postconflict situations does not fundamentally differ from
justice in times of peace. The objective of justice is
always to come to a decision with regard to a wrong
committed by one individual to the detriment of
another: to ascertain its severity, to impose punishment
and, where necessary, to order reparations. However,
in specific cases of conflict or post-conflict situations,
justice often operates, but imperfectly. The victims
must overcome additional and very different obstacles
from those in peacetime. For women, those obstacles
can be truly crippling. For them, justice is often
beyond reach, whether for legal, security or social
reasons — without taking into account the fact that in
post-conflict situations the judiciary itself is often illprepared to face the specific situations of women who
have suffered the violence of war.
In that context, one cannot but emphasize the
importance of transitional justice. Not only does it
allow the possibility to redress past wrongs, but it
also affords an opportunity to transform women’s
situations, thereby guaranteeing lasting peace in a
more egalitarian society. The participation of women
at all levels and in a timely manner is indispensable
to guarantee that the new society that emerges from
the rubble of war will grant women their rightful place
with the full enjoyment of all their rights.
It is therefore essential that women be heard during
peace processes and that they be involved in security
sector and justice sector reforms. In a word, women
must be full-fledged stakeholders rather than just
spectators of reconstruction and peacebuilding.
Of all violations afflicting women in conflict
situations, sexual violence, which constitutes a direct
attack against physical integrity, unavoidably comes to

S/PV.7044

mind when one speaks of transitional justice and the
issue of reparations. It is indeed difficult to imagine a
society claiming to be fair and respectful of women’s
rights when thousands of survivors of sexual violence
are denied their rights to see the perpetrators of that
violence brought to justice. However, in many cases,
post-conflict justice ignores the case of those women,
often because it does not possess either the necessary
expertise or the necessary resources to tackle the task.
Luxembourg backs the partnership between
the intergovernmental Justice Rapid Response and
UN Women. In cooperation with the Institute for
International Criminal Investigations, that partnership
has made it possible to establish a list of specialized
experts on the investigation of acts of sexual violence.
In that way, experts can be rapidly deployed as
required. UN Women has already resorted to using
such experts to assist the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in numerous
commissions of inquiry. Experts have also lent
their assistance to the International Criminal Court.
Luxembourg will continue to support that initiative,
which reinforces both responsibility and the transitional
justice process.
I would add that, in the past year, we supported a
Department of Peacekeeping Operations project aimed
at bolstering the role of women in the maintenance and
building of peace, specifically by holding a regional
workshop in Liberia to provide women leaders working
for peace and security in West Africa an opportunity
to share their experiences and to strengthen their
networks.
The Security Council must play its full role in
promoting the topic of women and peace and security.
Unfortunately, there continues to be a clear gap between
principled statements and the unanimous support of the
Council for the issue of women, on the one hand, and
the concrete implementation of those statements, on the
other. We therefore support the recommendation by the
Secretary-General’s in his latest report that
“when establishing and renewing [United Nations]
mission mandates, a more consistent approach with
regard to the inclusion of gender-specific provisions
could be sought.” (S/2013/525, para. 73).
By adopting resolution 1325 (2000), 13 years
ago, the Security Council set itself bold objectives.
Resolution 2122 (2013), which we have just adopted
today — thanks in particular to the efforts of the United

13-5201125/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

Kingdom — allows us to make progress. It underscores
in paricular the need for the Security Council to receive
information more regularly with regard to the issue of
women and peace and security. The resolution will
bring new impetus as we near the fifteenth anniversary
of the flagship resolution 1325 (2000), which will be an
opportunity to take stock — positively one hopes — of
its implementation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement and for
presenting his report on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525). We are also grateful to the UnderSecretary-General and Executive Director UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay;
and the board member of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Brigitte Balipou, for
their briefings.
We have proposed to focus our debate on women, the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. In recent times, the Security Council has
paid increasing attention to the issue, acknowledging
that combating impunity, addressing past violations,
rebuilding the justice sector and asserting the principles
of the rule of law underpin efforts to build peace and
stability in the aftermath of conflict. However, less
attention has been paid to the gender consequences
of the breakdown of the rule of law during and after
conflict. While genuine gains have been made in
strengthening the political will and international legal
framework to secure justice and deal with conflictrelated sexual violence, little has been said of the full
range of violations and serious crimes experienced by
women, including enforced disappearances, foreign
occupation, mass forced displacement, restrictions on
humanitarian aid, conflict-related human trafficking
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure. There can
be no tolerance for such acts. Combating impunity and
strengthening both international and national justice
responses are critically important in that regard.
Governments bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians and for ensuring accountability
for conflict-related criminal offenses. In resolution
2122 (2013), adopted today, the Security Council once
again calls on Member States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to thoroughly
investigate and prosecute persons responsible for
26/75

18/10/2013

genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
other serious violations of international humanitarian
law. At the same time, when national authorities fail
to take action, the international community should
play a more proactive role in ensuring an appropriate
response. Such measures and appropriate protection
and accountability efforts must obviously be free of
selectively and politically motivated approaches and
preferences. It is essential to address conflict-related
violations and abuses of human rights through all
available means, including, inter alia, by mandating
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions, as well as by supporting the implementation
of the recommendations of those bodies and missions.
As we have stated on a number of occasions, wrongs
that have been left unpunished or unrecognized may
impede progress in achieving long-awaited peace and
reconciliation. Such wrongs can also play a key role in
the eruption of new conflicts and the commission of new
crimes. Our consistent focus on that particular aspect
of the problem is based on my country’s experience in
addressing the tragic humanitarian consequences of
the war unleashed against it, including mass atrocities
committed by adverse armed forces, forced population
displacement in Azerbaijan and the continuing military
occupation of its territories.
It is important that the Security Council, Member
States and regional organizations ensure that mediators
and envoys in mediation, peace and preventive
diplomacy process can contribute to ensuring
accountability, including by encouraging the parties
concerned to envisage transitional justice clauses
in peace agreements. Those responsible for serious
crimes committed during conflicts, including genderbased violence, must be excluded from all branches of
Government, and the principle of no amnesty or any
other form of indulgence for the perpetrators of such
offenses must be applied. Such measures should be
implemented comprehensively and should also envisage
the full rights of victims to redress.
In resolution 2122 (2013), the Council recalls
applicable provisions of international law on the right
to reparations for violations of individual rights. It is
essential that reparations programmes receive increased
recognition and support as a tool for delivering justice
and redress for victims and longer-term peace dividends
within societies and communities. The contribution
of transitional justice measures to rebuilding the
rule of law, redress, justice and reconciliation makes

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

such measures equally important tools for furthering
women’s rights in post-conflict societies.
To conclude, I would like once again to thank
all briefers for their contribution to our debate and
reiterate my country’s full support for more systematic
and frequent discussions of the topic.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I wish to inform all
concerned that we will be continuing this open debate
right through the lunch hour, as we have a very large
number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing and
his thorough report on the situation of women and peace
and security. Brazil is also grateful for the briefing by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka as Executive Director
of UN Women. She can count on our full support in
dealing with the challenges ahead. We thank the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, for
her presentation. Let me also thank the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for her intervention.
It is widely acknowledged that in situations of
conflict, the most vulnerable, women included, are
those who suffer the most. That makes prevention
especially important. The tendency to rush to military
solutions runs contrary to the idea of the protection of
civilians, since the use of force aggravates the risks to
the most vulnerable and further penalizes civilians, in
particular women and children.
The Security Council’s engagement with the
issue of women and peace and security has greatly
contributed to our common efforts to improve the
lives of women in conflict situations around the world.
The resolutions adopted by the Council have created a
comprehensive body of norms and stimulated progress
on the protection and promotion of women’s rights.

S/PV.7044

The scourge of sexual violence in armed conflict
has rightly been the subject of attention by the Council.
It is warranted that we also focus on the importance of
furthering the equal rights of women and their right to
equal participation in decision-making processes.
The rule of law makes available to vulnerable
groups, such as women, normative tools that promote
their empowerment and emancipation. It is essential
to uphold the equal rights of women by ensuring their
full participation in governing institutions and the
judicial system. We must reaffirm the need to establish
a legislative framework that secures their full access to
justice.
Brazil embraces a comprehensive notion of the
rule of law that embodies a number of principles and
experiences. We are convinced that the rule of law and
development are strongly interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. The rule of law is intimately connected to
the realization of social and economic rights. In that
regard, we are proud to celebrate, in 2013, the twentyfifth year of the Brazilian Constitution, whereby we
acknowledged the centrality of social and economic
rights in the context of the rule of law and human rights.
The participation of women in conflict resolution
and mediation processes not only contributes to the
elaboration of balanced rules in post-conflict situations,
but is also an important factor in achieving sustainable
peace. Unfortunately, there is a long way to go before
women are fully and duly integrated into national and
multilateral peace efforts around the world. Viewed
from different points of view, such as the number
of women delegates and mediators; the numbers,
substance and relative importance of provisions in
peace agreements; and post-conflict strategies or
policies, women’s participation in peace and security is
still insufficient.
Brazil believes that supporting and promoting
women’s participation in the maintenance of international
peace and security is an increasingly important aspect
of the Security Council’s responsibility under the
Charter. In that vein, we encourage further reflection
and debates on the role of women in promoting the
prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes.
In post-conflict situations, transitional justice can
be an important tool to shape a better future for women.
In many circumstances, knowing the truth about the
violations committed against women is central to
achieving national reconciliation. Transitional justice

13-5201127/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

also plays a significant role in ensuring that the
permanent justice structure to be established will take
the interests of women into account in its foundations.
Important structural gender asymmetries curb
the options of women in most societies. Rural
women, in particular, have their potential as agents
of peace hindered, since they benefit less than men
from the wealth created by rural employment and
face new challenges owing to the impact of the still
ongoing economic crisis. Yet, rural women are key
contributors to global economies, playing a critical
role in both developed and developing nations. They
enhance agricultural and rural development, improve
food security and help reduce poverty levels in their
communities, thereby contributing to the promotion of
sustainable development with social inclusion and food
security, which are key to attaining sustainable peace.
When empowered, women can have an important
positive impact on the lives of the individuals in their
societies, particularly in countries emerging from
conflict. The Security Council is called on to continue
to make sure that such impact is fully felt in all relevant
situations on its agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. MayrHarting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: As this is the first time that
I have had the chance to speak under your presidency,
Sir, I would first like to congratulate you on having
assumed the presidency of the Council and wish you
the best of luck in that important task.
I am speaking on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
We thank the Secretary-General, Under-SecretaryGeneral Mlambo-Ngcuka, High Commissioner Pillay
and Ms. Brigitte Balipou for their statements here
today. We also welcome the Council’s adoption earlier
today of resolution 2122 (2013), outlining further steps
on women, peace and security.
We welcome the theme of today’s debate, with
its particular focus on the rule of law and transitional
justice during and post-conflict, which have received

28/75

18/10/2013

limited attention to date. Yet the breakdown of the rule
of law in conflict leads to a broad range of violations
of women’s and girls’ rights. To address that challenge,
post-conflict reforms need to be gender-sensitive and
women’s access to justice in conflict and post-conflict
settings needs to be secured. Women need to be
represented in the justice sector.
The provision of fair, transparent, effective and
accountable justice mechanisms for all is crucial to
ensuring the benefits of the rule of law for everyone.
Women’s and girls’ rights must be secured; they must
also be ensured in informal justice systems. Given the
broad range of conflict-related violations of women’s
rights — including enforced disappearance, early and
forced marriage, human trafficking and violations
of economic and social rights — transitional justice
processes need to address them in full. The EU is
now working on establishing its policy on transitional
justice. The way justice related issues are addressed in
peace negotiations has a strong impact on the pursuit
of post-conflict justice and mediators can play an
important role in that regard.
The EU Concept on Strengthening EU Mediation
and Dialogue Capacities aims to promote the
representation of women and the availability of
adequate resources for dedicated gender expertise at
an early stage of the mediation process. We call on the
United Nations system to increase the participation of
women in mediation activities, including as chief and
lead mediators, and to include gender experts in the
mediation teams. Supporting women’s civil society
groups is crucial to developing domestic constituencies
for women’s engagement in conflict resolution.
We call on the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions to ensure gender expertise in the planning
of peacekeeping operations or special missions with
rule of law mandates and the gathering of genderaggregated data when making a baseline assessment of
rule of law institutions.
We welcome the comprehensive approach of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/525) and
particularly welcome the increasingly targeted and
concrete recommendations for action. We underline
the need for continued regular reporting and briefings
to the Council. However, we note the need to further
enhance the links between the information provided to
the Council and the outcomes of the Council’s work,
particularly the mandates of the United Nations peace
13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7044

operations. We would also welcome reporting on the
rule of law action point of the seven-point action plan
on gender-sensitive peacebuilding.

Response initiative and is among the 124 States that
have endorsed the United Kingdom initiative to end
sexual violence in conflict.

We note positively the Council’s growing practice
of including sexual and gender based violence in the
designation criteria for targeted sanctions regimes.

A pervasive culture of impunity continues to be
a major challenge in the area of women, peace and
security. Accountability, human rights and the rule
of law are recognized preconditions for successful
political transition and development, but women are
too often denied full and equal access to justice. States
must offer effective and universally accessible national
judicial systems and provide all victims with support,
protection and redress. The needs of vulnerable groups,
such as women with disabilities and indigenous women,
among others, require special attention.

The European Union supports the work aimed
at increasing the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
promoting women’s equal participation in all efforts
for the promotion of peace and security and providing
an integrated approach to prevent and punish acts of
sexual violence, as well as to bring justice, services and
reparation to its victims.
In that regard, we acknowledge the important
contribution of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court to expanding the scope of gender and
sexual-based violence. We encourage States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Statute, enact domestic
criminal legislation of those atrocious crimes and to
routinely and systematically prosecute them as the
primary means of ensuring accountability.
We commend the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law.
The increasing number of national and regional
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) provides the opportunity to compare different
experiences in order to further improve our work. To
further map our actions and experiences, we support
the call of the Secretary-General for an independent
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) to prepare for the 2015 high-level review. Finally,
I again thank you, Sir, for organizing this important
debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Women and
children continue to be disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts and their aftermath. We have
witnessed, in particular, an alarming increase in sexual
violence, which is often used as a method of warfare.
It has disastrous long-term consequences, not only
for the victim, but also for the affected communities.
Liechtenstein is proud to give its support to the sexual
and gender-based violence work of the Justice Rapid

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has significantly contributed to ending
impunity for gender-based crimes, and its Prosecutor
has declared the issue of sexual violence to be one of
the priorities of her work. Indeed, 18 of the persons
currently accused in the Court’s cases are charged
with sexual crimes. Where national justice systems are
unable to deliver justice, the ICC can play an important
role pursuant to the principle of complementarity. It
can also assist in domestic proceedings by providing
information and evidence. The Court also provides
direct assistance to victims on the ground through its
Trust Fund for Victims, which Liechtenstein continues
to support. Like other speakers before us in the debate,
we remain of the view that the grave situation in Syria
merits referral to the International Criminal Court by
the Council.
The need to protect women and girls must not
overshadow the participation pillar of the women, peace
and security agenda. My delegation is therefore pleased
to see that resolution 2122 (2013), adopted earlier today,
builds on the core elements of resolution 1325 (2000)
and contains key commitments for several stakeholders
to the full participation of women.
Women’s full participation — including in
peacekeeping operations, national reconciliation
processes and mediation — enhances the effectiveness
and sustainability of development efforts and contributes
to the prevention of conflict. But women continue to be
underrepresented at all levels of decision-making. Their
interests are often not, or insufficiently, reflected in
peace agreements. Out of 10 peace agreements signed
in 2012, only three included provisions on women
and peace and security. Against that background,
we welcome the Peacebuilding Commission’s recent

13-5201129/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

declaration on women’s economic empowerment for
peacebuilding. We have noted with great interest the
Mediation Support Unit’s commitment to increasing its
efforts to include more women in mediation processes
and the increased female capacity in that respect.
We believe that it is important that the United
Nations lead by example to advance this agenda. The
appointment of Mary Robinson as the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa is therefore a very important step in that respect.
We welcome the Special Envoy’s active engagement
to involve women and ensure their participation in
mediation efforts.
As in other areas, we have noted a lack of
consistency when it comes to the inclusion of concerns
raised by the issue of women and peace and security
in the Security Council’s work. It is important that
the Council consistently implement the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the follow-up resolutions in
all its resolutions on country situations.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Skåre.
Ms. Skåre: Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing
me to give a brief presentation on NATO’s contributions
to the implementation of the Council’s resolutions
on women and peace and security. Allow me also to
welcome today’s adoption of resolution 2122 (2013),
which is yet another significant resolution on women
and peace and security, and to thank our briefers for
their presentations at today’s debate.
In the year that has passed since I last addressed the
Security Council (see S/PV.6877), work by NATO and
our partners on the issue of women, peace and security
has continued to progress. Awareness is growing, and
it is better understood that mainstreaming gender in
the broader security context will strengthen our ability
to meet today’s security challenges. Furthermore, our
policies on women and peace and security are becoming
a more integral part of our everyday business.
In NATO’s collaborations with partner nations
on women and peace and security we focus on joint
political leadership, as well as on practical cooperation
in the security and defence fields. Reforms and the
rebuilding of security institutions should be gendersensitive and ensure women’s participation in security,
as in any other sector of our societies. I am happy to
report that over the past year a number of partners
have included or are considering including women and

30/75

18/10/2013

peace and security-related goals in their cooperation
programmes with NATO.
A review of the practical implications of resolution
1325 (2000) in the conduct of NATO-led operations
and missions has been concluded together with our
partners in the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) and the International Security Force in Kosovo,
and recommendations on the way ahead have been
approved by the North Atlantic Council. That review
and the ensuing discussions in the Alliance with our
partners provided a good opportunity for us to learn
from our experiences in Afghanistan and Kosovo.
A key lesson is that we need to strengthen our focus
on the implementation of already existing policies,
action plans and directives. We are therefore pursuing
the continued integration of a gender perspective into
all phases and activities related to conflict analysis,
planning and the execution of crisis management
operations, and we are strengthening the role of gender
advisers in the field. Those activities contribute to the
enhancement of operational effectiveness and to the
improved implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions in an operational context.
As documented by that review, training, education
and exercises remain key tools for ensuring that
our security institutions and armed forces have the
necessary competencies. We have made strides in
strengthening the gender training offered under the
auspices of NATO. The Nordic Centre for Gender in
Military Operations, situated in Sweden, has been
appointed department head for NATO gender training
in military operations. Strengthened curriculums for
both troops and gender advisers have been developed.
NATO is also currently developing an online gender
course, in close collaboration with the United Nations.
We encourage partners to make use of available gendertraining opportunities offered by NATO and its allies.
NATO’s overall purpose is to safeguard the
freedom and security of all its members by political
and military means. The Alliance is not defined by
the threats we face, rather it is defined by the values
we share. We are united by the principles of individual
liberty, democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
NATO fully recognizes the need to ensure access
to justice for all, and we recognize the challenges that
occur when the rule of law breaks down in a conflict
situation and when there is no equality before the law.
We do not have individual liberty if women cannot

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

decide for themselves; we do not have democracy if
women cannot participate; we do not respect human
rights if women’s rights are not respected; and there is
no rule of law if women do not have access to justice.
The overall responsibility for ensuring the rule of
law and equality before the law rests with nations, but
the role of international law in setting standards and
ensuring accountability is also very important. Real
gains have been made in developing the international
legal frameworks and institutions to secure
accountability and justice for war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
NATO is exploring how we, as a politico-military
regional organization, can best, within our role and
responsibilities, prepare and assist in supporting the
rule of law and gender equality through our activities.
For example, under ISAF, we have been running a Rule
of Law Field Support Mission to support and enable
Afghan officials and international organizations in
their rule of law efforts.
The heinous crimes, and in particular the sexual
and gender-based violence, committed during conflicts
have amplified the need to stand united in the struggle
against impunity. Sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict undermines freedom, security and stability,
and, if unpunished, it undermines the credibility of
any legal system, denying access to justice for all.
Global prosecutions, civilian protection mechanisms,
the contributions of the United Nations and other
international organizations are there to complement
national efforts.
In September, all NATO allies fully subscribed to
the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict. It is highlighted, both in that Declaration
and in resolution 2106 (2013), that the collection of
data and the documentation of sexual and gender-based
violence in armed conflict can be instrumental in
bringing perpetrators to justice and in ensuring justice
for survivors.
We should, however, not regard women as
passive victims and recipients. Just as women need
to be included in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts, women need to be included
also in reconciliation and transitional justice. Women’s
participation is a matter of basic human rights and
democratic principles. Those most affected by conflicts
must be heard and enabled to contribute to the solutions
that prevent conflicts. We cannot afford not to include

S/PV.7044

women. It is not simply a question of what benefits
women, but of what benefits the whole society — men
and women, boys and girls.
The President: I thank Ms. Skåre for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico would like to thank Azerbaijan for its work
in coordinating this debate. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for presenting his recent report
on the subject (S/2013/525), and we welcome the
participation of the Executive Director of UN Women
and civil society in today’s dialogue.
My delegation commends the adoption today of
resolution 2122 (2013), which continues building the
institutional framework begun in 2000 with the historic
resolution 1325 (2000).
The Secretary-General’s report provides a road
map for the action that all relevant stakeholders must
take in order to continue to effectively include women
in peace, development and in strengthening the state
of development we all live in. Mexico welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to move up
the holding of a high-level meeting in 2015 with the
aim of reviewing the progress made regionally and
nationally in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We
believe that from a preventive perspective of shared
responsibility in the face of threats to international
peace and security, the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) continue to apply and to have relevance for the
community of nations.
My country is currently moving forward with a
review process of our legal and institutional framework
with the aim of ensuring its confirmity with a plan
of action for comprehensive implementation of the
resolution. The process seeks to systematize some of
the activities that are already being developed at the
internal level, such as educating the armed forces on
women’s rights. In order to do so, we are in regular
contact with various partners so as to learn the best
practices already being used for similar action plans.
Concerning political rights, our executive authorities
recently proposed an initiative to the legislature aimed
at ensuring women’s equitable representation in the
Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. With regard to
the United Nations mandate, we are striving to increase
the number of women on the lists of candidates for
high-level posts, particularly those having to do with
political operations and, of course, peacekeeping.

13-5201131/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

Mexico welcomes the adoption of the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and commends the initiative taken to formulate
an international protocol for investigating and
documenting sexual violence in conflict. We assure the
Council that we will continue to support such efforts.
Similarly, we consider it vital to continue to push for
women’s participation in mediation processes and
peace agreement and ceasefire negotiations so as to
encourage national reconciliation, based on respect for
and enjoyment of the human, social and civil rights of
the most vulnerable groups. We believe it essential to
support national reconciliation and dialogue processes
with judicial change that ensures that justice is
impartially meted out, and including programmes for
repairing and reconstructing the social fabric.
Strengthening inclusive and solid societies must
be an essential part in re-establishing the rule of law,
both in societies living with armed conflict and those
that are undergoing the process of reconstruction and
reconciliation. There can be no lasting peace without
justice, and it is therefore vital to ensure that national
dialogue and reconciliation processes contribute
effectively to fighting impunity and ensuring not only
that women take part in the processes of reform of the
security and justice systems but that they are also full
participants in those systems once they are reformed.
In that regard, we note the Declaration facilitated
by Mexico and Denmark and adopted at the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law
at the National and International Levels in September
2012. The text enshrines “the importance of ensuring
that women...fully enjoy the benefits of the rule of
law” (General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 16), and
we committed to ensuring their full participation in
institutions of governance and the judicial system.

18/10/2013

accurate and precise assessment of the progress made
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Austria aligns itself with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union.
We agree that the nexus between the rule of law
and women and peace and security needs our further
attention. In the aftermath of conflict, transitional
justice mechanisms must be victim-centred and
gender-sensitive in order to ensure that the rights of
victims, in particular women and children, are fully
respected. Legal, institutional and social obstacles to
women’s access to formal and informal justice systems
must be more energetically addressed, and in that
context gender-sensitive reforms should receive more
attention. Reparation programmes for gross human
rights violations contribute to the reconciliation of
divided societies, in which financial reparations
potentially have an important impact on enhancing the
economic security of women, including war widows, in
the aftermath of conflict. Reparations should also be
targeted to victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
The Security Council has clearly recognized its
own role in ending impunity for serious violations
of international humanitarian and human-rights law,
and has acknowledged the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms, including in resolution
1894 (2009). In that context, we would like to stress the
important role of the International Criminal Court and
other international criminal tribunals in the fight against
impunity, and we welcome the first investigations of
cases of sexual violence before those courts.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.

A central element of our understanding of the
rule of law is that it not only guarantees women’s
equal rights but necessarily implies women’s equal
participation in political and public life, as well as
their economic empowerment. While the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding efforts is at
the heart of resolution 1325 (2000) and should be selfevident 13 years after its adoption, there is no reason
for complacency.

Mr. Doujak (Austria): Austria is grateful to
Azerbaijan for convening today’s open debate on
women and peace and security, and would like to thank
all the briefers for their very interesting presentations.
We appreciate the broad range of issues covered in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/525), as well as
the continuing use of indicators that allow for a more

We call on the Security Council to make the
best use of the time frame leading up to the highlevel review of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in 2015 and to mainstream measures to enhance
women’s participation in its work, including in the
mandates of peacekeeping and political missions. Our
immediate concern must be to increase the number of

For my country, persistence continues to be the
linchpin for decision-making and implementing action
on the agenda for women and peace and security.

32/75

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

women in police and military contingents in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we
welcome today’s adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) and
its references to the deployment of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations as well as more
regular briefings in the Security Council.
Austria appreciates the Security Council’s
increased attention to violence against journalists in
situations of armed conflict. As the Secretary-General’s
report rightly points out, female journalists often face
gender-specific risks of violence and intimidation. Our
initiative on the safety of journalists in the Human
Rights Council acknowledges those specific risks and
calls for a gender-sensitive approach when considering
measures to address the safety of journalists.
Also, I would like to take this opportunity to give
a short update on our national measures to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). On the basis of our revised
national action plan adopted last year, we have
continued our efforts to enhance the gender-expertise
of civil and military staff in peacekeeping operations.
Together with the Austrian Study Centre for Peace and
Conflict Resolution, Austria has developed a training
curriculum that fully incorporates both resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1894 (2009) on the protection of
civilians. After a pilot course held last year, the first
regular course with the new curriculum will be held in
early December.
Austria has also continued its efforts to support
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in other
forums, including the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Together with Finland,
Turkey and Kazakhstan, we have proposed a draft text
for an OSCE-wide action plan on women, peace and
security to assist participating States in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that those efforts will
soon lead to a positive result.
In concluding, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, all for your efforts in advancing the
women and peace and security agenda and express the
hope that we will see significant progress in that area in
the lead-up to the 2015 review.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I will give a somewhat
shortened version of the distributed statement. We
thank the delegation of Azerbaijan for organizing
today’s very important debate and we welcome the

S/PV.7044

Security Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2122 (2013). New Zealand also associates itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the representative
of the Marshall Islands who will speak on behalf of
Pacific Islands Forum.
In 2013 we have seen a very real focus by the
Security Council on the protection aspect of the women
and peace and security agenda. The Council’s highprofile debate in June (S/PV.6984) and resolution 2106
(2013) demonstrated solid progress in that regard. The
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, endorsed by 113 States, including my own,
was a landmark.
Hard tools, such as sanctions regimes that target
perpetrators of sexual violence and appropriately
mandated and trained peacekeeping missions, are
effective instruments for the protection agenda, but
the participation dimension of the women and peace
and security agenda still requires targeted action by
the Council. Indeed, the Council’s role in addressing
women’s political participation in the peace and security
agenda remains a challenge. That makes today’s debate
on the role of women in transitional justice even more
important.
In June, when the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Mary Robinson,
made her first statement to the United Nations family
in her new role, she spoke of women not as victims but
as stakeholders. She questioned the sustainability of
any peace that half the population has had no role in
building and she called for women to be put at the core
of peacebuilding. New Zealand agrees. If it is going
to deliver lasting and sustainable peace, then, as the
representative of Austria just emphasized, transitional
justice must incorporate the entire population.
Women’s perspectives must be included in the design,
implementation and monitoring of transitional justice
processes.
Beyond simply being a just democratic principle,
there are many tangible reasons for that. It builds trust
in post-conflict justice institutions, and UN Women’s
research shows that women are more likely to report
sexual and gender-based crimes to transitional justice
institutions that involve women judges and officials.
The Council should also make clear that there must
be prominent roles for women, both as leaders and as
active participants in the consultative processes that
establish transitional arrangements.

13-5201133/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

New Zealand’s experience, in its own region and
beyond is that credible, informal and tradition-based
justice systems have a demonstrated role in establishing
accountability. In post-conflict societies, it is often
informal justice mechanisms that are the most
accessible for justice, mediation and conflict resolution.
While some informal and traditional systems struggle
to adequately address women’s needs due to inherent
gender biases, examples from Africa show the value of
local efforts to transform such institutions in a manner
that allows for the full participation for women.
United Nations field presences must fully engage
with women in civil society and the community. New
Zealand thus encourages a consistent practice of
deploying gender advisers to peacekeeping missions,
with their role continuing through any transitional
arrangements to assist in post-conflict processes.
In addition to the existing Pacific Regional
Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security, which
New Zealand is continuing to implement along with
its regional partners, we are proceeding with the
development of a comprehensive national action plan of
our own. Looking ahead, we welcome the concept of an
independent global study to assist in the preparations of
the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015,
and we believe our Pacific Regional Action Plan could
provide a good example of regional action.
Women and peace and security is the agenda item
that will not go away, and with very good reason. As
long as that remains the reality, New Zealand will
continue to participate actively in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy): Mr. President, allow me to begin
by thanking you for organizing today’s open debate of
the Security Council and the speakers for their valuable
contributions.
Italy welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council today’s of resolution 2122 (2013), on women
and peace and security, which is a further step towards
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union and wishes to
make the following remarks in its national capacity.
We appreciate the focus of today’s debate — women’s
rights must be an integral component of efforts to
34/75

18/10/2013

rebuild justice and rule of law in conflict and postconflict situations. I wish to address three areas. First,
with regard to participation, we need to remove the
obstacles blocking women’s access to justice, which
are often rooted in traditional and cultural attitudes,
increase the number of women in national and
international judiciary bodies and ensure that gender
awareness informs their decisions. Secondly, with
respect to protection, laws must be gender-sensitive,
including by upholding the right of women to own land
and by criminalizing sexual and gender-based violence;
there should be no amnesty for such crimes. Thirdly,
as to reparations, to be effective, they must have the
strength to prevent the recurrence of violations and
eliminate the root causes of gender inequality.
While Governments have the primary responsibility
to steer such processes, the international community
and other actors can provide critical support. In the fight
against impunity for perpetrators of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide, where women are
often the victims, the International Criminal Court has
a unique role in complementing the efforts of national
courts when these are unable to bring perpetrators to
justice. The United Nations also has a key role to play
in assistance and capacity-building. Former judges
and the specialized staff of United Nations ad hoc
tribunals are potentially resources, as is cooperation
with civil society organizations, in particular womenled organizations.
In 2015, the Security Council will hold a highlevel meeting to review the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/525) includes strategic measures to accelerate
implementation, of which I would like to highlight three
recommendations: increasing women’s participation in
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions,
especially at the middle — and senior-management
levels; reaching the target of 15 per cent spending for
post-conflict peacebuilding projects on gender equality
and women’s empowerment; and systematically
addressing all elements of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
work of the Security Council.
Italy considers resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions to be key elements of its agenda
for international peace and security. We are currently
reviewing our national action plan with a view to
accelerating its implementation over the next three
years. Gender equality and women’s empowerment
are mainstreamed into development cooperation

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

programmes. Specific projects on resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions are currently being
implemented in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Somalia and
Palestine. Italy supported the creation of the first centre
for women victims of violence in Bethlehem, Palestine.
In Libya, we are supporting the approval of a bill that
equates victims of sexual violence with victims of war.
To conclude, we have the tools to ensure that the
vision enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000) becomes
reality. It is high time we use them to turn a new page
in the lives of many women and girls around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Beham.
Ms. Beham: I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to
participate on behalf of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in this important
debate. I would also like to thank the briefers and other
speakers for their thought-provoking presentations.
As the representative of the world’s largest regional
security organization, I would like at the outset to devote
a few remarks to the role that regional organizations
can and should play with respect to the implementation
of the commitments resulting from the women, peace
and security agenda. We have already heard a number
of remarks in that regard.
While it is obvious that States have the primary
responsibility to ensure that the resolutions on
women, peace and security are translated into action,
regional organizations working on the maintenance of
international peace and security, such as the OSCE,
also have a recognized role. Both the recent presidential
statement on cooperation with regional organizations
(S/PRST/2013/12), adopted in August, and several
of the women, peace and security resolutions refer
to the crucial contribution of regional organizations
to affirming the participation of women in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution mechanisms and
peacebuilding.
There is now a good window of opportunity to
give women, peace and security issues a boost on
the regional level as the United Nations is currently
leading a process of strengthening the role of regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
dealing with conflict prevention, in particular early
warning and early action. The OSCE Secretary General,
in his recent round of consultations with senior United
Nations interlocutors, including Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
found strong support for the OSCE to play a central role

S/PV.7044

in this process. The OSCE welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013) today, which clearly recognizes
the efforts of regional organizations in implementing
women, peace and security commitments, including
the development of action plans and implementation
frameworks.
The OSCE participating States have acknowledged
the importance of the women, peace and security
agenda by adopting a number of Ministerial Council
decisions, including one explicitly dedicated to
increasing women’s participation in conflict prevention,
crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation and
another dealing with the elements of the conflict cycle
to include commitments under resolution 1325 (2000).
As a result, the OSCE has taken a number of initiatives,
both at the secretariat level and in its field operations,
to implement these Ministerial Council decisions, in
particular in conflict-affected contexts in the OSCE
region.
Let me begin with our activities related to the
theme of today’s debate — women, the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict-affected contexts. The
OSCE field operations, institutions and secretariat
are implementing a variety of activities related to war
crimes justice, trial monitoring, criminal justice reform,
judicial independence and administrative justice. We
undertake every effort to mainstream the participation
of women into these activities and to integrate gender
into our substantive approaches.
To take just one example, the OSCE promotes gender
balance in its work with judicial personnel because we
believe that diversity has a positive impact on women’s
access to justice and the perceived legitimacy of the
judiciary. From a substantive perspective, our mission
to Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the integration of
a gender perspective into war crimes-trial monitoring
by providing specific training for civil society on how
to monitor conflict-related sexual violence cases and
understand the specific challenges that witnesses and
victims face in such processes. Trial monitors are
then better prepared to gather data on how such cases
progress through the judicial system and to advocate for
policy improvements based on the data. This is one step
in ensuring that justice and accountability are pursued
equally for all violations and crimes, regardless of their
nature or the sex of the victim.
Also, through a number of women’s resource centre
networks supported by the OSCE in Central Asia
and the Caucasus, our organization helps to enhance

13-5201135/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

women’s access to legal aid. But the judiciary is, of
course, not the only actor involved in the rule of law,
and the OSCE also works with participating States to
increase the number of women in the police and to make
law enforcement activities gender-sensitive as a part of
comprehensive security sector reforms facilitated by
our Organization in many countries.
Within the politico-military dimension, the OSCE
Forum for Security Cooperation promotes the inclusion
of women in the military, including in combat positions,
making sure that civilian oversight and human rights in
the armed forces are guaranteed for men and women
alike.
As I said, the OSCE is the world’s largest regional
security organization. It also plays an important
role throughout the region in mediation, dialogue
facilitation, good offices and quiet diplomacy. The
organization has increased its efforts to ensure that those
processes are inclusive. We are pleased to announce
that on 24 October, in Istanbul, the OSCE will launch
a guidance note on gender-responsive mediation. The
purpose of the guidance note is not only to increase
women’s participation in mediation, dialogue and
quiet diplomacy initiatives, but also to strengthen the
capacity of mediators to understand how the substantive
concerns of both men and women can be included in
those processes and how that inclusion benefits the
sustainability of conflict resolution and reconciliation.
We are grateful to the Secretariat’s Department of
Political Affairs and the Mediation Support Unit for
their inspiring cooperation in preparing this guidance
note.
Allow me at this point to refer to one more issue
that we believe is important, also in the framework of
today’s debate. The OSCE is a leader in a key peace
and security issue that is not discussed enough from a
perspective of women, peace and security: integrating
a gender perspective in combating violent extremism
and radicalization that leads to terrorism. This is an
issue of serious concern to OSCE participating States.
Both national authorities and international and regional
organizations increasingly recognize that a better
understanding of the dynamics of this issue is central
to formulating and implementing effective strategies
that will increase stability and security. In 2014, the
OSCE will undertake a new initiative, in partnership
with the Global Counterterrorism Forum, to promote
gender-sensitive strategies, policies and measures
to counter violent extremism and radicalization that

36/75

18/10/2013

leads to terrorism, with an emphasis on empowering
women to contribute to those efforts in different roles
and capacities. I would like to conclude by drawing
attention to the good cooperation between OSCE field
operations and UN Women offices on women, peace
and security issues. For example, next month we will
be co-hosting a conference in Almaty, Kazakhstan
for OSCE participating States to discuss with expert
representatives and civil society organizations progress
in drafting and implementing national action plans
or other strategies on Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). The results of this conference will be
merged with the outcome of an OSCE study on good
practices and lessons learned by OSCE participating
States, which was undertaken with the Peace Research
Institute in Oslo. We hope that events and research such
as those will provide us with further insight on how
to put into practice important goals in the resolutions
on women, peace and security and, that Member States
of the United Nations can benefit from the knowledge
generated by the OSCE.
The President: I thank Ms. Beham for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): My delegation
thanks Azerbaijan, as President for the month of
October, for convening an open debate on women,
peace and security. Lithuania welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013) today, which aims to streamline
action within the United Nations system to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and other related decisions. It
is important that the resolution clearly underlines the
role of regional organizations and civil society. We
appreciate the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral that provide a strategic look at and guidance
on the implementation of existing commitments. We
would also like to commend the work of Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women.
and her first briefing to the Council.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the European Union. I will
limit myself to a few points relating to the agenda on
the rule of law and the participation of women.
Strengthening international and national justice
responses to conflict-related violence against women is
crucial. In the aftermath of conflict, it is vital to develop
transitional justice mechanisms and institutions and to
rebuild the rule of law to protect women’s rights.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

We must pay greater attention to providing better
support for victims, including by ensuring protection
for witnesses, victims and justice officials, providing
reparation mechanisms and ensuring the systematic
inclusion of women in all aspects of conflict resolution.
United Nations special representatives, peacekeeping
and political missions and United Nations agencies
have a much greater role to play.
In recent years, the United Nations has augmented its
involvement in establishing and supporting transitional
justice measures, furthering women’s rights in postconflict societies. The United Nations-supported truth
commissions in Mali, Kenya and Cote d’Ivoire have
addressed gender-based crimes. Yet more must be done
to ensure that transitional justice addresses a full range
of gender-specific crimes, including human trafficking,
early or forced marriages, the links between sexual
violence and natural-resource extraction, withholding
humanitarian assistance, enforced disappearances and
forced displacement.
Transitional justice cannot be a substitute for
accountability. It should not limit the access of victims
to reparations. Blanket amnesties cannot be extended
to conflict-related sexual violence. We must pay greater
attention to delivering reparation programmes and
funding. We continue to support the wider Council
practice of including sexual violence in the designation
criteria for targeted sanctions.
It is difficult to imagine tackling impunity without
monitoring and reporting mechanisms. We welcome the
Council’s decision today that United Nations entities
should do more systematic reporting to the Council,
including analysis.
Lithuania sponsored Council resolution 2117 (2013),
on small arms and light weapons, which links the illicit
transfer and misuse of small arms to a disproportionate
impact on violence against women and girls.
In previous statements my delegation has
already spoken about the importance of ensuring the
empowerment of women. Their participation at all
levels of economic, political and social life is as crucial
to sustainable peace as it is to poverty reduction,
economic recovery and sustainable development.
We welcome the the Peacebuilding Commission’s
declaration on women’s economic empowerment for
peacebuilding.
The recent decrease in women’s share of senior
positions in United Nations field operations should be

S/PV.7044

reversed. Efforts by the United Nations to retain, attract
and support women staff should be complemented by
efforts by Member States to consistently nominate
more female candidates.
Notably greater involvement of women — from
mediation, restoring the rule of law and governance
to
participation
in
post-conflict
electoral
processes — continues to require commitment and
attention. It also requires greater dedicated resourcing,
particularly for civil society groups working on the
ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN Women, Ms. MlamboNgcuka; the representative of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Balipou; and
Ms. Pillay, the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their contributions to this debate.
We fully align ourselves with the statement of
the European Union. We would like to make a few
additional remarks in our national capacity.
Belgium welcomes the theme chosen for today’s
debate. We also sponsored resolution 2122 (2013),
adopted today. The rule of law and transitional justice
in relation to gender have not yet received sufficient
attention, despite the fact that they are key to the
promotion and protection of women’s rights in postconflict situations. My country welcomes the fact that
this debate is also focusing on the rebuilding of justice
mechanisms that guarantee women non-discriminatory
access to justice in post-conflict societies.
Indeed, improving the legal framework and the
rules of procedure to ensure women better access to
justice at both the national and the international levels
is one of the aims of the second national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that my
country recently finalized for the period 2013-2016. To
attain that goal, we believe that it is critical, on the one
hand, to support the initiatives that facilitate access to
justice for women and girls so as to ensure that their
rights are protected, and, on the other, to incorporate
the gender dimension into documents relating to the
rule of law and transitional justice and to support
transitional justice mechanisms that have a real impact
on gender parity.

13-5201137/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

Belgium continues to give political and operational
priority to the fight against all forms of violence
against civilians during and after armed conflict, with
particular focus on sexual violence. In that regard,
my country encourages States to include the fight
against sexual violence in their transitional justice
mechanisms and penal law, and to consider the fight
against sexual violence as their responsibility. We also
reiterate our call on all countries to apply the broadest
possible definition of the concept of sexual violence, as
identified by the International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to welcome
the publication by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of a report on sexual violence in that country.
The report demonstrates the importance of the Human
Rights Council’s decision to convene at its twentyfifth session a high-level dialogue on the lessons
learned and the remaining challenges in the campaign
against sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The report also reflects the need to allow
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations to
share their relevant experience.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to thank Secretary-General
for his commitment to this issue, for his report
(S/2013/525) and for being present at this debate. I also
thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her statement
and congratulate her on her recent appointment as
head of UN Women. Spain fully supports her in the
performance of her duties.
Spain welcomes the fact that the Security Council
has devoted three debates this year, with different
approaches, to the women and peace and security
agenda. The adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) today
and of resolution 2106 (2013) in June consolidates
a doctrinal and legal corpus that reflects the will of
Member States to move from dialogue to action.
The approach chosen today for the current debate
links two fundamental principles to which Spain is
particularly committed: the first is the fight against
impunity for crimes against women in armed conflict,
and the second is women’s participation in rebuilding
the rule of law in post-conflict situations in order to put
an end to the structures of inequality and discrimination
in the context of which those crimes were committed.

38/75

18/10/2013

Regarding accountability and the fight against
impunity, the international community’s efforts in that
field should be recalled. That was highlighted during
the Council debate of 24 June 2013 on impunity for
crimes of sexual violence in conflicts (S/PV.6984) and
the subsequent adoption of resolution 2106 (2013), which
reiterates the importance of vigorously continuing to
establish accountability for the most serious crimes
committed against women and girls in conflict. On
that issue, I would like to stress the need to address
impunity for crimes committed against those who tend
to be particularly discriminated against, such as women
and girls with disabilities or indigenous women and
girls.
Spain has actively contributed to such discussions
in many forums in which such questions have been
addressed and will continue to do so as long as the
effective prosecution of those responsible for such
crimes persists as a global challenge requiring urgent
and priority attention.
With regard to full participation in establishing the
rule of law, which means placing women at the centre
of the decision-making processes in the post-conflict
rebuilding phase, while giving particular attention to
justice and security sector reform. Spain believes that
that is the only way to end the discrimination that makes
women suffer disproportionate violations of their rights
during conflicts. It also enhances safeguards to ensure
that such discrimination is not repeated.
The report of the Secretary-General clearly notes
a positive trend in women’s participation in mediation
processes and the negotiation of peace agreements.
However, the inclusion of matters that directly affect
women and their rights in such agreements is still
insufficient. That is what the United Nations Working
Group on the issue of discrimination against women in
law and in practice points out in its latest report. The
Working Group expresses concern for the fact that
the gender perspective is not sufficiently taken into
account in transitional processes, which will result in a
less inclusive peace.
On that count I would like to highlight the
initiatives mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
report that have promoted the involvement of women in
crisis and conflict situations. I would like to highlight
specific areas where Spain has participated. They are
the High-level Conference on Women’s Leadership in
the Sahel Region, held in Brussels in April; the work

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

of UN Women through counselling many countries on
incorporating women’s rights and gender equality in
measures being taken to restore peace and guarantee
justice in the context of a transition; and the general
recommendation that the Committee on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women has
adopted today on women and conflict-prevention,
conflicts and post-conflict.
As stated on many occasions, Spain devotes
particular efforts to promoting a gender perspective
in conflict situations and has had a plan of action on
women, peace and security since 2007. Within that
framework, our country carries out various actions
within the scope of its foreign policy, cooperation and
defence activities in order to guarantee the correct
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In particular,
I would like to refer to the International Seminar on
Gender Perspective and Peace Operations, coordinated
by the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Spain and the Netherlands. The sixth edition of that
seminar will take place next November in The Hague.
The seminar includes a specific module on the role
of women in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes, as well as on the processes
regarding security sector reform. Spanish cooperation
plays a leading role in that regard through the plan
on gender-sensitive peacebuilding, with a chapter
dedicated to gender-sensitive transitional justice and the
rule of law. Furthermore, the Office for Humanitarian
Action of the Spanish Agency for International Aid for
Development has elaborated a guide to address sexual
violence in humanitarian interventions.
I will conclude by quoting the words of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, who,
on the occasion of an expert-level dialogue on the
approach of the United Nations on transitional justice,
pointed out that peace processes constitute historic
opportunities for broadening the goals of post-conflict
justice. Spain wants those opportunities effectively
recognize women’s rights, both in terms of guarantees
of justice and conditions of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, allow me to
join others in expressing gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN Women,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
representative of the Non-governmental Organization
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for

S/PV.7044

their statements. I would also like to thank the Council
presidency for taking up the topic and organizing the
open debate today.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union delivered earlier. In addition, I would
like to make the following remarks.
Estonia is dedicated to protecting and promoting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, both
nationally and internationally. As a member of the
Human Rights Council, our particular focus is on the
rights of women and children, gender perspective in
conflict settlements and the fight against impunity.
Estonia firmly believes that the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict situations must promote justice and
accountability in ways that further the rights of women,
including through legal and institutional reforms that
are gender sensitive. The equal right to decision-making
and participation, along with women’s empowerment,
is crucial to ensure a functioning society and peace and
justice in the aftermath of conflicts.
Additionally, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/525), women’s representation in the
justice sector plays a significant role in increasing the
reporting of crimes and enhancing public trust in the
rule of law institutions. The importance of prevention
must likewise be stressed. By enabling women to fully
participate in judicial systems, we can better tackle the
root causes of impunity for violence against women.
Estonia welcomes the call by the Security Council
in today’s resolution to Member States to comply
with their relevant obligations to end impunity and
to thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for atrocity crimes. Estonia further agrees
with the Council that the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes of international concern against
women and girls has been strengthened through the
work of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
the ad hoc and mixed tribunals, and the specialized
chambers in national tribunals. ICC prosecutions
will not, however, be sufficient to ensure complete
accountability. Therefore, it is essential that the gender
provisions of the Rome Statute are translated into
national prosecutions.
Justice for victims of atrocity crimes, however,
entails more than just punishing perpetrators. The Rome
Statute further empowers victims by its broad victimparticipation scheme and underlines its commitment to
victims by its reparations provisions. Likewise, the ICC

13-5201139/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

Trust Fund for Victims has been doing important work
to alleviate the suffering of victims in the countries
where the Court is conducting investigations.

18/10/2013

remarks and other invited speakers for their valuable
briefings on the issue.

Estonia was honoured to join the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
during the General Assembly’s opening week. We were
also glad to see how much interest there was in the
topic of enhancing accountability for sexual violence
in conflict, discussed at a side event during that week
that focused on the role of the ICC and that was hosted
by the Estonian Mission to the United Nations. We
would like to commend the important work of the Team
of Experts on Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and I am glad to note that Estonia has made
financial contributions to the activities of the Team.

Malaysia remains concerned about sexual and
gender-based crimes and strongly believes that ending
impunity is crucial in our quest to put an end to sexual
violence in times of conflict. We note that progress
has been made over the years, and we welcome the
continuing work of the United Nations and other
stakeholders, including the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
focuses its efforts on strengthening the capacity of the
national rule of law and justice actors. We feel that the
Team’s engagement with relevant Governments would
strengthen their capacity to effectively address sexual
violence against women and girls.

Estonia would also like to take the opportunity
to emphasize that in addition to conflict-related
sexual violence, increased attention should be paid
to the full range of violations and serious crimes
experienced by women, including gendered impacts
of enforced disappearances, foreign occupation, mass
forced displacement, restrictions on humanitarian
aid, conflict-related trafficking and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure.

In our effort to secure peace and security, we
must move urgently to replace the prevailing culture
of impunity with one that promotes the rule of law,
justice and accountability. Underlining the importance
of ending sexual violence, Malaysia is pleased to
report that it has joined many others in endorsing the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which makes clear the collective view on the
need of greater action to address the issue.

Let me also commend UN Women for their work
targeted at raising the number of national action plans
related to resolution 1325 (2000) or other relevant
planning instruments, as outlined in the recently
adopted UN Women Strategic Plan. Estonia developed
its national action plan in 2010 and has advised a number
of States on developing theirs. We would be ready to
cooperate in that regard with other States in the future.
We are looking forward to hearing the results of the
global study, and to the high-level review in 2015.

My delegation is concerned with the often
inadequate legal frameworks on women’s rights in
post-conflict countries. In that matter, we could take
a page from the lessons learned through established
courts, such as the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Criminal Tribunal of the
Former Yugoslavia, which offer insightful lessons from
the prosecution of sexual and gender-based crimes.
Those could be applied to future tribunals and domestic
judicial processes. Furthermore, Governments that
have experienced conflict could consider allocating
greater financial resources to investigate cases of
sexual violence. There is also a need to ensure that
international and national courts have adequate
expertise. In that regard, countries in a position to do
so should render assistance to post-conflict societies.

In conclusion, we are glad to note that Estonia was
among the sponsors of resolution 2106 (2013), which
strengthens the monitoring and prevention of sexual
violence in conflict, and we were happy to co-sponsor
resolution 2122 (2013), adopted today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate Azerbaijan on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also
express my thanks for convening today’s open debate
on the important issue of women, peace and security.
1 would like to thank the Secretary-General for his

40/75

In addressing the issues of women’s empowerment
after conflicts, attention should be given to strengthening
the security of women through rules and regulations.
That could be done through setting up institutional
and administrative machinery to plan, coordinate,
implement and monitor development programmes
for women. My delegation cannot stress enough the
importance of increased access for women to education
and employment, as well as the development of policies
13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

and services that offer equal livelihood opportunities
to women. At the same time, we must also remember
the importance of access to health care, especially for
victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
Malaysia welcomes today’s adoption of the
resolution 2122 (2013) on the issue discussed. My
delegation hopes that there will be sufficient impetus
toward the actual realization of the resolution and the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Malaysia therefore
appreciates the ongoing update on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/525) of 4 September. As mentioned in
the report, there remains a deficit in opportunities
for women to exercise leadership, and women are
still underrepresented in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution, protection and peacebuilding processes. My
delegation believes that the greater active participation
of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding would go
a long way towards including a gender perspective and
allowing women to shape peace.
In that regard, there is a need to increase the number
of women in high-level decision-making positions in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations. Malaysia
is also supportive of appointing more women protection
advisers to monitor and report on sexual violence in all
relevant situations. We appreciate the positive values
they bring in creating greater awareness of sexual
violence issues, reporting incidents of sexual violence
and implementing Security Council resolutions on the
ground.
We strongly believe that the subject of women,
peace and security deserves the Security Council’s
sustained attention. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to the efforts to address sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Nonetheless, we must insist
that gender equality and efforts to encourage and instill
a gender perspective be promoted during times of peace
rather than solely during times of conflict. The respect
and promotion of women’s rights must become part of
the culture of every society. In that regard, the Council
can be assured of our continuous engagement and
unrelenting support for the advancement of the issue
in our pursuit of achieving peace and security at the
national, regional and international levels.

S/PV.7044

organizing this debate and for having made us give up
our lunch for this good cause.
In the interests of time, I shall deliver an abbreviated
version of my written statement, with a focus on
four points to which my country attaches particular
importance.
First, Switzerland puts particular stress on a
gender-sensitive implementation of the transitional
justice mechanisms. As Ms. Balipou pointed out earlier,
women’s perspectives and needs should be included
in all four principles against impunity: the right to be
informed, the right to justice, the right to reparations
and the guarantee of non-recurrence. As we know
from experience, violent conflict affects women and
men differently, not only with respect to the types of
violence suffered, especially sexually-based violence,
but also based on their different biological and social
roles and identities. Prosecutions for gender-based
and sexist violence at the national and international
levels are thus key to achieving reconciliation and
reintegration in post-conflict societies. For example,
when truth commissions investigate violations from
a gender viewpoint, they identify the impact of
those violations on women and men alike and can
make recommendations that lead to specific gendersensitive initiatives in terms of justice, reparation and
institutional reform.
Secondly, archives are key to the fight against
impunity, especially to the full realization of the right
to be informed. Switzerland welcomes the work of
the experts convoked at the initiative of the British
Government on the prevention of gender-based violence,
which makes good use of archives in order to expose
sexual violence committed in conflict situations and to
investigate crimes. Switzerland has seconded an expert
to the working group and stands ready to contribute
further expertise.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

Thirdly, Switzerland welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/525) mentions
the importance of access to safe abortion for women
and girls who are victims of rape. Switzerland firmly
believes that all women and girls have the right to
control their own bodies and to be free from coercion
and sexual violence. Given the increased exposure to
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict settings,
those rights must be strictly guaranteed.

Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for

While Switzerland supports the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to draft an independent study on

13-5201141/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

18/10/2013

the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
implementation of commitments made almost 15 years
ago is one of our chief concerns, which leads to my
final remark.

In the spirit of brevity, I shall limit my remarks
to several issues raised in the Secretary-General’s
recent report (S/2013/525) that we consider particularly
important.

It is well known that Switzerland is one of the
22 States members of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency Group, a transregional initiative that
seeks to improve the working methods of the Security
Council. My country notes that when resolutions on
specific crises are adopted by the Security Council, they
do not always take into account all the commitments
made with regard to women, peace and security.
Furthermore, their implementation differs greatly from
one context to another.

We note the progress to date in the system as a whole
and at the regional and national levels with regard to
best practices, national plans, indicators and training.
However, we are concerned by the persistent deficit in
the number of women in leadership positions, as well
as the lack of opportunities for them to rise to such
positions. At the same time, we express our concern
at the ongoing decline, as described in the report, in
the number of women represented at the middle and
high levels of mission leadership staff, the scarcity of
data broken down by gender and age, and the gaps in
financing.

Our country therefore urges the Security Council,
among other matters, to ensure that gender advisers
are deployed in all peace missions and that effective
mechanisms are introduced so that information
concerning the situation of women and girls can
be presented in a systematic manner in reports and
transmitted in Security Council debates. In that regard,
Switzerland welcomes resolution 2122 (2013), adopted
earlier today, which broadly accommodates the concrete
recommendations in that sense. Nonetheless, it would
have been better yet to have adopted the resolution after
this debate in order to more fully take into account the
views expressed by the participants.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks Azerbaijani the presidency for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security, and
for the opportunity to reaffirm the role of women in
transitional justice.
While our country has periodically taken part
in these debates, our comments today are special
significance since this is our first speech following
Chile’s election as a non-permanent member of the
Council for the period 2014-2015. We reiterate our
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) (2000), bearing in mind that 2015 will mark
the fifteenth anniversary of that instrument, which
has enabled us to progress, among other goals, in the
promotion of women to positions of leadership, the
prevention of gender-based violence in situations of
conflict and post-conflict, and the creation of national
plans in various countries, including Chile.

42/75

Similarly, we support the convening of a high-level
meeting on the matter in 2015 and share the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that an independent
worldwide study of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) be undertaken to make a full diagnosis
of its implementation status and detail priorities for
further action. We hope that the the study will be
designed above all to seek the broadest participation of
Member States and of civil society so that it will enjoy
cross-cutting support.
We agree with the recommendations in the report
about the need to promote sustainable budgets for
the work, so as to strengthen women’s organizations
working at the national levels and to train women
leaders of peace movements. While appreciating the
work of the experts deployed in the field, we consider it
essential to provide training at the system and national
levels not only for those providing direct leadership in
that area, but also to those performing management
functions, whatever their role. My delegation agrees on
the need to accelerate women’s access to the political
arena and to support transitional justice reform as a
peacebuilding guarantee.
Chile signed the Arms Trade Treaty and urges
other States to support that initiative, which we believe
represents an important humanitarian instrument for
the prevention of violence against women and girls.
It is my delegation’s belief that the Security
Council should use every means in its power to gather
information on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions, particularly through
briefings provided by the commissions of inquiry

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

established to investigate situations on the Council’s
agenda. We take this opportunity to urge the members
of the Council to hold well-informed consultations on
those issues.
I note that at the regional level, the Chilean
Joint Centre for Peacekeeping Operations convened
a seminar, jointly with the United States Naval
Postgraduate School, entitled “Women, Peace and
Security: Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
new challenges”, in Santiago, Chile from 1 to 12 July. It
was attended by professionals from Brazil, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay as well as
from our own country. The seminar concluded with the
adoption of a document in the form of an action plan,
agreed in group discussions, embodying initiatives
fully reflecting the international norms discussed
during the seminar.
Chile will continue promoting the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), convinced as it is of the
important role played by women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and of the need to increase their
participation in decision-making processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Spinellis (Greece): We would like to express
our appreciation to the presidency of Azerbaijan for
convening this important open debate, as well as to
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UN
Women and the Under-Secretary-General for their
important contributions. We align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and we welcome the adoption of resolution 2122
(2013) by the Council earlier today.
In a conflict-affected environment, violence against
women is significantly intensified, indicating that in
many cases, violence is an extension of existing gender
inequality in society. Despite the continuous efforts
of the international community to eradicate violence
against women, sexual violence in armed conflicts
remains a widespread phenomenon. It exacerbates and
prolongs situations of armed conflict and is therefore
directly linked to the maintenance of peace and security.
Among others, resolution 2106 (2013) underlines
the importance of women’s greater participation and
leadership in decision-making processes in areas of
conflict. In many cases, women are excluded from
decision-making. Nevertheless, their full and equal
participation in peacemaking and peacebuilding is

S/PV.7044

indispensable for the success of those processes, since
it is the only way to ensure that the needs of women
involved in conflict-related situations are effectively
addressed. Women must be seen not solely as victims,
but as active agents of change and of peacekeeping.
Prevention, rather than reaction, must be a
priority. That requires the existence of early warning
mechanisms based on accurate, objective and reliable
information. The collection of data relating to sexual
violence in areas of conflict is crucial and strongly
encouraged, so that both national and international
actors may be duly informed.
While it is crucial to address sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict contexts, it is equally
important to combat impunity and strengthen both
international and national justice responses to those
crimes. Consequently, capacity-building related to
the rule of law, that is wide in scope and goes beyond
traditional areas of law reform and strengthening of
justice and law enforcement institutions are necessary.
The rule of law should address justice, equality
and equity with a strong focus on the empowerment
of women and girls, gender equality, and preventing
and combating violence against women as essential
preconditions for equitable and inclusive sustainable
development. In that context, we praise the work of the
United Nations in assisting Member States to address
rule of law issues in conflict contexts and we consider
it vital that the United Nations continues to emphasize
the importance of providing redress and assistance
to victims in conflict, post-conflict and other crisis
situations.
The prevention of and response to violence against
children, in particular, including sexual violence and
abuse, forced marriage and maltreatment, should
continue to be an important focus area of United
Nations assistance.
To ensure genuine rule of law, beyond the formal
establishment of institutions, judicial systems need
to be fully accessible to all individuals and groups. A
major obstacle to access is the cost involved in legal
advice and legal representation services. We support
the work of the United Nations to implement a wide
variety of projects focused on providing legal aid to
address that obstacle.
In conclusion, Greece is of the view that genuine and
inclusive participation in the elaboration of transitional

13-5201143/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

justice mechanisms ensures that they not only respond
to the needs and expectations of victims, but provide
transformative change for sustainable transition to
peace and reconciliation, which is the ultimate goal of
all of our efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): At the outset, I would
like to thank Azerbaijan for convening this open debate
on women and peace and security, the SecretaryGeneral for his informative report (S/2013/525), and the
briefers who spoke this morning.
We are pleased that the Council has convened an
open debate on this issue for the third time, which
signals the importance the Council attaches to the
issue of women. Women account for more than half
of the world’s population. Women’s participation and
the recognition of their special needs are essential. The
issue of women and peace and security is multifaceted.
We welcome today’s discussion, which focuses on the
role of women in transitional justice and the rule of law.
A situation of conflict creates particular challenges
in terms of human rights and upholding the rule of law.
As is rightly mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his report, rebuilding justice and the rule of law and
enhancing gender-sensitive legal and institutional
reform, in conformity with international standards,
is crucial to protecting women’s equal and inviolable
rights in the aftermath of conflict. Measures to protect
women victims and to redress wrongs against them and
bring perpetrators to justice deserve particular attention
from the Security Council and the cooperation of the
international community.
My delegation is pleased to learn from UN Women
that transitional justice mechanisms are increasingly
responding to war crimes against women by providing
specific arrangements to protect women witnesses.
We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2106
(2013), in June, which focuses on accountability for
perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict and stresses
women’s political and economic empowerment.
Those mechanisms need to be effectively utilized.
The Council’s resolutions and presidential statements
also need to be translated into actions if we are to be
successful in our attempt to protect women.
Just last month, Thailand joined other like-minded
countries in endorsing the Declaration of Commitment

44/75

18/10/2013

to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, initiated by the
United Kingdom. We will continue to cooperate with
all partners to eliminate sexual violence in conflict and
bring the perpetrators to justice.
Although we do not have a situation of armed
conflict in Thailand, the Security Council resolutions
on women, peace and security have been applied as
domestic guidelines on how to best protect women
in our country. A Subcommittee on Women and the
Promotion of Peace and Security has been established
by the Ministry of Social Development and Human
Security. The Subcommittee is currently drafting
policies and strategies as a basis for our national action
plan, which hopefully will be adopted in the near future.
Enhancing women’s access to justice is also one of
Thailand’s main priorities. Our Independent National
Rule of Law Commission helps ensure that all State
organs perform their duties based on the rule of law,
without discrimination. The Council may be interested
to know that on 15 November Thailand will host the
Bangkok Dialogue on the Rule of Law: Investing in
the Rule of Law, Justice and Security for the Post-2015
Development Agenda. This meeting is yet another
example of Thailand’s commitment to help promote
the rule of law, justice and security. Our decision to
co-sponsor resolution 2122 (2013) and all our efforts
are based on our strong belief that the rule of law at
the national and international levels is an indispensable
foundation for a more peaceful, prosperous and just
world.
Let me once again congratulate the Security
Council, UN Women and other bodies with regard to
women and peace and security and commend them for
their ongoing work. The Council and the international
community can count on Thailand’s active engagement
in and contribution to that important issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow
me to congratulate the delegation of Azerbaijan on
holding this open debate on the role of women and the
rule of law and ensuringjustice in conflict and postconflict situations.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence for their
personal commitment and leadership in the fight
against violence against women. We also believe that

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

UN Women and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights should play an important role in
combating violence against women and protecting
women’s rights.
Belarus condemns all forms of violence, including
in conflict situations, particularly against the most
vulnerable segments of society — women and children.
As with any other country, Belarus has zero tolerance
for that scourge. Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2106 (2013) adopted in June, have created a
clear legal framework for responding to sexual violence
in conflict and prohibited its use as a weapon of war.
We believe that a thorough investigation of all acts
of sexual violence and the immediate punishment of
perpetrators are crucial in combatting this scourge.
That violence can be eliminated only through
coherent collective efforts by the international
community — Member States, international
organizations and civil society. Such efforts can and
should be carried out through a genuine partnership
based on a unified approach, respect for each other’s
views and agreement on the steps to be taken.
Today, it is clear that there is no State in the world
that would not endeavour to put an end to violence
against women. The question is not who is right, who
is for, who is against violence. Today, the question is
how and in what way can come together through our
collective efforts.
In that context, we are seriously concerned
about recent incidents — be they deliberate or
unintentional — that replace the painstaking and
time-consuming work on the formation of such a
partnership with vociferous media campaigns based
on documents drawn up by an inner circle and hastily
gathered expressions of support for them. We are willing
to believe in the sincere intentions of the proponents of
that approach to combating violence against women. At
the same time, we cannot but disagree with an approach
that puts those States with the wisdom and strength
of will to consider every word in the international
documents that they sign in an awkward position.
We also consider it inadmissible that members of
the international community that have done a great
deal, including specifically in combatting violence
against women and children, have been placed in an
artificially created situation and forced to justify
themselves for failing to appear on a list of countries
who combat sexual violence. Every State plays an

S/PV.7044

important role in combating sexual violence, and no
vociferous media campaign should alienate or disregard
even one Member.
We pay tribute to reasonable initiatives to
strengthen international support to combat sexual
violence in conflict. Belarus calls for us not to replace
real partnerships with unity that is merely on paper,
and to avoid hasty and irresponsible actions that may
devalue the noble idea of combatting this scourge.
Our shared responsibility, affirmed as a moral
imperative of policy, is to steadfastly abide by
partnerships based on respect, even if that goes against
our short-term interests and plans. Only that approach
can guarantee a genuine implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security,
resolution 2106 (2013), and resolution 2122 (2013),
adopted today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Let me begin by stating
Slovenia’s full alignment with the statement delivered
by the European Union earlier today. We also join others
in welcoming the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013).
As stated by some briefers and several speakers
before me, women and girls are particularly vulnerable
in conflict and post-conflict situations. It is therefore
also extremely important to discuss the gender
aspects of the rule of law and transitional justice
in the light of the three elements of resolution 1325
(2000) — participation, prevention and protection.
Rebuilding justice and the rule of law is critical
to any post-conflict transitional process burdened by
the legacies of mass atrocities, serious human-rights
violations and a weakened judicial infrastructure.
A gender perspective, as well as the participation
of women, should be injected into those processes.
Transitional justice processes should address the full
range of conflict-related violations of women’s rights.
As particularly vulnerable victims in conflict-affected
situations, women experience grave consequences
from breakdowns in the rule of law, in the form of a
range of violations including, but not limited to, sexual
and gender-based violence. In that context, Slovenia
particularly welcomes the reference to the need for
access to a full range of sexual and reproductive health
services in the resolution adopted today (2122 (2013)).

13-5201145/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

Addressing abhorrent violations by ensuring access
to justice, formal and informal, as well as full rights
of redress, is essential to the process of reconciliation
and lasting peace. Importantly, preventing impunity for
the perpetrators of such crimes decreases the chance
that they will recur in the future. Furthermore, the
representation of women should be ensured in the
justice sector. Eliminating violence against women
and violations of their social and economic rights is
a prerequisite for ensuring their full participation
in recovery. Gender-sensitive legal and institutional
reforms that conform with international standards are
therefore needed.
The primary responsibility for the prosecution
of conflict-related crimes, including violations of
women’s rights, belongs to States. However, while
the principle of complementarity enhances national
capabilities to prosecute such crimes effectively, more
efforts must be made to improve criminal justice at the
national level. The international legal framework for
judicial assistance to countries should be strengthened.
That includes extradition between States in order
to support the effective prosecution of international
crimes at the national level. Having recognized that
legal gap, Slovenia has been working together with the
Netherlands and Belgium on an initiative to consider the
possibility of adopting a new international instrument
for mutual legal assistance and extradition for the
effective investigation and prosecution of the most
serious crimes of international concern by domestic
jurisdictions. We intend to continue our activities in
that regard in the framework of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and invite other States to join the initiative.
The role of international criminal courts and
tribunals, in particular the International Criminal Court
(ICC), remains crucial to the establishment of the rule
of law, especially in cases where States are unable or
unwilling to pursue accountability for serious crimes.
Moreover, the contribution of international criminal
justice, including the ICC, to the field of gender
discrimination and crimes of sexual violence has been
and will continue to be momentous. As stressed by
ICC Prosecutor Bensouda in a panel on international
criminal justice at a strategic forum held last month
in Bled, Slovenia, the ICC should also be seen as an
investment in the future of women and humankind
as a whole. To that end, Slovenia will continue to
firmly support the International Criminal Court and

46/75

18/10/2013

international instruments regarding individual criminal
responsibility, and calls on States to accede to or ratify
the Rome Statute and its amendments.
We also consider it important that the topic under
discussion today be addressed by regional organizations
as well, as important stakeholders in the task of ensuring
peace and security.
With regard to the issue of women and girls and the
justice sector, Slovenia is supporting a project aimed at
improving the status of juvenile offenders, particularly
girls, and strengthening the juvenile justice sector in the
Afghan province of Herat. Activities envisaged for 2013
and 2014 will include the psychological rehabilitation
of underage girls in prison and their reintegration
into society, and awareness-raising campaigns for the
general public on the situation of imprisoned minors,
as well as expert training for officials in the judiciary.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
October, and to thank the Permanent Representative
of Australia for his leadership of the Council last
month. I am also grateful the Secretary-General
and the Executive Director of UN Women for their
contributions this morning.
Thirteen years after the adoption of the historic
resolution 1325 (2000), the culmination of a long
process concerning women and international peace and
security, the Security Council is still considering the
issue. Our debates, however, reveal shortcomings in the
area of the rights of women, which are being terribly
violated, particularly in the Arab world. The Security
Council has established several criteria for women’s
contributions to settling conflicts and their role in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Those criteria
should be implemented, in conformity with Security
Council provisions, in order to achieve the goals of
women’s participation in conflict resolution and the
reconstruction of society in the aftermath of conflict.
Women should be integrated into peace negotiations and
into social reconstruction. Their participation at every
level is still incomplete. Their access to transitional
justice systems must be facilitated, including in
relation to crimes committed in conflict, especially
since women and children are victims of particular
types of crime and subject to discrimination, and they

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

face social and cultural impediments that hinder their
access to justice mechanisms.
The State of Qatar understands the importance
of the rule of law and of strengthening women’s
participation and promoting women’s and girls’ rights
in post-conflict reconstruction and conflict resolution.
Their participation should be strengthened in order
to enable them to function in the political arena,
particularly through a collection of initiatives enabling
their comprehensive inclusion.
We cannot talk about women and peace and security
without discussing the causes of their vulnerability.
There are several aspects of this that should be
strengthened, first and foremost through laws that
protect women in conflict without discrimination. We
should call on all parties concerned to take measures
to protect women and girls against gender-based and
sexual violence in times of conflict.
We are very concerned about the situation of
women in armed conflict. Because of violations of their
human rights, women shoulder the heaviest burden of
conflict. In Palestine, they suffer the unjust effects
of the Israeli occupation, which affects the entire
population in the occupied territories, particularly in
Gaza. It is women who have to deal with the difficulties
resulting from Israeli practices and the blockade. The
mobility of Palestinian women continues to be hindered
by checkpoints, and women are subjected to practices
that contravene all international and moral principles.
In Syria, women are being targeted for violence
more than others. Under orders from the regime, acts
of physical and psychological violence, rape, sexual
violence, degradation and torture have been committed
by members of the Syrian armed forces against their own
families. Those are all war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The Syrian regime bears full responsibility
for sexual exploitation and trafficking in women; it
is a regime that has killed thousands, making women
into widows and children into orphans, and displacing
people within the country and beyond its borders.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donaghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union.
We warmly welcome today’s landmark resolution
of the Security Council (resolution 2122 (2013)), a

S/PV.7044

resolution that can fairly be described as representing
the high water mark so far in terms of advancing the
agenda relating to women and peace and security.
Although — or maybe because — the links between
women and peace and security are so well established
and that set of issues is now a well-developed part of
the Security Council’s broader work programme, there
is a clear need for a more consistent and systematic
application of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the subject.
Ireland is a founding member of the ACT
(accountability, coherence and transparency) group,
which is pressing for the Security Council to be more
accountable, more coherent and more transparent in its
working methods. I assume that the enhanced focus on
women and peace and security in today’s resolution will
mean improvements in both the quantity and quality of
briefing that will be provided to the Council on those
issues.
What distinguishes today’s resolution from others
is that it represents a pivot away from a narrow focus
on women as victims and towards the more positive
and liberating agenda of women’s participation and
women’s leadership. Welcome attention is paid to the
active role that women and women’s groups can play
in transforming conflict, insecurity and fragility. That
aspect has been insufficiently highlighted. It is often
overshadowed by the appalling suffering inflicted
on women through, for example, sexual violence in
conflict.
We should, however, recognize the profoundly
positive contribution to be made to conflict resolution
by the empowerment of women, allied to the treatment
of women and men on equal terms. Peace is more
effectively secured when women are involved. Peace
initiatives that have strong participation by women
tend to be more resilient than those that do not. There
is no denying the moral imperative for equal treatment
between women and men.
At its core, the women and peace and security
agenda presents an ambitious, even a radical, challenge.
It calls on us to fundamentally revise the role of women
within society. It requires men to reflect on their own
roles and abandon traditional mindsets.
Fortunately, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 4 September (S/2013/525) acknowledges,
times of transition and flux can present opportunities
to strengthen women’s leadership, empowerment

13-5201147/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

and rights in the process of restoring the rule of law
and governance systems. As his report indicates, the
participation of women in peace negotiations and
donor conferences has increased over the past year.
Active support for such participation, which is being
provided by gender experts and women’s civil society
organizations, is growing, and some peace agreements
have included gender-sensitive language. That is
encouraging. Yet the progress being made is hard
fought and uneven.
One of the most eloquent champions of women’s
rights in the world today is Mary Robinson, a former
President of Ireland and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. The
“Framework of Hope” that she has set out for progress
in that region highlights the empowerment of women
as a factor of critical importance. It is based on a vision
of reaching beyond traditional political leaders to
energize civil society, especially women’s groups. The
Bujumbura declaration of 11 July 2013 was a product of
that approach.
It is clear that real transformative progress will
be possible only when national political leaders in
conflict-affected societies, almost all of the them men
at present, adopt the women and peace and security
agenda as their own, and when more male voices are
heard and more male champions stand up. We need to
expand understanding of the enormous contribution
that women can make in meeting peace and security
challenges. We need to incentivize national and local
male leaders so that they commit to making the concrete
progress needed to realize that potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Bosnia and Herzegovina appreciates the convening
of the Security Council’s semi-annual debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the Executive
Director of UN Women for their comprehensive
briefings. And we extend a warm welcome and our
gratitude to the representatives of civil society for their
presentations today.
We believe that the Security Council, UN Women
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict will ensure
that the United Nations works in a concerted and
coordinated manner that will strengthen the capacity

48/75

18/10/2013

of the United Nations system to match its commitment
to gender equality with the leadership, resources and
expertise needed to advance achievements on the
ground. The development of additional indicators to
track the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
a significant step in broadening the women and peace
and security agenda.
We also recognize the positive contribution of the
Security Council to the rule of law, which is one of
the key aspects of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We fully agree
with the prevailing position that justice, including
transitional justice, is a fundamental building block
of sustainable peace in countries in conflict or postconflict situations. Delivering justice and security in
respect of the rule of law mitigates conflict, helps reduce
the risk of relapse into further conflict and creates
conditions conducive to sustainable development.
With regard to the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/525), we note with satisfaction that
the attention from the international community to the
issue of sexual violence in conflict has increased. We
therefore call upon all stakeholders to continue their
efforts to reduce and eliminate the high incidence of
threats faced by women and girls in contemporary
armed conflicts. However, we realize that despite the
urgency with which practices in implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) have improved, there remains a
deficit in opportunities for women on both the national
and international levels. To exercise leadership, there
remains an ongoing underrepresentation of women in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, protection and
peacebuilding processes and efforts.
Conflicts create situations in which women and
children are the ones most affected by the deterioration
of living conditions and fundamental rights. Violence
and the deprivation of rights often go hand in hand with
conflict. Efforts to fight impunity, provide assistance
to victims and hold perpetrators accountable must be
intensified and better coordinated. Regrettably, sexual
and gender-based violence often continue after peace
deals are reached, due to insufficient investment in
protection and prevention strategies, or weak security
and justice institutions. We are aware of the fact
that peace cannot be sustained unless women play a
critical role in the process. We therefore underscore
the importance of the full and effective involvement of
women at all stages of peace processes and of giving

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

them an equal role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in early peacebuilding.
We affirm our commitment to the rule of law as
an imperative for political dialogue and cooperation.
In that regard, with the aim of improving the overall
situation of women victims of rape, we are making
efforts to finalize the drafting of a programme for
victims of rape, sexual abuse and torture in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the period 2013-2016. At the State
level, a draft transitional justice strategy has been
developed to create an acceptable platform for efficient
and realistic mechanisms and activities to correct the
injustices and heal the traumas resulting from the
armed conflict in the 1990s.
We also emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully supports the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the provisions of which have been incorporated
into the Bosnia and Herzegovina gender action plan
and the action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Besides defining goals and activities, the
action plan includes an introduction, an analysis of the
de facto situations, and eight goals with strictly defined
activities, deadlines, the definition of responsibility and
partners. In this regard, through the action plan, we have
shown our dedication to increasing the representation
of women in decision-making positions at all levels of
power in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In addition, we are
undertaking efforts to increase the number of women in
military and police forces and to ensure their inclusion
in executive positions within such forces.
Increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
missions and introducing gender perspectives into the
training of participants in peace missions are further
priorities for us. We are also making additional efforts to
strengthen capacities in fighting trafficking, decreasing
the danger of mined areas, improving support networks
for women and girls who were victimized during the
war, and increasing the knowledge and capacities of
civil society. Furthermore, the gender equality agency
started a project on the implementation of the resolution
1325 (2000) action plan at the local level in cooperation
with the non-governmental organization Women BH
and with the financial support of UN Women. This
project represents an innovation not only in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also at the regional level.
While much has indeed been accomplished, a great
deal remains to be done to obtain real results for women
on the ground. To that end, it is of vital importance for
all United Nations stakeholders, and especially the

S/PV.7044

Security Council, to continue to use appropriate tools at
their disposal for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). At the same time, Member States need to take
decisive action accompanied by clear goals, baselines
and indicators to monitor and assess its implementation.
The goals for the future have already been identified.
We must now find the will and persistence to achieve
them. I assure the Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
full cooperation in this endeavour.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that we support
the Council’s adoption today of resolution 2122 (2013),
which we were pleased to sponsor.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN Women, High
Commissioner Pillay and Ms. Brigitte Balipou, the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their active involvement and
valuable contributions. We also welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) by the Council earlier
today, calling for higher levels of women’s involvement
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is undeniable that
the role, views and leadership of women are essential if
we are to truly make and sustain peace.
As a country that hosts tens of thousands of
refugees as a result of aggression and war imposed
on Armenia, we attach particular importance to
this debate. It is nothing new to say that the costs of
conflicts are borne disproportionately by women and
girls and, since it is primarily women who pay the price
when peace is absent, they are important stakeholders
in peacebuilding. As such, the inclusion of women in
all stages of peace processes guarantees a more lasting
and representative settlement.
We view this open debate as an opportunity
to highlight the policies and programmes aimed at
supporting national ownership and reform of justice
systems that place women’s rights and access to justice
for women at their heart. As the recent declaration of
the Peacebuilding Commission on women’s economic
empowerment for peacebuilding underscores, societies
that invest in women see exponential dividends from
such investments. We believe that justice sector reform
must start with the reform of laws to ensure that women
have equal rights in all spheres. It must include reforms
to strengthen women’s access to the justice system
and to promote and protect their rights and to protect

13-5201149/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

18/10/2013

women from the violence and insecurity that too often
accompany transitions from conflict.

role to create opportunities for women to participate
and exercise leadership.

Transitional justice mechanisms and reparations
programmes in particular have an important role in and
impact on societies recovering from conflict. When
linked to development efforts, such measures can have
sustainable and transformative impacts for victims, and
for women victims in particular. The transitions that
follow conflicts present important opportunities not
only to address the injustices faced by women during
times of conflict, but also to transform underlying
inequalities and gender-based discrimination.

We also believe that without women’s civil society
strength and women’s leadership, there will be no
effective prevention. Women’s experiences of violence
during and after conflict are much broader, and effective
protection from all forms of violence and violations
will be possible only through their empowerment and
participation.

Having had the privilege to chair previous sessions
of the Commission on the Status of Women, I would
like to emphasize that the United Nations has made
significant gains in securing commitments to gender
equality and women’s post-conflict empowerment.
Specifically, the Secretary-General’s seven-point
action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding is a
well-conceived and realistic set of targets for the United
Nations system.
Armenia also commends the efforts of the newly
appointed United Nations Special Envoy Mary
Robinson and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Margaret Vogt and others in establishing the
gender-responsive mediation practices, in particular
over the past year, which saw the appointment of gender
advisers, early and regular consultations with women,
the establishment of women’s advisory bodies, and the
implementation of the commitment to secure women a
place at peace talks.
Recently, the United Nations has developed an
increasingly sophisticated network for specialized
gender experts for deployment to mediation, transitional
justice and prosecutorial processes. Member States
should avail themselves of these important resources.
For example, the regular deployments of UN Women
to commissions of enquiry over the past three years
have produced a steady improvement in the extent to
which human rights abuses against women are reported
and acted upon. This is a direct result of the quality
of expertise and the regular deployment of experts to
those bodies.
To further promote the application of the women,
peace and security agenda, Armenia encourages
the Council to continue its efforts and to ensure the
consistent and regular application of the agenda across
all areas. The Security Council should recognize its own

50/75

In conclusion, let me express our readiness to work
closely with the Council, the United Nations bodies
and the non-governmental organizations concerned to
expand and implement the women, peace and security
agenda by improving the situation of women around the
world, including women affected by armed conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Krishnasswamy (India): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on the agenda
item “Women and peace and security”. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN Women and the other briefers for their detailed
remarks.
The resolution of armed conflict situations
requires a holistic and sustainable approach. The
participation of women in peace processes and postconflict reconstruction efforts is necessary to lay the
foundation for lasting peace. In that regard, resolution
1325 (2000) and successive Council resolutions on
this issue have provided a framework for effective
institutional arrangements. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/525) points out, significant progress has
been made but much more needs to be done.
India is one of the leading contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Based on our broad
experience, we believe that the Security Council must
make resources available to implement the greater scope
of peacekeeping mandates, including by providing
more women protection advisers. India was the first
State to successfully deploy an all-women police force
as part of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
hope that more Member States will contribute a greater
number of women military and police personnel to
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We have taken note of the indicators proposed
in the Secretary-General’s report. Indicators can be
useful in assessing situations as countries move from

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

situations of armed conflict to conflict resolution and
from peacebuilding to post-conflict reconstruction. We
must recognize, however, the difficulties in obtaining
credible and verifiable information from armed
conflict zones. It would be useful to have further
discussions before adopting such indicators to ensure
their relevance and efficiency.
We firmly believe that capacity-building should
be a main focus of United Nations efforts. In order to
ensure sustainable peace and stability, State institutions,
including in the area of security, the rule of law and
justice, need to be strengthened. National Governments
have the primary responsibility for prosecuting and
deterring violence against women, including sexual
violence. As affected States re-embark on the process
of rebuilding their countries, including by consolidating
democratic ideals and practices and making effective
improvements to socioeconomic conditions, the United
Nations and the international community must step up
and sustain their support to them.
We would urge caution in going beyond the
mandates given by the Security Council in the reports
submitted to it. It will be useful to remind ourselves
that the women, peace and security agenda evolved
from the imperative to address the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women, including the
abhorrent practice of sexual violence against women as
an instrument of war.
The general recommendation in the report of the
Secretary-General to incorporate into that agenda
other thematic areas — such as countering terrorism,
transnational organized crime, natural resources and
others — not only has implications for the division of
work and responsibilities between the Security Council
and the General Assembly, but also has the potential
to dilute significant United Nations work being done
in the area of women, peace and security and in other
thematic areas.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm India’s commitment
to contributing positively to the consolidation of United
Nations efforts in the area of women, peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on Azerbaijan’s accession to the
presidency of the Security Council this month. Turkey
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) on
women, peace and security by the Council earlier today.

S/PV.7044

I would like to commend the United Nations team of
experts on the rule of law and sexual violence for their
valuable work.
Sexual violence in armed conflicts, from the early
stages of conflict to its aftermath, is one of the gravest
human rights abuses committed against women and
girls. In situations of conflict, sexual violence is often
used as a weapon of war — a strategy to deprive human
beings of their most basic rights, their safety, security
and dignity. Sexual violence can exacerbate and prolong
armed conflicts and may impede the restoration of
international peace and security, as posited in many
relevant Security Council resolutions to date.
We welcome the fact that the international
community has been paying increasing attention to
the crime of sexual violence in conflict. The Security
Council has hosted many debates on the issue and
addressed the crucial issues of transitional justice,
capacity-building and the rule of law. International and
regional organizations are devoting more attention to
this topic.
The draft decision of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Ministerial Council
on the OSCE action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which Turkey is sponsoring
together with Austria, Finland and Kazakhstan, is a
recent example of this. Turkey was also glad to join in
the launch of the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict at the ministerial level on
the sidelines of the General Assembly’s general debate.
However, despite all those efforts, sexual violence
in armed conflict remains one of the most neglected
crimes. Sadly, the situation in Syria, just across our
border, is a vivid example of that. Turkey echoes the
condemnation voiced very recently by the Council of
the acts of sexual and gender-based violence and abuse
taking place in Syria. However, as we most regretfully
know, a culture of impunity tends to prevail in conflicts
and in post-conflict situations. Violators are not
adequately punished, if punished at all. Victims lack
sufficient access to justice, physical and psychological
treatment or support. Those suffering sexual violence
often find it difficult to speak out, especially in
situations of prolonged conflict.
Today’s debate serves to highlight the strong will
power of the international community to combat sexual
violence in conflict. Now is time to focus on the ways
and means to do so by sharing best practices and talking

13-5201151/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

about specific measures that can be adopted. In that
sense, we find the focus of today’s debate on the rule of
law and transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
situations extremely useful, and would like to thank the
Azerbaijani presidency for convening it.
The elimination of the root causes of conflict is
the best way to prevent sexual violence and to address
impunity. Combating impunity is possible only by
building transparent, effective, non-discriminatory and
functioning institutions and justice systems. It is vital
to ensure that women and girls have access to judicial
institutions and proper representation. We in the
international community should pursue our efforts to
support gender-sensitive judicial reform and capacitybuilding. It is important to provide gender expertise in
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding efforts, as
well as to ensure the participation of women in those
efforts.
The health sector is another area that should be
strengthened to deal with sexual violence in armed
conflict. Rehabilitation to address the mental, physical
and psychological trauma suffered by women and girls
should not be delayed, so that they can move on and
rebuild their lives.
Combating sexual violence is an issue that should
also be dealt with on a broader societal scale. As
individuals and groups from all sectors of society raise
their voices higher against this atrocity, we will all be
able to stand stronger in our struggle. That requires a
need for stronger interaction with civil society, grassroots institutions and women’s organizations, as well as
the private sector and the media.
A significant number of peace agreements fail within
the first five years of signature. Among the various
reasons for this outcome, the lack of inclusiveness is
evident. The full, equal and meaningful participation
of women at the decision-making level is crucial
for assuring that the political, social and economic
outcomes of peace talks and mediation efforts address
their specific issues and concerns.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security
Council, member States and all relevant United Nations
bodies, in addition to all relevant stakeholders at the
local, national, regional and global levels that have
made the issue of sexual violence against women in
conflict a priority.
Our special thanks goes to the Special
Representative Bangura, whose exemplary dedication
52/75

18/10/2013

in fighting against sexual violence in conflicts,
including combating impunity, we continue to admire
and strongly support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. António: On behalf of the African Union
Commission, I wish to first congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country’s accession to the
Presidency of the Security Council for October, and
to express the African Union’s (AU) gratitude for the
opportunity to take part in this open debate on a theme
of critical importance to Africa, a continent plagued
by pockets of conflicts, including a number of postconflict situations.
Experience has shown that addressing issues of
rule of law and transitional justice in those conflict
and post-conflict situations has become an urgent and
indispensable prerequisite for achieving sustainable
peace and stability. Equally important is the need
to address the gender dimension and to find ways to
tackle issues of rule of law and transitional justice
from a gender perspective. In that regard, I wish to
join previous speakers in their recommendation of
the importance and the content of the resolution 2122
(2013) adopted by the Council today. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for the report (S/2013/525) before us
today. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women;
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations Commissioner
for Human Rights; and Ms. Brigitte Balipou of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
The African Union reaffirms its support for the
advancement of holistic justice for women in situations
of conflict, post-conflict, political violence and gross
human rights violations. African Union documents,
such as the Constitutive Act, enshrine a commitment to
the advancement of gender equality and the protection
of women from gender-based and other forms of
violence. Furthermore, the prevention, protection and
promotion of women’s rights have been aptly addressed
in the 2003 Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women, the 2004
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa, and
the 2009 African Union Gender Policy, which contains
provisions on mainstreaming gender equality.
The African Union takes cognizance of its
member States’ international commitments in respect

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

of women’s rights, most notably Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security, and thus
acknowledges and supports the efforts of those African
States and regional bodies that have taken concrete steps
towards implementing those resolutions. Some notable
examples are Liberia, which has developed an action
plan and indicators for implementing resolution 1325
(2000), and the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, which is in the process of developing a
regional protocol on sexual and gender-based violence.
Despite those notable advances, much more
remains to be done on the continent to ensure that
justice and accountability for violations, particularly
against women, are brought to bear and that redress for
the victims is provided in order to ensure that crimes
perpetrated against them during conflicts are never
repeated.
While transitional justice mechanisms and processes
are entrenched at the national level, the African Union
and subregional bodies continue to play a pivotal role
in influencing the adoption and implementation of
transitional justice processes on the continent. Indeed,
the AU organs have become increasingly involved in
negotiating transition in States emerging from conflict
and in fashioning approaches to address past human
rights atrocities.
To that end, the African Union Commission,
with the technical support of civil society partners,
are leading in the development of the African Union
Transitional Justice Policy Framework. The Transitional
Justice Policy Framework emerged from the report
by the AU Panel of the Wise entitled Non-impunity,
truth, peace, justice and reconciliation in Africa:
opportunities and constraints. The report interrogates
the polarized peace-versus-justice debate that seems
to be the focus of international justice discourse in
Africa, while seeking to offer a middle ground and an
African regional perspective that takes into account the
complexities and nuances within the African context,
including continental approaches to non-impunity,
truth, peace, justice and reconciliation in Africa. The
report of the Panel of Wise also concludes that the
AU has a sound track record of pronouncements and
engagement related to addressing impunity in Africa, in
spite of some challenges of coherence and coordination
in implementation.
The proposed policy framework is intended to
serve as a guide that is adaptable and applicable to
individual countries or subregions emerging from

S/PV.7044

conflicts and/or repressive rule to assist in the pursuit
of accountability, sustainable peace, justice and
reconciliation. The African Union Commission has
therefore held several consultative meetings, with
the technical support of the Centre for the Study of
Violence and Reconciliation, South Africa and other
stakeholders. The consultation in Lomé, for example,
focused specifically on mainstreaming gender into the
policy framework and was undertaken with the support
of UN Women. During the meeting, specific language
on women and gender considerations for the policy
framework was developed.
The African Union looks forward to the adoption of
the policy framework and remains convinced that this
document will be make a significant contribution to
“comprehensively
promote
justice
and
accountability in ways that further the equal rights
of women and the right to equal participation in
decision-making” (S/2013/587, annex, p. 2).
Let me conclude by reiterating the African Union’s
appreciation for this opportunity to contribute to this
open debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank
Azerbaijan, which holds the presidency of the Security
Council this month, for organizing today’s open debate.
My thanks also go to the Secretary-General, Ms. Pillay
and Ms. Balipou for their very insightful briefings. I
congratulate Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka on her appointment,
and I thank her for her first briefing to the Council.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Germany welcomes the detailed analysis of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/525), which
identifies many achievements in the women, peace and
security agenda in the past years. We also share the
concerns addressed in the report, such as an increasing
focus of the international community on women as
victims of armed conflict, instead of on their role as
actors in peace processes and agents of change in all
spheres of society.
We therefore welcome the fact that resolution
2122 (2013), adopted earlier today, emphasizes the
positive role that women can and will play if they are
fully included in all aspects of conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding. The potential of women in building a

13-5201153/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

sustainable peace cannot be underestimated, nor can
the imminent problems for post-conflict societies if
those who bear the burden of reconstruction on the
ground are not fully included in decision-making.
We should ask ourselves what more Member
States and the United Nations itself could do to ensure
an implementation of the full agenda as laid out in
resolution 1325 (2000).
Transitional justice and the rule of law are crucial
elements for the prevention and solution of conflicts.
We therefore very much welcome the theme of today’s
debate, which emphasizes the importance of gendersensitive systems. Women need to be part of all truth
and justice commissions, and women’s concerns
need to be addressed in those fact-finding bodies. At
the same time, perpetrators of violence, crimes and
human rights violations need to be held accountable
for their actions. That is the most promising way to
promote lasting reconciliation. Germany has supported
several projects in Rwanda and Burundi to train female
police officers on the prevention and investigation of
sexual and gender-based violence. In Cambodia and
Uganda, Germany has supported the access of women
to the justice system through legal and psychosocial
counseling.
Secondly, 43 countries have adopted national
action plans on women, peace and security. That is
an important first step. However, any progress on
the ground depends on the political will to abide by
those commitments. The German national action plan,
which was adopted last year, covers the four focus
areas set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and additionally
includes the areas of preparation for peace missions
and the prosecution of crimes. The implementation
of the action plan is monitored by an inter-ministerial
working group in collaboration with representatives
from civil society. German diplomatic missions abroad
have been instructed to support the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), for example by advocating
for the inclusion of women in local crisis prevention,
conflict management and post-conflict peacebuilding
or by supporting gender-sensitive projects on the
ground.
Thirdly, the Security Council, for its part, should
start to systematically mainstream women’s issues
in all relevant spheres of its work. Whenever the
Security Council mandates or renews United Nations
missions or requests briefings from envoys and special
representatives, women, peace and security should
54/75

18/10/2013

be a central part of all considerations. We welcome
that the resolution adopted today contains provisions
addressing that.
Fourthly, women protection advisers play a central
role in monitoring and reporting to the Council, training
mission personnel on preventing and responding to
sexual violence, and engaging in dialogue with conflict
parties. Although we welcome the deployment of women
protection advisers to the missions in South Sudan and
Mali, the remaining women’s protection advisers in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
which were already mandated by the Council, should
also be deployed as rapidly as possible and, where
necessary, be included in mission budgets.
Germany will continue its support to UN Women
and all other relevant actors, including civil society
organizations, to ensure that women’s roles and their
important contribution in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding are adequately taken into account.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I would like to thank
the delegation of Azerbaijan for convening today’s
important debate. Canada welcomes the opportunity
to participate in the Security Council’s open debate on
the role of women in international peace and security.
Canada also welcomes the participation for the first
time of Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka in her important
new role as Executive Director of UN Women.
(spoke in French)
Canada firmly believes that the participation of
women in all decision-making processes, particularly
those related to the prevention and resolution of
conflict and the transition to democracy, is a necessary
precondition to securing sustainable peace, as is their
access to justice and their inclusion in the economic
and social lives of their countries and communities. As
the Honourable John Baird, Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Canada, said in his address to the General Assembly
last month:
“We must invest in opportunities for women and
young girls. We must ensure that women participate
fully in all parts of our society and in all the
countries of the United Nations. That will help us

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

build a stronger, more secure, more prosperous and
more peaceful world” (A/68/PV.21, p. 2)
(spoke in English)
Particularly egregious is the practice of child, early
and forced marriage, which puts the very lives of young
girls at risk. That practice denies girls’ rights, disrupts
their access to education, severely jeopardizes their
health and limits the development of their community
as a whole. Conflict situations exacerbate that practice
among displaced and refugee populations, such as
we know to be the case in Syria. Canada encourages
the Security Council to continue to provide political
leadership and to take action to ensure the meaningful
participation of women in conflict prevention,
mediation and resolution processes.
Much work is being done by Member States,
including by Canada, to advance the empowerment of
women and girls. For example, Canada played an active
role in the development of resolution 24/23, addressing
child, early and forced marriage at the twenty-fourth
session of the Human Rights Council, and co-hosted
a side event at the General Assembly in September.
Canada is leading the first stand-alone draft resolution
on the important issue at the General Assembly later
this year.
Prime Minister Harper and other leaders in New
York recently reviewed progress on the 2010 Muskoka
summit of the Group of Eight and the United Nations
initiatives to improve to improve global maternal
and child health. Under Canada’s leadership, the
Human Rights Council adopted the robust resolution
23/25 this past June on the elimination of violence
against women. The resolution lays out actions to be
undertaken by Member States and the United Nations
to prevent sexual violence, including in conflict-related
situations, and calls on States to ensure that women are
active participants in decision-making processes.
Canada joined 112 other Member States in
September in launching the Declaration of Commitment
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. Endorsements of
the Declaration have now grown to an impressive 134
States. Canada and others are working with partners
in the field to assist in the empowerment of women in
conflict-related situations, to prevent and respond to
sexual violence and to hold perpetrators to account.
For example, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Canada assists survivors of sexual violence in bringing
those responsible to justice.

S/PV.7044

Canada looks forward to working with others to
strengthen our collective efforts to empower women
and girls as active decision-makers. We look forward
to the Security Council high-level review in 2015 to
assess what progress we are making in enhancing the
role of women in international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express my gratitude
to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2013/525), which we read and followed
attentively. We wish Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka success in
her new post as Executive Director of UN Women.
I also would like to congratulate Azerbaijan on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of October. We wish its delegation every success.
My country, Syria, has long been among the fairest
countries in the Arab and Islamic world in securing all
the necessary provisions and environment for enabling
women to enjoy equal rights with men, free from
the ignorance, blindness and social and intellectual
shortcomings that prevail elsewhere. A woman serves
as a Vice-President in my country at a time when other
countries ban women from driving cars.
Regrettably, the current crisis in Syria has evoked
a strange and inhumane phenomenon that runs contrary
to the values of the Syrian people and all the legal
instruments that Syria has signed and acceded to in
its efforts to support the rights of women and children.
The current situation runs contrary to the principles
of the Islamic religion and Arab chivalry. That change
came about with the arrival of mercenaries and takfiris
who are openly recruited from all parts of the world to
impose unjust Wahhabi ideas that degrade women and
turn them into concubines.
All this has taken place with arming, support and
financing from Qatar, Saudi Arabia and France. Those
States have spent countless sums on influential media
and invidious sectarian incitement to halt Syria’s
socioeconomic, security and judicial development.
They work to undermine its independence, its national
decision-making and its rejection of those who exploit
religion. Most prominent among the fatwas that affect
women is the fatwa of sex as struggle, which allows
fornication under the guise of jihad. Published by some
irresponsible minds and financed by the Gulf regimes,

13-5201155/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

the fatwa encourages Islamic women to commit
adultery in the name of religion. My delegation has
sent a detailed letter on that diseased fatwa and the
mentalities that promote it to the Secretary-General
(A/68/487, annex). We urge all those present and those
who are concerned for human rights to study it.
The Syrian authorities are eager to bring to
justice all those who commit such crimes, and we
are documenting those grave violations. Syria arrests
the perpetrators and subjects them to accountability
under Syrian national law. On the other hand, we must
work together to remove the root causes of crimes
against women and girls and to combat impunity by
immediately putting pressure on the regimes that seek
to promote terrorism in Syria to halt their financial
support and the provision of arms, as well as to end the
media coverage they give to terrorist groups that violate
women’s basic rights. We call for the accountability of
the regimes of both Qatar and Saudi Arabia for their
support for and the media coverage they provide to the
crazy, irresponsible minds that encourage the rape of
innocent Syrian women.
We cannot but express our deep concern about the
deterioration of the situation in the refugee camps of
our Syrian brothers, where Syrian women and girls face
insecurity and are being trafficked, raped and subjected
to forced marriage, all of which has been documented
in international reports. Although slow and delayed,
Western media reports, most recently that of Germany’s
RTL television, have documented the tragedy of Syrian
refugees younger than 14 who have ended up in slave
markets, where petrodollars turn them into concubines
in the name of religion. Those who exploit the tragedy
of the Syrian refugees do so deliberately in order to
create a ghetto of Syrian victims and exploit them in a
manner that degrades Syria and its people.
Syria has notified all the specialized organs of the
United Nations system, especially the Security Council
and the General Assembly, through a number of official
communications and reports. Regrettably, the United
Nations remains less engaged than expected, despite
the important role it could play to achieve justice, to
hold perpetrators accountable and to put an end to such
an inhuman and immoral phenomenon.
We hope that Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngucuka
will actively seek to put an end to that phenomenon
and that she will pressure those foreign Powers that
seek to intensify the bloodshed in Syria to cease
their interference in my country and their violations
56/75

18/10/2013

of international law and the United Nations charter.
We also look forward to her active participation in
protecting the rights of Syrian women under the Israeli
occupation in the occupied Golan Heights and in
improving their living conditions.
The permanent representative of France spoke
about my country in a manner that lacks the diplomatic
finesse expected from the representative of a permanent
member of the Council. It would seem that the French
regime — through its extremism and its continued
disregard for its responsibilities as a permanent member
of the Council, along with its bloody interference in
the affairs of several member States, including my
country — has lost the legitimacy to maintain its status
in the Council. By encouraging, arming and protecting
regimes that refuse to attend the Geneva conference and
that continue to kill Syrians from Paris and elsewhere,
the French regime, through its irresponsible and childish
interference, has become a threat to international peace
and security and is no longer a member to be trusted
with maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Marshall Islands.
Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): This is the first
time I have spoken on behalf of the Pacific Islands
Forum States in this Chamber. On their behalf, I want
to first offer our sincere congratulations to you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency, as well as to thank you
and the members around the table for convening and
holding this important meeting.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum States represented at the United Nations:
Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati,
Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my small
atoll nation, the Republic of the Marshall Islands. The
Pacific Islands Forum members stand on the leading
edge of evolving security issues — situations in which
women play a critical role to play in working towards
stability. At the same time, despite some very positive
overall gains, progress in the region towards gender
equality is slow, with only mixed results since the
Forum issued the Pacific Leaders Gender Equality
Declaration last year.
Despite some positive steps, including the number of
women serving in important and very senior Government
positions, women’s parliamentary representation in the
Pacific is the lowest of any region in the world. The region

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

has recently witnessed and continues to be affected by
armed conflict, civil unrest and local-level conflicts
over resources, as well as increasingly violent crimes
and political crises. Women and children constitute a
disproportionate number of those affected. Women face
a variety of security challenges in the Pacific, including
water and food security, loss of land, violence, and
economic empowerment. A range of potential drivers
is apparent, rangining from economic inequalities,
land, governance, alienated youth, urban migration and
inter-group tensions, with results that inevitably disrupt
the lives of women and their families and increase the
risk of sexual and gender-based violence.
More recently, the Forum leaders have recognized
climate change as the greatest threat to the livelihood
and well-being of the peoples of the Pacific. Climate
impacts can lead to forced displacement, with clear
implications for women, and raise security questions
that have no simple solutions or easy precedents. In
times of natural disaster, which are increasing in the
Pacific region, women and girls are more prone to sexual
violence in the context of displacement due to the loss
of their homes or traditional protection mechanisms
though their family or clan structures.
In many violent situations in the Pacific region,
women have demonstrated their capacity to contribute
to solutions as mediators, providers of safe havens, or
in working to improve local communities. Women and
young women have also played an important part in
conflict prevention, management and recovery in the
region. Women have generally been first to actively
work across ethnic divides, despite considerable risks.
The Pacific region is working to achieve better
participation in formal conflict prevention and
management and post-conflict recovery efforts, as
well as oversight and accountability mechanisms for
the security sector. The region recognizes the value
of having women at the negotiating table in leadership
roles and the need to provide sufficient recognition and
resources to ensure that they are able to do their work.
In December 2010, as part of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), a Pacific
regional working group on women, peace and security
was established. In June 2011, the Forum Regional
Security Committee gave the group the policy task
of developing a regional action plan, which has been
formally recognized by our leaders. Earlier this year, a

S/PV.7044

regional reference group was established to oversee the
regional action plan’s implementation.
The action plan provides a detailed regional
framework to enhance women’s and young women’s
leadership in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
mainstream gender and ensure the protection of
women’s and girls’ human rights in humanitarian
crises and in transitioning from conflict, disaster or
post-conflict situations — all with a mechanism to
accelerate the implementation of existing international,
regional and national commitments on women, peace
and security.
The action plan assists in addressing gaps and
advancing solutions. A range of further means may
be considered, including the United Nations regional
gender architecture, United Nations in-country
assistance — which is highly lacking — and resource
allocation decisions. The Biketawa Declaration sets
out the framework for regional conflict prevention and
management of political crises. Our regional action
plan is a key platform to better integrate gender into
that security framework and thus represents a specific
response to relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, the countries of the Pacific Islands
Forum are committed to work with like-minded
countries to ensure that our necessary local efforts and
our contributions to the United Nations will always
encourage and support resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Czech Republic.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic): Let me thank the
Azerbaijan presidency of the Security Council for
scheduling this important debate and the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2013/525), as well as today’s
briefers for their updates.
We highly welcome the adoption today of resolution
2122 (2013) and align ourselves with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.
The protection of human rights, including the rights
of women, belongs to our foreign policy priorities. The
Czech Republic takes an active stance in promoting
the strengthening and effective realization of the rights
of women and in preventing gender-based violence in
various multilateral forums. We also raise the issue
within the universal periodic review mechanism.

13-5201157/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

The Czech Republic fully endorses the relevant
rules of international criminal law regarding “rape,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, enforced
pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form
of sexual violence of comparable gravity”. The Rome
Statute qualifies these as a war crime, both in the
context of international and non-international armed
conflicts and — when it forms part of a widespread
attack against a civilian population — as a crime
against humanity.
It is our conviction that the international community
should put particular focus on preventive efforts, namely
in the case of those violations of international law that
belong to the core crimes included under the concept of
the responsibility to protect. The rich jurisprudence of
the international criminal tribunals has recognized rape
as a powerful tool of war used to intimidate, persecute
and terrorize the enemy. The Czech Republic believes
that the effective prosecution of the perpetrators of
such crimes is an important element of lasting peace
and justice.
As part of its human rights promotion activities,
the Czech Republic takes into consideration gender
aspects and the protection of women in post-conflict
situations, as well as in countries in transition,
including by supporting projects of Czech and local
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Since 2005,
the transition promotion programme of the Czech
Ministry of Foreign Affairs — a unique financial
instrument aimed at democracy assistance — has
supported projects of civil society organizations that
are working to strengthen democracy, the rule of law
and respect for human rights by empowering civil
society, including women’s organizations, throughout
the world.
For example, a recent project has been implemented
by the Czech NGO ADRA — which deals with the
capacity-building of civil society in the protection of
women’s rights — in Georgia. Its aim is to achieve the
highest standard of protection in the context of providing
services to victims of domestic violence. Through the
project, the Czech Republic has shared its experience
with its Georgian partners, particularly concerning the
legal counseling to victims of domestic violence and,
importantly, in the broader context of assistance.
The Czech Republic also provides long-term
support to women victims of sexual violence in the
eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The support — amounting to over 32 million
58/75

18/10/2013

Czech koruny today — ranges from providing first
aid and comprehensive medical, psychological and
legal assistance, to providing shelter and livelihood
support for women and their unwanted children who
have been excluded from local society, as well as
organizing awareness campaigns for medical personnel
and the public in the affected areas. Awareness-raising
aimed at the public sphere, as well as the judiciary, is
a key prerequisite in ensuring effective protection of
the rights of women in countries in transition or postconflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Govender (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2013/525). We thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay; and the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, Ms. Brigitte Balipou, respectively,
for their statements. My delegation also wishes to thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting today.
The report of the Secretary-General reflects the
measurable advances that have been made across all
areas of the women, peace and security agenda since the
adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) 13 years
ago, and its implementation. It has provided for the
establishment of an enabling framework placing women
at the centre of processes impacting on their safety,
security and development, in equal partnership with
men. The report highlights the remaining significant
protection, prevention and participation deficits in the
areas of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
economic recovery, impeding the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, we must recognize the limitation
that comes with that approach and the underlying
expectations of the mechanisms to deliver on these
areas in a sustainable manner. Such an approach, we
must appreciate, brings with it short-term relief and
impact and therefore cannot be considered a panacea
for the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The host State has to eventually play its
rightful role in addressing the specific challenges in the
long term.
My delegation welcomes the recommendations
elaborated in the report of the Secretary-General on

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

how to close these implementation gaps. A renewed
commitment is also required of Member States and the
United Nations system to effectively implement the
seven-point action plan.
We welcome the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013), especially as it seeks to place
women at the table for negotiations and peace talks.
Women generally represent a majority constituency
in societies, and as such should not be excluded from
the negotiation table in conflict-affected States. South
Africa is supportive of such an approach, especially as
our own history has taught us about the powerful role
that women play in bringing about peace and stability.
We also believe that women should play a role beyond
that, one that includes securing a larger stake in political
leadership and policy- and decision-making positions,
both in the public and private sectors.
The report of the Secretary-General correctly
points out the need for increased participation by
women in United Nations peacekeeping missions. South
Africa has played its role in that regard by contributing
through its police deployment, a contingent made up of
16 per cent women, which, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, is the highest percentage of female
deployment by a troop-contributing country.
While the host State needs to demonstrate the
political will to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000), greater commitment and support by the United
Nations and the international community is needed
to capacitate countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In the South African context, where women
have been historically disadvantaged by apartheid and
the patriarchal nature of South African society, men
traditionally dominated the political and economic
space. During the past 18 years of democratic rule, the
Government instituted specific measures that included
electoral and candidature quotas for women at the
national, provincial and local levels of Government,
including at the executive and legislature branches of
Government.
Our history has not only demonstrated, but has
taught us, about the powerful role that women play in
a post-conflict setting. South African women represent
a powerful constituency and have been at the forefront
of driving reform and developing and advancing
responsive policies and legislation across all sectors
of Government and the public and private sectors.
At the level of women’s participation in political

S/PV.7044

decision-making, today South Africa has 44 per
cent women representation in Parliament and 43 per
cent women at the level of Cabinet ministers. At the
provincial level, five of the nine provincial premiers are
women.
We recognize the importance of women having
unfettered access to justice in conflict and postconflict settings, including through gender-responsive
legal, judicial and security-sector reform and other
mechanisms. Access to justice for women in conflict
and post-conflict settings through conscious policies
of inclusion is essential to building fair, equitable and
just societies. Women suffer disproportionately from
poverty, and the risks they face are heightened in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings.
Women’s legal status and rights must be ensured
in post-conflict situations. Strengthening the legal
framework to address issues of discrimination against
women with respect to land ownership, access to
economic opportunity and employment, education
and health care is an essential component of genderresponsive peacebuilding architecture.
Justice for victims of serious violations of
international law is an essential requirement for
sustainable peace, security and the development for
States emerging from armed conflict, where the rule of
law must enjoy primacy and be unscrupulously upheld.
My delegation therefore supports efforts by the Council
to continue fighting impunity for the most serious
crimes committed against women and girls, through
the work of the International Criminal Court, ad hoc
and mixed tribunals, as well as specialized chambers in
national tribunals.
My delegation appreciates the commendable work
undertaken by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. However, we remain
of the view that significantly more needs to be done
by Member States, the United Nations system and the
relevant entities in supporting national efforts by States
to increase women’s participation, leadership and
expertise in the rule of law and transitional justice, as
well as in advancing accountability measures for serious
offences committed against women and children.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes resolution
2122 (2013) and its reinforcement of preceding
resolutions. We also welcome the announcement by
the Secretary-General of a high-level review in 2015

13-5201159/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

to assess progress at the global, regional and national
levels on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): First of all, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General, the new Executive
Director of UN Women and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their informative
briefings. I also thank and welcome the participation of
the representative from civil society. I would also like
to welcome today’s adoption of resolution 2122 (2013).
As Prime Minister of Japan Shinzo Abe announced
in his statement to the General Assembly last month (see
A/68/PV.12), Japan is actively committed to engaging
in the international agenda concerning women and to
making every effort to create a society where women
shine. We are planning to extend official development
aid amounting to more than $3 billion over the next three
years in the areas of women’s social advancement and
capacity-building; women’s health care; and women’s
participation and protection in the field of peace and
security.
In order to protect women’s rights and ensure
women’s participation in conflict-affected situations,
security for those who serve to uphold the rule of law,
such as police officers and judges, is a basic necessity.
In that regard, gender-responsive transitional justice
measures and justice system reforms need to be
addressed. In particular, women’s access to the justice
system must be strengthened so as to protect their
rights, as well as to protect them from the violence that
too often accompanies the transition from conflict. To
that end, Japan has, for example, supported various
efforts to assist victims of sexual violence in refugee
camps located in such countries as the Sudan, Somalia
and Iraq, by providing legal advice, representation and
awareness-raising campaigns, as well as establishing
relief and recovery systems that include mental health
care.
In order for Member States and the United Nations
system to be able to take effective actions, it is
important that we highlight good practices and share
lessons learned. Today’s open debate is an excellent
opportunity to that end.
In order to realize a more peaceful society, Japan
intends to make its utmost effort to ensure women’s
participation and incorporate a women’s perspective
into each and every phase of conflict prevention,
60/75

18/10/2013

conflict settlement and peacebuilding, including
election processes. Such women’s participation will
also contribute to better protecting the rights and the
physical well-being of women, including female human
rights defenders, female political leaders and female
war correspondents, who are particularly exposed to
danger in times of conflict.
From that perspective, Japan has been earnestly
developing a national action plan based on resolution
1325 (2000). In that action plan, Japan, in collaboration
with UN Women and civil society, will articulate
measures to be taken for the sake of promoting women’s
participation in such efforts as conflict prevention,
the protection of victims of sexual violence, and
peacebuilding and restoration processes.
In July, in collaboration with the Global Network
of Women Peacebuilders, our Mission held a special
event entitled “Resolution 1325 (2000) in action:
lessons learned and reflections”. The summary of the
discussion held at that event has been included in the
Secretary-General’s report. We hope that it will further
serve as an input to the global review of resolution 1325
(2000) in November.
Increasing investment in the capacity and resources
of women’s civil society organizations that are active in
conflict-affected countries should also be considered.
In that regard, Japan was one of the initial supporters,
and continues to be one of the main contributors, of
the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions
to Eliminate Violence against Women, which directly
supports such civil society organizations. We will
continue our contribution to the Fund. Furthermore,
Japan co-hosted a special event in July with the Fund to
expand its donor base, including private-sector donors.
In addition, I would like to share with the Council
our experience of making use of an area of Japan’s
official development assistance schemes that we call
grant assistance for grassroots projects, which we
believe is a positive example of a good practice that could
be emulated elsewhere. Grant assistance for grassroots
projects is intended to provide rapid and direct support
to both international and local non-governmental
organizations active on the ground. Through such
assistance, we have been implementing numerous
projects on this basis all over the world, including in
Afghanistan and several African countries, providing
useful synergies for both donor and recipient countries.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, Japan will continue to make every
possible efforts to contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) as we approach the fifteenth
anniversary of its adoption, and will actively participate
in its high-level review in 2015.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on women, the rule of law and transitional justice
in conflict-affected situations. I would also like to
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2013/525).
At the outset, the Solomon Islands aligns its
statement with that delivered by the representative of
the Marshall Islands on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum. I would also like to make some
additional comments in my national capacity.
Resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) provide a framework
for improving the situation of women in conflict, as
articulated in the President’s concept note (S/2013/587,
annex). The impact of conflict on society as a whole
exposes the vulnerability and dignity of women and
children even more.
The Solomon Islands went through a conflict
situation beginning late in 1998. I would like to use this
occasion to speak on some lessons learned from it. We
saw both the vulnerability of women and their strength.
During the conflict, women organized themselves
into various groups, identifying themselves as women
for peace, acting as mediators, providing bridges and
bringing communities together. Cultural peace and
reconciliation traditions continued to be used to unify
and heal communities even after the conflict. The
role of women is recognized by the Solomon Islands,
which appointed women to be two of its five truth
and reconciliation commissioners. They have since
presented their reports to the Government.
At one of the open debates in the Council during
the previous session, we discussed cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations (see S/PV.7015). Looking at the
experience of the Solomon Islands relating to women
and peace and security, we cannot help making the
connection to the contribution of regional organizations
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
given its role in our national situation. At the request

S/PV.7044

of the Government of the Solomon Islands, under
the auspices of the Pacific Islands Forum in 2003, a
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands,
led by Australia and supported by New Zealand and all
the Pacific small island developing States, was deployed
to my country to restore the rule of law, rebuild core
public institutions and allow the country to recover
from the conflict. The Regional Assistance Mission,
made up of military, police and civilian components,
restored the rule of law and carried out peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peacemaking activities.
To date, our economy is growing, State institutions
are functioning and the country is open for business.
Accordingly, the Regional Assistance Mission, in
partnership with the Government, has now undergone
a transitional phase. It is now a police-only mission; its
success belongs to the people of the Solomon Islands as
well as the Pacific. The Regional Mission was flexible
in adapting to a changing environment, allowing the
partnership to conduct the transition at a pace suited
to the conditions in the receiving State, the Solomon
Islands. It is an example of South-South cooperation,
and triangular cooperation with the Solomon
Islands’ regional neighbours. While each example of
transitional justice is unique and has its own national
context, my delegation feels that the Pacific has found
a model that addresses peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and peacemaking, all rolled into a single mission. As a
nation, we still have much to do in serving our people,
scattered over our country of 900 islands.
The Solomon Islands is one of the few countries that
have a ministry of peace and reconciliation. We also have
a ministry of women’s, youth’s and children’s affairs.
We have come a long way in implementing elements of
the five resolutions on women and peace and security.
In 2009 we reviewed our national policy on gender
equity and women’s development. In partnership with
Australia, we have also undertaken a Solomon Islands
family health and safety study, which has found that two
out of three women in our country suffer from genderbased violence. A recent commission on the status of
women found that 7 out of 10 women around the world
suffer from gender-based violence. In response to that,
we adopted a national policy on eliminating violence
against women. Our national police have responded,
adopting a no-drop policy of victim protection that
deals with both victims and perpetrators. Our public
solicitor’s office has established a family protection
unit that provides specialized services to women and

13-5201161/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

children. Also, working with other non-State actors and
faith-based institutions, we continue to provide shelter,
counselling and support for victims of gender-based
violence.
We have come a long way, but we are determined
to keep going, focusing on the economic empowerment
of women and greater investment in rural areas, which
is where the bulk of populations are located in least
developed countries (LDCs) as well as in Pacific
nations. These are conflict-resolution measures as well
as conflict-prevention measures. It is for that reason that
putting peace at the heart of sustainable development,
with peace — and state—building goals, is something
that we, as a member of the Group of 77 and China,
would like to see on the post-2015 development
agenda. We would like to see more investment in highvalue, game-changing investments that can transform
economies within the Pacific and in LDCs to allow us
to build resilience against warm, cold and hot security
threats.
For us, as a small island developing State, climate
change remains a threat multiplier, with impacts on
food and water security. Threats of sea-level rise
continue to disempower women as land is swallowed
up by sea. Relocating populations to higher islands also
poses threats of conflict, as one language group moves
from its ancestral land to another land-tenure system. It
was for that reason that the General Assembly adopted
resolution 63/281, on climate change and its possible
security implications. We see this as an issue that all
United Nations principal organs, including the Security
Council, should be seized of.
I would like to conclude by assuring you once
again, Mr. President, of the support and cooperation of
the Solomon Islands in protecting women’s safety and
their contribution to nation-building and world peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and to say how pleased we are to have you presiding
over the Security Council. I would also like to thank
you for organizing this open debate on women, the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. We are grateful for the report presented this
morning by the Secretary-General (S/2013/525) and the
briefings by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the representative of the NGO Working Group on

62/75

18/10/2013

Women, Peace and Security, who have given us a clear
idea of the situation under discussion.
In our country, Colombia, we are aware that the
participation of women in decision-making processes
in situations that affect them, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations, is of great importance for
peace and security, and that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their populations with a
differential approach and a gender perspective.
My delegation recognizes the important results
that the Security Council has achieved in the field. It
is necessary, however, to make a distinction between
the Council’s treatment of States that are making
efforts to comply with their international obligations
in the area but are not on the Council’s agenda and its
treatment of those States that are on its agenda. We
would therefore suggest that the issues generated in
that context should not only be guided by assessments
and follow-up processes, but they should also place an
emphasis on promoting successful experiences in the
field of cooperation and exchange of know-how and
best practices, giving priority constructive elements.
In considering this issue, the Council and United
Nations bodies should strictly adhere to the agreed
terms of mandates in the resolutions on women and
peace and security that are aimed at protecting women
in situations of violence, particularly sexual violence,
as well as decision-making in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Focusing on the issue before us, with respect to the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations, I would like to share the experience of our
country, which is currently debating the subject, while
striving to overcome armed conflict through a process
of dialogue that we hope will lead to peace.
On 12 March, the Government of Colombia
approved the national policy on gender equity and a
comprehensive plan to guarantee a life free of violence,
which constitute reference points for the design and
implementation of sustainable actions for the protection
of women and to ensure the effective enjoyment of
women’s rights, with a focus on peacebuilding, cultural
transformation and the promotion of the participation of
women in positions of power and decision-making. The
budget approved by the Colombian Government, which
is a sign of its political commitment, is approximately
$1.75 billion.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

Taking into account that 50 per cent of the total
number of victims of conflict are women, the law on
victims and land restitution has made significant gains.
The law established a comprehensive reparations
administration programme that enables major access to
victims, including measures to fully compensate them
for forced displacement and sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict.
In order to know the truth of what happened,
understand the structures of criminal organizations and
determine degrees of responsibility for illegal armed
groups and their collaborators, cases of sexual violence
have been given priority, resulting in the joining of
legal actions and guidelines in the Colombian Attorney
General’s Office.
As part of the plan of assistance, support
and reparation, 339,000 persons have received
compensation, 57 per cent of whom are women.
Significant progress has been made. To meet those
commitments, the Government invested an additional
$750 million dollars through August 2013.
Nonetheless, it should be noted that reparations
are not limited to the payouts of resources and money.
Additional actions are being developed, such as setting
up institutions for the exclusive purpose of guaranteeing
the rights of the victims and implementing an emotional
recovery strategy, in which more than 3,000 women are
taking part.
Colombia understands that the role of women in
a post-conflict situation is critical from the moment
that an agreement to achieve peace is sought. In that
regard, my Government has actively encouraged the
participation of women in the ongoing peace process.
For example, the first phase of the process, known as
exploratory talks, was led by a group of five persons
working on behalf of the national Government, two
of whom were women. Furthermore, 60 per cent of
the staff of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Peace are women, which ensures that the cases being
considered are treated with particular sensitivity to
issues of gender and women‘s rights.
Finally, I would like to stress that the strategies I
have mentioned are a sample of the efforts being made
by Colombian Government to protect women in the
context of conflict, while working for their improvement,
in accordance with the guidelines proposed by the
Security Council and with an increasingly modern and

S/PV.7044

strengthened institutional system operating within a
framework of respect for the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): My Government
welcomes today’s debate and the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525). We celebrate this year the thirteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), and we welcome
today’s important resolution 2122 (2013), which we
sponsored. The resolution will advance today’s agenda
relating to women and peace and security.
We take this opportunity to make a few remarks
in our national capacity, while we fully endorse the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
earlier.
We attach great importance to today’s theme, which
is close to our mission statement — “The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, your partner for peace, justice and
development”. Let me highlight five points.
First of all, the Government of the Netherlands sees
women as leaders. In our national action plan based
on guidelines set forth in resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as in our wider human rights and gender equality
policies, we have chosen to focus on the role of women
as political actors in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and recovery. We believe in the power of
women as agents for peace and as representatives of
communities living in conflict. During the recent
opening week of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, the Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Franciscus Timmermans, hosted an event with a group
of Syrian women. He heard their recommendations and
opened doors for them here in New York. Their stories
inspired many and offered new hope for a solution to
the horrific conflict in Syria. We stand ready to further
support Syrian women’s contributions to that end.
We encourage the Security Council to remain
committed to the full agenda of resolution 1325 (2000),
including the meaningful participation of women in
all peace negotiations, security sector reform and
decision-making related to conflict resolution and postconflict rebuilding. We call upon the Security Council
to more systematically implement the women and peace
and security agenda.
Secondly, we support the women’s agenda in
countries in conflict or transition. In his report,

13-5201163/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

the Secretary-General finds that deficits remain in
opportunities for women to exercise leadership, with
shortfalls existing in the resources provided to support
women and strengthen their organizational capacities.
Recognizing that fact, the Netherlands has therefore
established a funding mechanism called “Women on
the Frontline” for women’s organizations in countries
in transition in the Middle East and North Africa. We
aim to support them with organizational and capacity
development. Our aim is clear — women should be in a
position to make their voices heard, demand their rights
and contribute to the development of their countries.
We also welcome efforts by United Nations
mediators to include women in peace and transition
processes. Yemen is an inspiring example, where,
against all odds, women are participating in the National
Dialogue and are claiming their role in the next phases
of transition. We also pay tribute to Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Mary Robinson’s outreach to women
early on in her mandate, as our Irish colleague briefly
mentioned a moment ago.
Thirdly, we support legal systems based on
equality. We need a gender-sensitive approach to the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Women and girls should have
equal access to fair and transparent justice services
and they should be able to influence justice policies
and institutions in their country. In that respect, we
also acknowledge the important contribution of the
International Criminal Court and other special courts
and tribunals in addressing gender-based and sexual
violence in specific.
As the focus of today’s debate is on the importance
of the rule of law and justice, let me highlight an
example. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
Government is helping to establish a gender-sensitive
judicial system, including by training women to become
lawyers themselves.
Fourthly, we care about prevention and the
protection of victims of sexual violence in conflict.
The Netherlands welcomes the continued high-level
attention to the role of women in conflict situations.
In June, the Council adopted resolution 2106 (2013);
other international actors, such as the Group of Eight,
have also shown real commitment to the prevention
and prosecution of sexual violence in conflict. For my
Government, that is a crucial part of the 1325 agenda.

64/75

18/10/2013

We welcome and support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to ensure the full range of
services to victims of rape, including access to services
for the safe termination of pregnancies resulting from
rape, without discrimination and in accordance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.
The prevention of, and protection from, sexual
violence is an issue that continues to demand our full
attention. I am proud to announce that the Netherlands
recently increased its contribution to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the Elimination of Violence against
Women by $2 million, bringing it to a total of more
than $8 million.
Fifthly and lastly, we stand ready to share
experiences and improve on our joint implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. We offer
our full support and cooperation to the global review
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that
UN Women is currently undertaking. In that context,
we are pleased to announce that, in late 2014, the
Netherlands will host an international conference on
lessons learned.
As I have said, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
wants to be a partner for peace, justice and development.
The role of women is crucial in all three dimensions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Smaila (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open date, which
places in the proper context the issue of women and the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. We also thank Azerbaijan for the concept
note (S/2013/587, annex), which has provided direction
to our discussion.
Nigeria shares the Secretary-General’s view that
there has been measurable progress in all areas of the
women and peace and security agenda, especially as
it relates to the increased provision of expertise and
training. We are pleased to note that, under the rubric of
prevention and protection, there has been a significant
increase in focus on policy and operational focus on
the monitoring, prevention and prosecution of violence
against women. The international community must
sustain that momentum.
In spite of those accomplishments, we believe that
considerable work still needs to be done to overcome
the challenges posed by a lack of implementation of

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

commitments on women and peace and security. A nexus
must be created among women’s participation, security
and the core work of United Nations peacekeeping
operations — often overlooked when gender-specific
information is provided to the Council. Indeed, the lack
of sex-disaggregated data on security threats prevents
action that could contribute to greater security for
women. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to explore options for providing
guidance that would facilitate reporting to the Security
Council to include information on the situation of
women and girls. The Council requires such information
to work in concert with other intergovernmental bodies
such as the Human Rights Council.
Sexual violence against women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict situations should remain a matter of
high priority to the international community. More
needs to be done to hold accountable the perpetrators
of such heinous acts. Indeed, the adoption of resolution
2016 (2013), in June, underscored the need for more
systematic monitoring of sexual violence in armed
conflict. It is therefore imperative that the Council
develop the appropriate mechanisms to ensure women’s
participation in all aspects of mediation, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding to address sexual violence
in conflict.
The gender dimensions of transitional justice are
critical in assessing crimes committed against women
in conflict. The lack of access to justice occasioned
by the deterioration of an already weakened criminal
justice system amplifies their vulnerabilities. Indeed,
UN Women notes that securing justice for women
entails engaging with the processes that shape future
justice mechanisms, including constitution-making
and peace processes. That ultimately accentuates the
need for greater women’s participation in post-conflict
nation-building, where frameworks are instituted to
enable them seek redress.
Nigeria is committed to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions on women
and peace and security. Strident steps have been taken
at the national level to ensure the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In the same vein, Nigeria
stresses the importance of compliance with resolution
1820 (2008), on ending acts of sexual violence against
women in conflict situations.
It is essential for Member States to adopt and
implement comprehensive legislation on violence
against women as a concrete step to increase women’s

S/PV.7044

access to justice. Special courts designed to reduce
delays in rendering justice should be established where
necessary to facilitate access to justice for victims.
Strong advocacy to break the culture of silence and
promote zero tolerance across the globe is fundamental
to the restoration of the rights and dignity of women in
all circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Medan (Croatia): Croatia thanks Azerbaijan
for convening this important debate on women, the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations, an issue to which Croatia attaches great
importance in the context of further advancing the
women and peace and security agenda at the global,
regional and national levels.
We welcome the report and recommendations of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525), as well as resolution 2122 (2013), adopted
today by the Council.
Croatia endorses the statement delivered on behalf
of the European Union and would like to add a few
points in its national capacity.
In our view, ensuring gender equality is one of the
basic principles with regard to respect for human rights.
Transitions can present opportunities to strengthen
women’s rights, leadership and empowerment. It is
crucial to put in place gender-responsive transitional
justice measures as a key element in the processes of
restoring the rule of law and governance systems in any
conflict-affected situation.
Women ought to be placed at the heart of ongoing
political, social and economic developments. Even
though women are widely recognized as effective
agents of peace, the number of women participating
in decision-making in the area of peace and security
remains unacceptably low. Ensuring their equal
participation in decision-making is therefore essential
for achieving sustainable peace and stability. In that
context, we stress in particular the need to increase
women’s and girls’ access to education. There can be no
development and stability in any society, in particular
war-affected and post-conflict ones, if girls and women
have no access to education.
Owing to discriminatory legal frameworks and
practices, women and girls are more vulnerable to
conflict-related violations of their rights, including

13-5201165/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

sexual violence. It is of vital importance that the culture
of impunity that still prevails with regard to such crimes
be addressed. Based on our own tragic experiences of
the aggression on Croatia in the 1990s, during which
rape was used as a method of intimidation and terror,
we are convinced that the issue of sexual violence in
conflict can be adequately addressed only through a
comprehensive approach. In our view, victims’ rights
and access to reparations is one of the most genderresponsive transitional justice measures. The Croatian
Government is currently preparing comprehensive
legislation by which the survivors of sexual violence
from the 1990s will be entitled to the status of civilian
victims of war.
We also welcome the adoption of the resolution
2106 (2013), on strengthening of the prevention and
prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence, and
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
As a member of the group of global champions of
the prevention of sexual violence initiative, Croatia
will spare no effort to take a more prominent role in
preventing and combating sexual violence in conflicts.
Despite all efforts, violence against women and
girls still poses serious threats and has no borders or
nationality. The recent adoption of the Arms Trade
Treaty, with a binding criterion on gender-based
violence, contributes to preventing the potential
negative impact of international arms transfers on
women and their rights. Croatia signed the Treaty in
June, and is currently in the process of its ratification.
We believe that greater coordination and synergy
amoang international partners would further improve
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on the
ground.
Domestically, through its national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), Croatia
has integrated a gender perspective into its foreign
and security policy as well as its actions. We attach
particular importance to the involvement of women
in peacekeeping operations. Their presence reinforces
women’s perspectives, giving their initiatives more
added value.
Female members of the Croatian Armed Forces
involved in international assignments actively work as
commanders, military observers and staff officers. We
are particularly proud to state that, in coordination with
NATO, in December we will deploy our first female

66/75

18/10/2013

general as gender adviser to the Commander of the
International Security Assistance Force in Kabul. At
the regional level, we strongly support the adoption
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe action plan on women, peace and security at the
forthcoming ministerial meeting in Kiev.
In September, Croatia, as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, organized a high-level ministerial event
with UN Women on women’s economic empowerment
for peacebuilding. The main rationale behind this
event was to renew commitment and to sharpen the
global focus on the role of women as agents of positive
change and transformation in countries emerging
from conflicts. We also wanted to invite the broader
United Nations to boost women’s economic rights as an
essential contribution to peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Croatia will continue to give its full
support to all aspects of the women, peace and security
agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I am pleased to address
the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. I would like to
begin by expressing my appreciation to the Azerbaijani
presidency for organizing this open debate, and to
thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN Women, the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and in particular Ms. Brigitte Balipou of the
NGO Working Group on Women Peace and Security
for their valuable statements.
The Nordic countries strongly welcome the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/525) and the
adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) on women, peace
and security. We commend the Council for the progress
made and trust that the new resolution will enhance a
more rapid, complete and systematic implementation of
all the resolutions on this matter.
We welcome the focus of this debate on the rights,
perspectives and participation of women in the rule
of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. The rule of law is an integral part of the
engagement for peace and security. The Nordic countries
have a strong commitment to the rule of law and to its
main principles of legality, equality, accountability and
participation.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

We firmly believe that the rule of law must
encompass the whole population — women and men,
boys and girls — if it is to be worthy of its name.
Nevertheless, women’s perspectives, capacities and
needs continue to be overlooked in efforts to establish
the rule of law in conflict or post-conflict contexts.
To promote the rule of law while excluding women is
not only a paradox; it undermines the achievement of
sustainable peace and security.
Safeguarding women’s access to justice, applying
a gender-sensitive approach to transitional justice
mechanisms and including women in post-conflict
reparations programmes are paramount steps in the
establishment of the rule of law, and thus paramount to
peace and security. The campaign to improve women’s
access to justice must therefore include a scrutiny of
the systemic barriers of gender inequality, including
economic empowerment, women’s citizenship rights,
their legal capacity, property rights, as well as safe
transportation and safe access to witnesses and victim
protection programmes. In order to play a role, women
must also have access to their basic rights in all phases
of conflict. We therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call for expanded access to sexual and
reproductive health services.
Conflict-related gender-based crimes must be
investigated. Resolution 2106 (2013) and the recent
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict are two vital steps towards fulfilling our
obligations. We fully support the work of Justice Rapid
Response and its partnership with UN Women in
addressing sexual and gender-based violence. However,
let us underline that gender justice is not merely about
women’s needs as victims, but also about women’s
valuable contributions to bringing about peace and their
participation at the forefront of transitional justice and
in rule of law measures, such as justice system reform.
At the strategic level, gender awareness in the rule
of law and transitional justice is crucial for women’s
access to justice and for the enjoyment of rights. It
has a direct impact on their political and economic
empowerment. A systematic follow-up to ensure the
inclusion of the women, peace and security agenda in the
day to day work of the Council is therefore necessary.
The number, influence and leadership of women in
conflict-resolution and in post-conflict governance and
peacekeeping must increase.
The Nordic countries support and encourage the
findings in the progress report by UN Women to be

S/PV.7044

moved forward, alongside the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his report. We applaud the efforts
of the regional and subregional organizations to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), and we commend
the ongoing work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) membership to adopt an
OSCE-wide action plan.
We welcome the fact that the recently concluded
Arms Trade Treaty includes a legally-binding
provision on gender-based violence and a call for a full
implementation of the Treaty’s provision on preventing
gender-based violence and violence against women and
girls when assessing arms transfers.
We pay tribute to the work of civil society to
promote gender equality and women’s role in conflict
resolution and in conflict prevention. Let us not forget
that the very origin of resolution 1325 (2000) derives
from the tireless and courageous efforts of women’s
NGOs. We must continue to support and encourage the
women-led civil society in peacebuilding and conflict
prevention.
Finally, we welcome the Secretary-General’s call
for a 2015 high-level review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and his call for new and
ambitious targets.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening this debate
on women, the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict situations, which focuses on an important
aspect of the women, peace and security agenda.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women, peace and security agenda has clearly advanced
in terms of scope and depth, and now occupies an
important place in the realm of legal instruments,
policies and specfic actions of the Organization
in defending the importance of including a gender
perspective in addressing the needs of women and
girls in all conflict situations, and particularly in postconflict reconstruction and recovery.
The natural synergy between participation and
protection is probably the central aspect of resolution
1325 (2000). The role of women in bringing peace
and security to conflict situations and their greater
participation in post-conflict processes and in
transitional justice is crucial to laying the groundwork

13-5201167/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

for sustainable peace. We welcome the progress
identified in the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/525), which reports on improvements in various
national justice systems and the existence of more
resources in international efforts, while recognizing
that there is still a need for the greater participation of
women in all mechanisms related to peace processes
and post-conflict reconstruction.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013)
today, which joins other efforts of the Security Council
to carry out a systematic follow up to the implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda and to move
towards the full participation of women in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding.
We value the efforts of UN WOMEN and the United
Nations Development Programme and their initiatives
to improve women’s access to justice during and after
conflicts, as reflected in the report before us today. We
also value the critical role of civil society, particularly
that of local women’s groups that assist victims in
various aspects of recovery, from health services to
access to justice.
We believe that full accountability is crucial and
requires a broad, multisectoral response that, apart from
medical and psychological aspects and reparations,
should also include a focus on social and economic
reintegration for victims.
The United Nations system must continue to fight
against the impunity of those responsible for such
violations and promote national capacity-building,
along with regional efforts, as well as international
justice mechanisms and the work of organizations that
defend women’s human rights.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important aspects of the women and peace and security
agenda. In recent years, such operations have gradually
incorporated protection-of-civilian mandates, with
special attention to women and girls. The progress
has been significant, but there are still limitations in
meeting the expectations of both local populations and
the international community.
In that context, we would like to point out that
Uruguay has been in the vanguard when it comes to
including women into the armed forces, as reflected
in the number of women deployed by the armed forces
and by the national police in Uruguayan contingents
to peacekeeping missions. Those professionals, always
acting as volunteers, have performed remarkably
68/75

18/10/2013

and demonstrated significant levels of re-enlistment,
thereby illustrating their commitment to the goals
of the missions. That is why we would like to stress
the importance of continuing to promote greater
participation by women in the different areas and
functions that are linked to peace processes, as they
provide an undeniable qualitative contribution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on women and peace and security, an issue to
which Portugal attaches great importance. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; the UnderSecretary-General and Executive Director of UN
Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay; and Ms. Brigitte Balipou for
their very enlightening statements.
Portugal of course shares the views that have been
expressed by the observer of the European Union
regarding the matter of the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict-affected situations. However, allow
me to expand on some aspects of political significance
for my country.
It is increasingly evident that the rule of law is all
too often the second victim of conflict, the first victims
being women and girls. Portugal reaffirms the view
that women and girls are disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts and remain particularly vulnerable
in post-conflict situations. Sexual and gender-based
violence, child and forced marriages and disruption in
education, to name but a few of the facts of conflict,
are magnified when it comes to women and girls. The
Security Council has repeatedly acknowledged that fact
and must continue to act on such a basis. On the other
hand, there is a tendency to consider transitional justice
as the second-to-last concern of peace agreements,
the last being the participation of women in peace
agreements.
It is our firm belief that only through the systematic
and active participation of women in peace processes can
transitional justice truly assume a national dimension
and lay the foundations for rebuilding the rule of
law and reconciliation. We have been witnessing the
very important role women can plan in reconciliation
processes when they are included from the outset.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

Portugal feels particularly encouraged by the
rising awareness regarding those issues, and by the
efforts made at the United Nations and national levels
to increase expertise in several areas, such as mediation
and capacity-building for the political participation of
women, whether as candidates, electoral observers or
office holders.
With regard to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, we
also find encouraging examples of clearer political will
and adequate allocation of resources aimed at increasing
the proportion of women in uniformed components in
operations and in national security sector institutions.
The Council has heard, on a regular basis and
and directly from the ground, requests for further
strengthening the implementation of protection
mandates. We hope that the targets set by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations of 20 per cent for female
police participation in peacekeeping operations by 2014
will be attained. Portugal continues to develop policies
to promote the recruitment and retention of women in
the military and in the police forces, and looks forward
to cooperate further in training and in sharing good
practices with other troop and police-contributing
countries.
Let me conclude by stressing the role of the
economic, social and cultural rights of women as a
central component of protection. Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of this subject in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2013/525). These issues
belong at the forefront of our discussions on women
and peace and security and we commend his effort to
do so. Further analysis of the relationship between the
stability of livelihoods and the safety of women and
girls is therefore, from our point of view, crucial. We
encourage the United Nations to continue to give it due
attention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): The Council’s semi-annual
open debate to review the implementation of Council
resolution 1325 (2000)m, on women and peace and
security, is a good opportunity to review the progress
made over the past year, share good practices and identify
the persistent barriers to the full implementation of the
resolution.
Egypt has considered with interest the SecretaryGeneral’s report on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525). We would like to express our appreciation

S/PV.7044

for the efforts made in the drafting of the report, which
highlights the progress made, including the significant
policy and operational focus on the monitoring,
prevention and prosecution of violence against women
in conflicts. In that context, I would like to make the
following remarks.
First, Egypt reaffirms the pivotal role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding, as outlined in the resolution 1325
(2000). We also stress the importance of promoting
the education and economic empowerment of women
as effective tools to achieving sustainable peace and
security.
Secondly, Egypt is deeply concerned about the
increasing rates and patterns of violence against women
and girls around the world, particularly sexual violence
in armed conflicts and post-conflict situations. We
stress the indispensable role of transitional justice and
the rule of the law for the protection of women’s rights
and for ensuring accountability and non-impunity for
perpetrators, as a key element of conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding.
Transitional justice measures must address the full
range of violations and abuses of women’s human
rights, including crimes committed by United Nations
peacekeeping forces and personnel.
In that context, we highlight the significance of
the initiative taken in April by the Group of Eight on
preventing sexual violence in conflict, assisting victims
of sexual violence in war and preventing further attacks
and holding perpetrators accountable for their crimes.
Last month, Egypt joined the international declaration
of commitment to end sexual violence in conflict that
was launched during the high-level segment of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.
Thirdly, we support the inclusion of the theme of
women and peace and security as a crosscutting issue
in the post-2015 development agenda.
Fourthly, the Security Council will hold a highlevel meeting in 2015 to mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It will
assess progress in implementing that resolution, renew
commitments and address obstacles and constraints.
In that regard, there is a need to address the existing
gap related to quality data collection and analysis in
conflict settings. Egypt supports conducting a global
study to highlight good practices, implementation
gaps and challenges, as well as emerging trends and

13-5201169/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

priorities for action. The outcome of that study should
be available to all Member States.
The practices of the Israeli occupation in the
Arab occupied territories are a clear manifestation
of violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of Arab women and girls under foreign
occupation. Egypt stresses the responsibility of the
United Nations system, as well as all international
organizations concerned with women’s issues, towards
women under foreign occupation. There is definitely
a need to pay greater attention to their suffering in
order to ensure their full rights, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We request all
senior officials and field-based entities responsible for
reporting to the Council, particularly UN Women and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, to systematically include
information on the situation of women and girls in
Arab-occupied territories in their reports and briefings.
Egypt reiterates its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in line with
its international obligations, as well as its conviction of
the critical and indispensable role that could be played
by women in resolving armed conflicts and in postconflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I wish to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s important open debate. Your well-rounded
concept note (S/2013/587, annex) is indeed very useful
in providing us with the clear objective of our debate
on the issue. We also express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Executive Director of UN Women and the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, whose remarks serve as a good
basis for our focus at today’s meeting. The theme of the
meeting is well-chosen and timely, particularly as we
continue to advance the agenda to strengthen the role
and engagement of women in peace processes.
The resolution 2122 (2013), adopted this morning,
is another clear reflection of the strong resolve of
the Council concerning the critical role of women in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. We are particularly appreciative of
the fact that the resolution provides a good reference on

70/75

18/10/2013

supporting the development and strengthening of the
capacities of national institutions in order to provide
sustainable assistance to women and girls affected by
armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
The critical role of women in all stages of and
throughout any peace process has been reaffirmed in
various United Nations resolutions and documents — not
the least, of course, in resolution 1325 (2000) and its
subsequent texts. The recent declaration adopted by
the Peacebuilding Commission on women’s economic
empowerment in peacekeeping showcases yet another
unyielding commitment from Member States to support
the participation of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
economic recovery. The declaration also reaffirms
the primary responsibility of national authorities in
identifying their priorities and strategies for postconflict peacebuilding.
In that context, Indonesia wishes to emphasize the
critical importance of sustaining political momentum
behind ongoing peacebuilding processes, promoting
gender equality and promoting and protecting the
human rights of women. We are fully convinced that
the involvement of women in all aspects of society
unleashes a vast and dynamic pool of ideas, creativity
and skills, which inspire society to move on and gain
prosperity. Therefore, the promotion and protection
of human rights for all, including women in conflictaffected countries, is evidently crucial. Furthermore,
the ability of women to exercise their rights and
responsibilities will define a successful transition to
peace and stability based on the rule of law.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report on
women’s participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466),
it is essential to improve the approach of the United
Nations in combating sexual and gender-based
violence, particularly through the training for United
Nations peacekeepers. In the context of peacekeeping,
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
other related resolutions has paved the way for a
gender perspective mechanism in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Increasing the number of
female peacekeepers on the ground would also be a
positive step in support of resolution 1325 (2000). On
our part, we are happy to point out that Indonesia has
deployed female peacekeepers as well as military and
police observers in several missions, including the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
It is a matter of regret that respecting the rule of
law in conflict situations continues to be a significant
challenge for the international community. In our view,
that is a strong reason for inclusive peace negotiations
that produce peace that is durable, sustainable and longlasting. It is also reason for including the participation
and engagement of women in that process. We also
believe that national reconciliation, as one tool of
transitional justice, must benefit from the active
participation of women. Indonesia, in that regard,
agrees with the call made by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations last year that lasting progress
on security, national reconciliation, human rights, the
rule of law and sustainable development needs to occur
in parallel, given the interconnected nature of those
challenges in countries emerging from conflict.
In that regard, any assistance from the United
Nations, including that undertaken through the
Peacebuilding Commission, must be carried out in a
concerted manner and include a gender perspective.
In addition, it must also be in accordance with the
principle of national ownership, taking into account
the unique and specific needs and situations present in
each country.
Indonesia is steadfast in its commitment to
ensuring women’s participation at all levels of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding, and
it has been undertaking various measures at home
to that effect, in close partnership with civil society,
including women’s organizations.
Finally, Indonesia reiterates the importance of
the international community working in a concerted
manner to improve women’s participation during all
stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict
resolution, post-conflict planning and peacebuilding,
including by enhancing their engagement in political
and economic decision-making at the early stages of
recovery processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We join other delegations
in congratulating your country, Mr. President, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, and we extend our gratitude to you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. Today’s deliberations

S/PV.7044

reaffirms the great importance that we, individually
and collectively, attach to the promotion and protection
of the rights of women and their role in the prevention
of conflict.
As the year 2013 marks the thirteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, it is of the utmost importance that
we strive to ensure gender equality, to address violence
against women and to enhance women’s participation in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. We therefore
welcome the Council’s continued recognition of the need
for more systematic attention to the implementation
of women and peace and security commitments in its
work.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/525)
indicates, we welcome the progress that has been made
since 2012 in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the operationalization of the accountability
framework provided by the Council’s resolutions on
women and peace and security. In that regard, we
take note of the efforts and measures undertaken by
Member States, United Nations entities and regional
organizations.
However, we remain gravely concerned that, despite
the existence of resolution 1325 (2000), which became a
beacon of hope for millions of women and young girls,
crimes of rape and sexual violence still persist. Women
and girls continue to be targeted, while rape and sexual
violence continue to be used as weapons of war. The
prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict is
therefore both a matter of upholding universal human
rights and of maintaining international security, in
keeping with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that connection, impunity for sexual violence
by armed groups is unacceptable and can never
be tolerated. My delegation wishes to stress the
responsibility of States to protect their own populations
and the importance of demonstrating commitment and
political will to prevent sexual violence. To that end,
I wish to emphasize the importance of respect for the
rule of law, accountability and access to justice, as we
believe that they are critical to protecting women’s rights
in the aftermath of conflict. Botswana also shares the
view expressed by many that gender-sensitive legal and
institutional reform, in conformity with international
standards, should be accorded priority in order to stem
violence against women. With the belief and a sense of
optimism that, given our collective will, especially in

13-5201171/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

the Security Council, we can bring an end to impunity
and to those crimes, we call on the Council to strengthen
its efforts in that regard.
While greater attention continues to be paid to the
prosecution of perpetrators of these crimes, we are
also of the view that more must be done to ensure that
transitional justice addresses the full range of conflictrelated violation of women’s rights. My delegation also
believes that efforts to address sexual violence in armed
conflict should be consistent with and complementary
to wider efforts to promote the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and other relevant resolutions
on women and peace and security.
Let me also highlight that greater coordination and
collaboration with other relevant stakeholders and the
provision of assistance to States in conflict and postconflict situations are vital to improving global efforts
to address women, peace and security challenges.
Recognizing that peace is inextricably linked with
equality between women and men, one of the most
important issues to be addressed remains women’s
participation in conflict resolution, including the
negotiation of peace agreements at the national and
international levels. In that respect, it is also our belief
that the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
can be achieved only through increased recognition of
the crucial role of women, as well as their participation
and involvement in all efforts aimed at the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We therefore fully share
the opinion that gender equality should be recognized
as a core issue in the maintenance of peace and
security. We also support calls for the inclusion of a
gender perspective in mediation and peace processes,
particularly in the context of security arrangements and
transitional justice mechanisms.
Ending violations of women’s human rights is a
moral imperative and one to whose achievement we
must collectively commit. In that regard, Botswana
strongly supports all efforts aimed at preventing and
eliminating all forms of violence against women and
children. To that end, we wish to reiterate our support
for the work of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. In line with the Security Council’s
intention expressed in 2010, Botswana looks forward to
the convening of the high-level review in 2015 to assess
progress in the implementation of its resolution 1325
(2000). We therefore welcome this morning’s adoption
by the Council of resolution 2122 (2013).

72/75

18/10/2013

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union and would
like to make a few remarks in its national capacity.
I thank the Secretary General for his report
(S/2013/525), as well as the Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director UN Women, High Commissioner
Pillay and Ms. Balipou for their statements.
Latvia welcomes today’s adoption of the resolution
2122 (2013) on this very important topic and looks
forward to the high-level review in 2015 on progress and
obstacles in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We
believe that a global study highlighting best practices,
implementation gaps and challenges and priorities for
further action on women and peace and security will
greatly contribute to that end.
There are three main issues that I would like
to address today: first, women’s participation at all
levels of decision-making in conflict and post-conflict
settings; secondly, United Nations gender expertise;
and, thirdly, coordination within the United Nations
and outside on women and peace and security in order
to minimize costs and to maximize the impact on the
ground.
Turning to the first topic, let me emphasize that
women should be involved and participate in the
whole crisis cycle, from the prevention and resolution
of conflict to reinstating justice and the rule of law
in post-conflict settings. Women play a particular
role in voicing women’s rights and concerns early
on and in preventing backsliding on women’s rights
in post-conflict governance. There is no justice
without women’s participation at all levels of public
decision-making, and there is no participation without
women’s economic security and full access to public
services. All aspects of women’s participation should
be addressed equally, and greater attention should be
paid to the full range of human rights violations that
women experience in both conflict and post-conflict
settings. Latvia, as one of the countries that endorsed
the declaration of commitment to end sexual violence
in conflict and sponsored resolution 2106 (2013), on
the same topic, earlier this year, welcomes the progress
made in the monitoring, prevention and prosecution
of gender-based violence in conflict. However, efforts
should be continued in that regard and the protection of
women and girls should be carried out on a larger scale.

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

There can be no real impact on women’s rights
on the ground if the United Nations and other
international partners are not leading by example.
Women should be adequately represented at different
levels in peacekeeping and special political missions.
Appropriate training on gender-specific issues should
be provided for military, police and civilian personnel
deployed to international peace operations. United
Nations gender expertise is crucial for capacity-building
and the increased engagement of women in peacemaking
and peacebuilding processes. In that regard, Latvia
welcomes the review commissioned by UN Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
other United Nations institutions on the deployment
and coherence of gender expertise across the United
Nations system in post-conflict contexts and encourages
building on its recommendations. Initiatives launched
by UN Women and DPKO, as well as early and active
involvement by the Special Envoys of the Secretary
General for Sahel and the Great Lakes Region, show
that, through common efforts, real results on the women
and peace and security agenda can be achieved.
Finally, let me underline the importance of
gender mainstreaming and coordination within the
United Nations and between different international
organizations active on the issue of on women and
peace and security. Recent intergovernmental outcomes
identified gender equality and women’s empowerment
both as a thematic priority and a cross-cutting
issue in promoting development. The quadrennial
comprehensive policy review provided new political
impetus to coordination and accountability for gender
mainstreaming in the United Nations system, already
launched by the United Nations system-wide action
plan on gender equality and the empowerment of
women. We welcome the fact that resolution 2122 (2013)
provides for more regular briefings to the Council
on women and peace and security issues and for the
Council’s increased attention to those issues in other
thematic areas of work, as well as while establishing
and renewing the mandates of the United Nations
missions.
We fully agree that, in order to effectively address
threats to the security of women and girls, the links
between the United Nations work in political, human
rights and development fields should be strengthened.
Moreover, better coordination should be ensured among
all organizations on the ground. It is time to consolidate
knowledge and expertise and choose the most effective

S/PV.7044

ways to deliver the best results for women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict settings.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Latvia’s commitment
to the promotion and protection of women’s rights at all
levels and in all contexts, as well as our readiness to
actively contribute to common efforts in the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): First of all,
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement made
by the observer of European Union. Nevertheless,
I would like to add some comments in my national
capacity and contribute to these fruitful discussions by
sharing our country’s experience in assisting women to
promote their fundamental rights and freedoms.
The Government of Georgia is strongly committed
to the protection of human rights, democracy and the
rule of law. Therefore, ensuring women’s liberties
represents one of our priorities. The Government seeks
to strengthen United Nations coordination mechanisms
to ensure our fruitful engagement in overcoming
existing challenges.
At the international level, the Government of
Georgia fully supports the ongoing efforts of the
international community to promote the role of women
in different spheres. Georgia has become a sponsor of
the relevant resolutions presented within the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council.
As the Council is aware, in 1994 Georgia joined
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, without any
reservations. Apart from that, Georgia has acceded to
multilateral treaties, among them the 1951 Convention
concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women
Workers for Work of Equal Value and the Convention
on the Political Rights of Women.
To address the rights of women, Georgia has
dynamically carried out complex measures in various
areas, including legislation and relevant actions as
well as implementing all initiatives with the active
participation of civil society.
On 27 December 2011, the Parliament of Georgia
approved the 2012-2015 Georgia national action plan
on the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security — with

13-5201173/75

S/PV.7044

Women and peace and security

important technical assistance from UN Women. The
national action plan is built on four pillars: increasing
the participation of women in peace processes and
the security sector; preventing all forms of violence
against women; protecting women against all kinds
of threats and safeguarding their physical, mental
and economic security; and addressing the specific
needs of women during and after conflict periods. The
national action plan is the first such initiative in the
South Caucasus region to ensure the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In total, numerous consultative
meetings were held, involving approximately 102
organizations — representing internally displaced
persons and conflict-affected women — in the
preparation process of the national action plan. That
dialogue is continuing to date in the context of the
plan’s implementation phase.
While discussing the successful developments
in advancing women’s rights and freedoms, I
would like to emphasize the fruitful cooperation
that the Government enjoys with UN Women. We
appreciate its support in facilitating consultations and
information-sharing meetings among representatives
of Georgian women’s non-governmental organizations
and women participants of the Geneva international
discussions. The purpose of the meetings was to inform
civil society actors, especially women’s organizations,
on frameworks of peace processes aimed at increasing
knowledge and capacity towards advocating for the
inclusion of gender-specific concerns related to conflict
in the relevant forums.
Women’s role in Georgia, including the political
and military fields, has significantly grown. Women
represent 5.4 per cent of the armed forces and 50 per
cent of the civilian personnel of the Ministry of Defense,
among whom 20 per cent hold decision-making
positions. Women take part in the Georgian contingent
of the International Security Assistance Force in
Afghanistan. This is the first year that female students
have attended the main education programme of
Georgia’s national defence academy.
Regular training programmes are conducted to
enhance the skills and capacities of women police
officers. After the adoption of the national action
plan, female police officers from various regions
of Georgia participated in training programmes to
enhance the skills and role of female officers, with the
aim of becoming leaders and mentors in Georgian law
enforcement. In addition, again in close collaboration

74/75

18/10/2013

with UN Women, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is
a piloting specialized police unit to deal with genderbased violence in several municipalities of the country.
In June 2013, the Georgia Parliament adopted
amendments to the labour code to introduce regulations
that are more liberal with respect to women’s
employment. Currently, Georgia’s Ministry of Justice
has also initiated the drafting of a non-discrimination
law that will foresee the establishment of mechanisms
to ensure the protection of citizens from all forms
of discrimination, including those based on gender
identity and sexual orientation.
While the Government of Georgia spares no effort
in ensuring women’s liberties in the country and to
strengthen women’s role in areas related to security and
peacebuilding, we face major challenges in the occupied
regions of Georgia. Concomitant to the installation of
barbed wire fences along the occupation line of the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions, heavy restrictions on
freedom of movement have been imposed, extending
even to the most vulnerable populations, namely, those
in need of urgent medical assistance, and expectant
mothers. Unfortunately, such restrictions have even
led to casualties, when three women died en route to
hospital after having been refused passage through the
occupation line.
Despite numerous calls by the international
community, up to a half million internally displaced
persons and refugees, among them several hundred
thousand women, continue to be deprived of their
fundamental right to a safe and dignified return. We
remain hopeful that the international community will
adequately react to the illegal activities in the occupied
regions of Georgia and the ongoing violations of human
rights.
In conclusion, I would like to, once again,
reiterate the firm commitment of my Government to
strengthening cooperation with the relevant United
Nations agencies in order to defend the interests of
women who are suffering from gender bias, violence
and other inhuman or degrading treatment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your country’s assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October. Furthermore, I
wish to thank you for organizing this very important

13-52011

18/10/2013

Women and peace and security

debate affording the wider United Nations membership
an opportunity to contribute to the very important
discussion on women, the rule of law and transitional
justice. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN Women and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their kind
introductory remarks. I am also grateful for the concept
note (S/2013/587, annex) that you have circulated, Sir,
which we believe will guide our deliberations to a
successful conclusion.
From the outset, Namibia has recognized the
important role of women in peacebuilding, as enunciated
in resolution 1325 (2000), of October 2000, which my
delegation, together with many others, successfully
negotiated during our presidency of the Security
Council. Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
we have been pleased that the United Nations has adopted
specific policy directives to achieve gender equality in
peacekeeping operations. Due to their vulnerability,
women in many conflicts situations around the world
continue to face intolerable hardship, as they become
targets of sexual violence. In that context, Namibia
welcomes and supports the adoption of the recent Arms
Trade Treaty, as it is the first international instrument
that includes a gender criterion in the context of arms
transfers, thereby identifying women as vulnerable
targets in conflict situations.
The role of women in conflict prevention and postconflict peacebuilding is of great importance. Namibia
therefore fully supports the inclusion of women in
security systems such as armed forces, police and
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in support of various United Nations resolutions that
recognize that important role.
Namibia is proud to be among the troopcontributing countries that have successfully complied
with resolution 1888 (2009), which urges Member States
to deploy greater numbers of female military and police
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions. As
we speak, a group of police women from Namibia is on
its way to Darfur.
We
recognize
the
important
role
of
non-governmental organizations such as Justice
Rapid Response in training Member State officials
as investigators of gender-based violence and rapidly
deploying them to conflict areas. Namibia will
continue to support such initiatives, as they can go a

S/PV.7044

long way in assisting the international community in
investigating such horrible crimes, which specifically
target women and children. We therefore welcome the
partnership between Justice Rapid Response and UN
Women in organizing the upcoming training course
for investigators of sexual-based violence to be held in
Bogota in January 2014.
We would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the recent resolution adopted by the Human Rights
Council on the elimination of violence against women
that encourages the use of mechanisms such as the
UN Women/Justice Rapid Response joint roster of
international investigators of sexual and genderbased crimes in its efforts to promptly make available
the relevant expertise to investigate mass rapes and
systematic violence.
There is a need to combat impunity and bring
the perpetrators of sexual violence to justice. Sexual
violence must be prosecuted at both the national and
international levels. However, we have noticed with
great concern that sexual violence is underreported
at both the national level and in conflict situations.
Therefore, there is a need to support the strengthening
of judicial systems and the destigmatization of sexual
violence for the victims so they may access justice
without being excluded.
At the international level, we urge States to
fully comply with international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and the International
Criminal Court mechanisms, which need to be
strengthened.
In conclusion, the legacy of conflict-related violence
is endured long after peace agreements have been
concluded. Women continue to be targets of violence as
insecurity continues in the absence of effective justice
systems that facilitate large-scale impunity. Therefore,
the involvement of women in peace processes and the
establishment of the rule of law are the foundation for
sustainable and durable peace. We therefore commend
the continuous engagement of the Council in promoting
the role of women in peacebuilding.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

13-5201175/75
