208

General Assembly-Thirty-■econd Session

2. Notes the recommendation, approved by the
Diplomatic Conference, that a special conference be
called on the issue of prohibition or restriction of use
for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional
weapons;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Swiss Federal
Council for acting as host to the four sessions of the
Diplomatic Conference, and to the lntemational Committee of the Red Cross for preparing the basis for discussion and for its constant assis.tance to the Conference;
4. Urges States. to consider without delay the matter
of signing and ratifying or acceding to the two Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which
will be opened far signature on 12 December 1977
in Berne;
5. Appeals to States which have not done so to become parties to the Geneva Conventions of 1949;
6. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to acknowledge and to comply with their obligations under
the existing instruments of intemational humanitarian
law and to observe the international humanitarian rules
which are applicable, in pa,rticular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the Geneva Protocol of 1925
and the Geneva Conventions of 1949;
7. Calls upan ali Sta tes to take effective steps for
the dissemination of humanitarian rules applicable in
armed conflicts;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a report
concerning the state of signatures and ratifications of
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an ítem entitled "Report of
the Secretary-General on the state of signatures and
ratifications of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 concerning the respect for human
rights in armed conflicts".
97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/45.

Report of the Special Committee on the
Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the role of the Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955, 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, 2552 (XXIV)
of 12 December 1969, 2697 (XXV) of 11 December
1970, 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and 3349
(XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of
27 November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973 and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially its resolution 3499 (XXX) of
15 December 1975, by which it established the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,
and its resolution 31/28 of 29 November 1976,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,8
B Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/32/33).

Noting that the Special Committee has examined in
detail the observations received from Governments contained in the Secretary-General's analytical study conccrning suggestions and proposals regarding the Charter
of the United Nations and the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations with regard to the maintenance
and consolidation of international peace and security,
the development of co-operation among all nations and
the promotion of the rules of intemational law in relations between States,9
Considering that the Special Committee has not yet
completed the mandate given to it,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
2. Decides that the Special Committee should continue its work in pursuance of the following tasks with
which it is entrusted:
(a) To list the proposals which have been made
or will be made in the Committee and to identify those
which have awakened special interest;
( b) To examine proposals which have been made
or will be made in the Committee with a view to according priority to the consideration of those areas on
which general agreement is possible;
3. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful
of the importance of reaching general agreement whenever it has significance for the outcome of its work;
4. Urges members of the Special Committee to
participate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate
entrusted to it;
5. Invites Governments to submit, or to bring up to
date, thcir observations and proposals in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX);
6. Requests the Secretary-General to render ali assistance to the Special Committee, including the preparation of summary records of its meetings;
7. Requests the Special Committee to submit a
report on its work to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session;
8. Decides to indudc in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the ítem entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations
and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization".

97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/ 46.

Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Hos.t Country, 10
1. Accepts the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 26 of its report;
o /bid., annex II, document A/ AC.182/L.2.
10 /bid.,

Supp/ement No. 26 (A/32/26).

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (X~":7I) of 15 December 1971, with the purpose of exanurung on a more
regular basis all matters falling within its terms of
reference and requests the Secretary-General to provide
the Committee with all necessaJ"y assistance;
3. Decides to include in the provisiona·l agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/47.

United Nations Conference on Succession
of States in Respect of Treaties

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3496 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, by which ,it decided to convene a conference
of plenipotentiaries in 1977 to consider the draft _articles on succession of States in respect of treaties,
adopted by the lntemational Law Commission at its
twenty-sixth session, 11 and to emb?dy the results of
its work in an intemational convent1on and ,such other
instruments as it might deem appropriate,
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 18 of 24 November 1976, by which, after noting that an invi~ation had
been extended by the Government of Austria to hold
the United Nations Conference on Succession of States
in Respect of Treaties at Vienna, it had decided that the
Conference would be held in that city,
Noting that the Conference met at Vienna from
4 April to 6 May 1977, in accordance with the ~bov~mentioned resolutions but that it was not poss1ble m
the time available fo; the Conference to conclude its
work and to adopt an international convention and
other appropriate instruments, as requested by the General Assembly,
Noting further the view of the Conference that one
more session would enable it to conclude its work as
envisaged by the General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the reoommendation unanimously
adopted by the Conference that it should be reconvened
at Vienna for a final session of four weeks,
Taking into account the invitation of the Govemment of Austria, accepted by the General Assembly in
resolution 31/18, which extends aLso to a resumed session of the Conference, 12
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Succession of States in Respect of
Treaties; 13
2. Approves the convening of a resumed session
of the United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in Respect of Treaties at Vie11na for a period of
three wee~s, from 31 July to 18 August 1978, with
a possible extension of up to one further wcek should
this prove necessary in the view of the Conference;
3. Requests the Sec¡;etary-General to make the
neoessary arrangements, as provided under General
11 fbid,,
Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (Al
9610/Rev. l ), chap. II, sect. D.
12 See A/32/141/Add.l.
13 A/CONF.80/15.

209

Assembly resolution 31/18, for the efficient servicing
of the Conference;
4. Expresses its firm conviction that the Conference
will thus conclude its work and adopt an intemational
convention and other appropriate instruments as requested by the General Assembly.
97th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/ 48.

Review of the multilateral treaty-making
process

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its duty under Article 13, paragraph 1 a,
of the Charter of the United Nations to initiate studies
and to make recommendations for the purpose, inter
alia, of encouraging the progre~sive development of
intemational law and its codification,
Observing that, in the period since the inception of
the United Nations many important multilateral treaties
have been prepared by a number of different Unitcd
Nations organs,
Bearing in mind the important contribution ~f the
lnternational Law Commission to the preparat.Ion of
multilateral treaties during the past twenty-nine years,
A ware of the heavy burdens which active involvement
in the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Conscious of the desirability of assessing the efficiency and adequacy of the procedures fo11owed by t~e
United Nations in the formulation of the texts of multilateral treaties with a view to the improvement of such
procedures,
Bearing in mind the need for the United Nations to
exercise economy in the use of its resources,
Taking into account that in certain important and
specialized areas the interested parties have developed
methods of negotiation of proved and continued value,
Recalling the publication by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research of a study on the wider
acceptance of multilateral treaties, H
Recalling those resolutions of the General Assembly
urging the greater participation of States in multilateral
conventions concluded u11der the auspices of the United
Nations.
Observing that the United Nations has not hitherto
given comprehensive consideration to the techniques
and procedures used in the preparation of multilateral
treaties,
1. Requests the Secretary-Genera1 to prepare a report 011 the techniques and proccdures used in the elaboration of multilateral treaties, taking also into consideration thc debates in the General Assembly at the current
session and the observations referred to in paragraph 2
below, with a view to its submission to the Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session;
2. Invites Governments and the lntemational Law
Commission to submit by 31 July 1979, for inclusion
in the report referred to above, their observations 011
this subject;
14 UNITAR/ST/2.
