UNITED NATiONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2513th

MEETING:

3 FEBRUARY

1984

UNLIRRtr,Ry
JAN 22 1993

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/25 13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 3 February 1984 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16306) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2513

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
.., ?’ ,.
\: .
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2513th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 3 February 1984, at 4.50 p.m.
President:

Mr. S. Shah NAWAZ

(Pakistan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2513)

of the agenda

Letter dated 3 February 1984 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/16306)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.55 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like at the outset of this
meeting to express thanks, on behalf of the members of
the Council, to Mr. Javier Chamorro Mora, representative of Nicaragua, for his service as President of the
Council during the month of January. Mr. Chamorro
Mora earned our deep appreciation for the great diplomatic skill, tact and courtesy with which he guided
the Council’s work last month.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 3 February 1984 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16306)
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Honduras in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation
Cdceres (Honduras)

of the President, Mr. Herrera
took a place at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today in
response to the request contained in the letter dated
3 February 1984 from the representative of Nicaragua
to the President of the Security Council (S/16306).
I should also like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/16307, which also contains
the text of a letter dated 3 February from the representative of Nicaragua to the President of the Security
Council.
4. Mr. ICAZA GALLARD
(Nicaragua) [interpretationfiom Spanish]: First, Sir, I should like to express to
you my delegation’s warmest congratulations
on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and our gratitude for having responded so swiftly to
Nicaragua’s request to convene this meeting immediately. We would not have wished to be the ones to
convene the Council and to impose additional duties on
your presidency, but the situation demands it. We again
face very dangerous events, clearly aimed at bringing
about a war of destruction in the Central American
region. It is public knowledge that my country and the
people of Nicaragua have been the victims of frantic
efforts to destroy their freedom and their right to selfdetermination,
although the other peoples of Central
America have not been spared the scourge of intervention or of irresponsible and thoughtless policies.
5. Today we have come to the Security Council
greatly alarmed by events that severely threaten peace
and security in the region. Indeed, qualitatively,
they
are perhaps the most serious that have occurred over
the past two years. As the Co-ordinator
of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction,
Commander
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, has said, these could be the
precursors of a war between Honduras and Nicaragua
provoked by the United States to justify intervention.
6. Yesterday at 5.30 in the afternoon six military aircraft of the fighter-bomber
and push-and-pull
type,
painted olive drab, flying from Honduras, penetrated
Nicaraguan airspace, proceeding to the town of El
Viejo in the northeastern department of Chinandega
and then towards the Casitas volcano, where they
attacked a military unit of the Sandinist People’s Army
and a civilian communications
centre. The attack was
repulsed by anti-aircraft fire, and the attacking aircraft
withdrew towards Honduran territory through the sector of Cinco Pinos, in the same department. As a result
of this attack three soldiers of the Sandinist People’s
Army-Hal
Rodriguez, Roger Ovando and Danilo Valladares-were
killed, and the following soldiers were
wounded: Bernabe Sanchez, Marcos Huete, Rodolfo
Lazo and Roberto Cruz.

7. At 6 o’clock this morning five air-planes of an undetermined type attacked a military installation located in
the sector of Apocentillo, in the department of Chinandega. As a result of this new act of aggression, one
soldier was killed and another was wounded.

feats, recourse is being had to new wide-scale means
and strategies of aggression, characterized
mainly
by the permanent deployment of American troops in
Honduran territory and their involvement
in military
manoeuvres which constitute, from beginning to end
-if ever they should end-war exercises against Nicaragua, aimed, it would appear, at being converted into
a real war in keeping with the ag’aessive plans of the
‘to _i
United States Administration.
,-r- I .
12. At the present time American and Honduran
troops are carrying out in Honduras the Agalta operation, with the strategic objective-within
the context
I have already described-of
making war against Nic%a.,
aragua.

8. The Government of Nicaragua has lodged a vigorous formal protest with the Government of Honduras
because of its clear complicity with and participation in
these acts. This protest can be added without further
comment to the already long chain of complaints about
acts of aggression against Nicaragua, which in terms of
violations of Nicaraguan airspace in 1983 totalled more
than 620 by United States radio-electronic
and photographic surveillance aircraft, with more than 400 helicopters and aircraft flying from Honduran soil, on one
of which missions an American pilot was killed. There
were also 19 air attacks during the same year. However,
the most recent attacks represent a great qualitative
leap in the type of war machine used against our country. We do not hesitate to describe the events of the past
24 hours as the greatest threat to peace and security in
the region in the past two years, because this is the first
time warplanes have been used to continue the chain of
acts of aggression against Nicaragua. These events represent a serious escalation of the military actions and
provocations against our country, and therefore against
:
peace.

13. The Chief of the Honduran armed forces, General
Gustav0 Alvarez Martinez, on 31 January last stated
that the latest stage of the Big Pine II&~ilitary manoeuvres included simulated war againsf,a neighbouring
country. This stage was carried out with the participation of 7,000 military personnel, including 1,000 American soldiers and five battalions and combat-support
units backed up by American and Honduran air forces.
That same Chief of the Honduran armed forces, who is
known for his irrepressible hatred for ‘Nicaragua and
meek submission to American desigris,.on 18 December
declared, “War with Nicaragua is an option to consider
in order to resolve the crisis.” While.Alvarez-in
the
role of spokesman for the United Stat&and of announcer of the military manoeuvres-was’
announcing the
holding of the military manoeuvreS:Big
Pine III, he
reported that in June 1984 the Granadera I manoeuvres
would be held, in which Salvadoran’and
Guatemalan
troops would take part. These manoeuvres would be
carried out in the western region of Honduras, bordering on the Nicaraguan department, of Chinandega.
i
14. It is worthwhile asking whether these most recent
attacks directed at Nicaragua are not the outcome of
bellicose statements and demonstrations.
Do they not
represent concrete ,expression of the” irrepressible
desire to wage an unjust and senseless war against
Nicaragua? When we add to all this, rhetoric and all
these specific facts the troops, artillery and airplanes
Honduras has concentrated on its border with Nicaragua, it is particularly relevant to ask whether it can
be assumed that Honduras intends to remain peaceful.
It is impossible to ignore the negotiations-which
are
now at an advanced stage-between
the Governments
of the United States and Honduras aimed at building a
new military base in Honduras at a cost of more than
$160 million, which is a serious setback for the efforts of
the Contadora Group and a violation ‘of the commitments entered into within the context of that initiative.
Obviously, both countries are endeavouring to undermine the efforts of that Group, realizingis they do that
that initiative is a genuine step towards what to them is
an undesirable goal: peace in Central’America.
Commitments already entered into, such ‘as’ the elimination of foreign military bases and the’ gradual withdrawal of military advisers within one*‘month, have

9. The countries of Central America know very well
that the aircraft concerned are of the type used by the
Honduran Air Force. We are dealing now not simply
with border actions against civilian targets and innocent
citizens, but with actions against Nicaraguan military
units deep inside our territory, carried out not only,by
armed civil aircraft on isolated occasions but by a group
of war-planes. The fact that this,type of action originated from Honduran territory is extremely serious and
adds a qualitatively
more dangerous and explosive dimension to the already existing conflict situation in
Central America.
10. The responsibility
for and the consequences of
these events rest inevitably on those who have financed, organized and encouraged this chain of acts
of aggression and provocation. It is not necessary to
advance proof .of the criminal participation of the Central Intelligence Agency in the increasingly open operations being carried out against my country. Hence, one
must recall something which is equally well known: the
commitment
entered into with the criminal Somozist
Guards, who are shamelessly called champions of freedom. Similarly, one must recall public statements by
high American officials to the effect that there will be no
stability in Central America so long as the Sandinist
revolution exists.
11. Throughout
.I983 our people and Government
heroically resisted and defeated the offensives carried
out by the counter-revolutionary
forces operating from
Honduras; we frustrated the latest attack early in December’,1983. It is .ciear that in the face of these de2

been scrapped by the American
ernments.

an?l Honduran

Gov-

That report is based on observations of various members of the sub-committee
who went to Honduras in
December and saw for themselves the construction of
12 installations by United States soldiers.

15. There is no longer any doubt whatsoever as to
why the meeting of the Contadora Group with the Central American countries was suspended on 21 December 1983. As The&Jew York Times revealed, the obstructionist tactic of Honduras-to
use the very words
of that newspaper-has
become that Government’s official policy in the Contadora Group, choosing to act
completely at variance with the commitments
it had
assumed: if the Contadora Group suggests there should
be an end to the building of military bases, Honduras
agrees to the building of a gigantic one; and if the Group
advocates the withdrawal of military advisers, Honduras approves the:indefinite
stationing of hundreds of
American soldiers. The United States and its allies have
been put in a difficult and uncomfortable position within the Contadora Group because of the constructive,
flexible and honest attitude of the Nicaraguan Govemment and because of the sincere intentions of the Group
itself to achieve an honourable and just solution to the
problem of Central America. That is why those countries are obsessed,with the idea of dashing the peace
efforts and imposing their military alternatives and violent solutions to the conflict.
:tir.,
16. For the first time the Pentagon has confirmed the
rumours of a.permanent military United States presence in Honduras. When on 1 February Caspar Weinberger was questioned by the Senate Armed Forces
Committee on.a.permanent
United States presence in
Honduras, he .declared, “As regards a permanent
presence, a certain number of soldiers ,will remain in
that situation,?: Cynically-and,
presumably, to set the
minds of the members of that Committee at rest-he
concluded by telling them that he did not think the
number of permanent troops would reach 1,000, that
there would only be between 700 and 800 and that the
objective would be “to see to the maintenance of the
military installations”
which had to be build during the
Big Pine II manoeuvres, such as, for example, roads,
docks and radar installations.
Those same Pentagon
officials expanded on the information available and told
the media that the permanent contingent would include
air traffic controllers, medical personnel and specialists
in so-called civic action.
:_
17. To confirm even further the veracity of the interventionist plans -of the Reagan Administration
against
our country and the use of Honduran territory as a base
for aggression; pne need only look at the House of
Representatives
sub-committee
report on military
installations which, in addition to criticizing the Department of Defeqse for having built military installations in
Honduras without Congressional approval, adds that:
i‘, ’
‘ ‘4
“From fact,,that at present.new exercises are being
prepared and no one wants or is able to give any
indication ofthe purposes ofthose new installations,
it must be concluded that a qontinuation of the United
States presence is significant.”

18. Statements by one of the members of that subcommittee, Senator Jim Sasser, a Democrat from Tennessee, were also revealing. In statements to the press
he said that the Pentagon was trying to deceive the
Congress by building in Honduras a military infrastructure which went far beyond what was necessary for
carrying out the military exercises that were taking
place there. Those statements, together with the information provided in the sub-committee’s
report to the
effect that the improvements
in the military installations in Honduras do not seem to be directly related to
the Big Pine manoeuvres, prompt us to conclude once
again that we are in the other phase of the Reagan
Administration’s
aggressive plan, the goal of which is
direct military intervention by United States troops in
Central America.
.’
19. It is now clear to everyone that the objective of the
United States military presence in Honduras is not
what the President of the United States and officials at
various levels have tirelessly maintained and are trying
to get the American people and the international community to believe. It is not just a matter of exerting
pressure in order to stop the alleged flow of weapons.
20. During the past’four years our Government has
been complaining to the international community, and
yesterday in Caracas the United States Secretary of
State, George Shultz, confirmed our complaints. Referring to statements by Commander
Daniel Ortega
Saavedra about United States military intervention in
Nicaragua, he said: “If I were they”-the
Sandinists“I, too, would worry.”
21. In his most recent report, the Secretary-General
described the situation in Central America as “exceedingly complex and unstable” [see S/16208, para. 41, and
he acknowledged that there were: “certain developments in the situation which, if taken advantage of,
would make it possible to entertain hopes of improvement” [ibid., para. 31. Those developments stem from
progress and achievements in the Contadora negotiating process and from some of Nicaragua’s proposals
that have been put forward in that process. But the
Secretary-General
warned that multiple factors which
together maintain a dangerous situation can aggravate it
again “from one moment to the next” [ibid., paru. 41.
22. Indeed, in spite of the aforesaid positive elements,
the continued existence of aggressive military equipment, the constant threat against Nicaragua and its
revolution, and the stepping up of diplomatic and political manoeuvres by the current United States Administration reinforce our conviction that the danger is far
from disappearing and that this fragile relaxation of
tension could evaporate at any moment. We believe our
assessment of the situation is borne out by recent
3

events and the extremely
our revolution.

serious provocations

against

again tried to involve Honduras in the problems that the
Nicaraguan Government has been having, because of
its own tyranny, with its own citizens, whose attention
it tries to divert through the use of false information
harmful to neighbouring States and aimed at creating
confrontations.
‘
6’>:
30. The representative of the Sandinist Government
has hurled a number of accusations at my Government,
alleging complicity on our part in the events referred to
in the letter that led to the convening‘of this meeting.

23. It is for those reasons that we have requested this
urgent meeting of the Security Council. We wish to
alert its members and the international
community to
the extreme gravity of the situation, which gives the
lie to statements by spokesmen of the Government of
Honduras and of the United States aimed at creating an
appearance of support for and interest in the Contadora
Group’s peace initiatives.
24. It is no coincidence that those bombings of Nicaraguan military installations, with the direct involvement of foreign military equipment, took place only a
few days after the formal beginning of the work of the
Working Commissions on political, security and economic matters established by the Contadora Group
after the signing and ratification of the document entitled “Measures to be taken to fulfil the commitments
entered into in the Document of Objectives*’ [S/26262,

31. Honduras can declare with absolute certainty that
this accusation is completely unfounded. No military
aircraft left its base in the circumstances invented by
the vivid imagination of the Sandinist Government in its
attempt to divert attention from the internal struggles
taking place in Nicaragua.
32. On 13 September last the Security Council met
at the request of the Sandinist
Government
[2477th meeting], and that Government
levelled the
same kind of unjustified accusations that it is making
today against my Government.
Subsequently those
accusations were shown to be unfounded, particularly
when Eden Pastora, commander of&the Democratic
Revolutionary
Alliance, which is fighting in southern
Nicaragua, said that those attacks had been carried out
by his own Nicaraguan forces in Nicaraguan territory.

annex I, appendix].

25. The very purpose of those Working Commissions
is- to deal thoroughly with the problems relating to the
various sectors assigned to them and to give the ministers a report containing proposals for more concrete
commitments,
which should lead to immediate and
effective.action to reduce sources of tension and ensure
a stable peace in the area. Military pressure has now
supplemented
the obstructionist
and dilatory tactics
employed in the process of diplomatic
negotiations;
indeed, the recent military provocations that we are
denouncing today go further, reaching intolerable
limits.

,

26. My Government, therefore, vigorously reiterates
its protest. The entire Nicaraguan
people is fully
prepared to repel by force of arms any attack or act
of aggression, regardless of the source, against our
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. At
the same time, we wish to reaffirm our right to selfdefence and our deep commitment
to peace in Central
America. We are most willing to enter into a dialogue
and we firmly intend to renew our efforts to ensure that
the Contadora peace initiatives achieve the difficult
goal that has been set.
27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Honduras, on whom I call.
28.

I

33. In my letter dated 20 September 1983 to the President of the Security Council [S/15995], we set forth a
number of facts in support of our position and demonstrated the duplicity and complicity of Nicaraguan diplomats. In that letter we also pointed out that what took
place was very different from what was portrayed by
the Nicaraguan delegation and showed that there was a
disturbing disinformation
campaign directed at convincing world public opinion that other Central American countries were intervening in Nicaragua’s internal
conflict or had aggressive designs on”that .fratemal
country. In that letter we said that those false accusations were all the more disturbing coming, as they did,
on 7,8 and 9 September, the days on which the fourth
joint meeting of the Ministers for External Relations of
Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, the members of the Contadora Group, and the~Ministers
for
External Relations of Costa Rica, El.Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua was held, for the purpose of seeking a definitive solution to--the Central
American problem.

Mr. HERRERA

CACERES (Honduras) [interFirst of all, I should like to
express to you, Sir, the pleasure of the Honduras delegation at seeing you presiding over the important debates of the Security Council during this month.

pretation

from

34. Today, by a much too systema&‘:coincidence,
there are further false accusations, scarcely a day after
the close of a new meeting of the Contadpra Group, at
which progress was made towards implementation
of
the Document of Objectives and the measures for its
fulfilment-indeed,
at the time when it ,was decided to
implement the agreement on the Honduran initiative to
establish Working Commissions on the various issues
covered in the Document+hat
is, on political, security, and economic and social
matters. r >.
:

Spanish]:

29. I should like also to take this opportunity to thank
the members of the Council for responding affirmatively to our request to be allowed to take part in the
meetings on the present agendaitem, through which the
representative of the Sandinist Government has once
4

35. It is interesting how these coincidences are repeated whenever peace initiatives progress. This is why
we have spoken of an attitude of duplicity which should
be made clear to world public opinion. If we have
spoken about the Sandinist Government’s
systematic
campaign of false accusations before various forums
and for the benefit of the media, it is because the facts
bear this out. As everyone knows, in-international
relations both indirect:provocations
and press campaigns
are inimical to international
negotiations. A carefully
directed press campaign can give a false news item a
quasi-offtcial appearance, and sometimes the denials of
a country serve only to strengthen its apparent vera’,
city.

40. It has been stated that the goal of the joint manoeuvres held by Honduras and the United States is an
aggressive one. It seems to me that such arguments
have been put forward over and over again in an effort
to wear down the international
conscience. We have
said this before. We had occasion in the Sixth Committee during the thirty-eighth session of the General
Assembly to reply to the Nicaraguan delegation. On
5 December last we said:
“It has been said that there are foreign military
bases in Honduras, which is an implicit reference to
the Regional Military Training Centre established by
the Honduran Government in a location distant from
our border with Nicaragua, directed and supervised
by Honduran officers, first of all to train Honduran
troops and also to train the troops of friendly countries. It receives assistance from experts not only
from the United States, but also from any country in
Central or South America with which we maintain
relations of co-operation. It is only by ignoring the
elements of the legal definition of a foreign military
base that one could dare to call the Honduran military
centre a foreign military base.“’

36. As a distinguished
author from a country that
suffered the serious consequences of the Second World
War and Hitler’s policies said, control of the media can
make it possible for some Governments
to produce
sentimental and even passionate reactions among their
people and create a political crisis. Hitler’s tactics featured an impressive balance of attacks, like the ones
being made now, and offers at negotiation, like the ones
that the Sandinist Government says it is putting before
the Contadora ‘Group. It is interesting that a Govemment which has already shown the world what its basic
ideological oriehtation is does not seem willing to follow its own orientation but has assumed certain immoral attitudes’which
have already been historically
rejected by the-entire world community.
I
37. I have been,referring to facts. The Sandinist Government has sent notes of protest to this Council in
which it implicated the Government of Honduras in
what it called at the time “counter-revolutionary
groups” that had attacked the Nicaraguan village of
Francis-Sirper
on 20 December. It also stated that
those forces had left from Honduran territory and returned, threatening most of the Miskito population as
well as Monsignor Salvador Shaffer, Father Wendo Lin
and other clergymen, and that the Honduran Government was responsible for the fate of those individuals.

41. On that same occasion we stated, with reference
to the joint manoeuvres, that such joint United StatesHonduras exercises are held on the basis of a Bilateral
Military Assistance Agreement* signed in May 1954 and
that recently they have been taking place since 1965.
For further refutation of the accusation regarding ’
aggressive goals, we might read the preambular part of
that I954 Agreement, which states that the goal of this
military co-operation is to abide by
“pledges under the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance and other international
instruments to assist any American State subjected to
armed attack and to act together for the common
defence and for the maintenance of the peace and
security of the Western Hemisphere;”
and that the signatory Governments

38. Once again the world was able to verify the falsity
of that accusation when the Bishop himself declared
here in the United States that he was helping the Miskitos to find a refuge in Honduras.

desire

“to foster international peace and security within the
framework of the Charter of the United Nations
through measures which will further the ability of
nations dedicated to the purposes and principles of
the Charter to participate effectively in arrangements
for individual and collective self-defence in support
of those purposes and principles”.

39. Subsequently,
and very recently, the Sandinist
Government,
supposedly transcribing
a statement
made by Nobel Peace Price winner Mr. Perez Esquivel,
accused Honduras of being implicated
in genocide
against the Mi’skitos. But the same Mr. Perez Esquivel
denied this, saying that he hade never made such a
charge with regard to the Honduran army as described
by the Sandinist Government.
The Sandinist Govemment is obviously very clever at manipulating information. Regrettably, there are many people of good faith
who in the past have been taken’in by these claims, but
today they are taking a harder look and adopting positions that are more in keeping with the reality.

Furthermore,
among the purposes specifically set out
since 1954 in those agreements are full co-operation in
efforts to provide armed forces to the United Nations in
accordance with the Charter and the achievement of
agreements on universal regulation and reduction of
armaments with effective safeguards against breaches
of those agreements.
42. We have stated repeatedly that these agreements
are public and that they have been registered with
5

the United Nations Secretariat. We have provided
reference numbers of these and other complementary
instruments and have expressed our hope that the Nicaraguan Government too would register and make public the agreements under which it receives foreign
weapons and advisers which promote the arms race,
the destabilization
of democratically
and peacefully
elected Governments and acts of terrorism in Central
America. We have not been able to find those agreements in the Secretariat.

peaceful solution of all our problems of democracy, and
it is aware of our inability to relish the hegemonistic
ideological attitudes not in keeping with the visions of
the great proponents of inter-Americanism.
46. I have no wish to continue rehearsing the whole
series of falsehoods uttered here, for@e.Council’s
time
is precious. But we cannot ignore tli,isiconstant attempt
to deceive others and to conceal the truth about the
harsh realities, which must be considered in depth.
Those harsh realities have to do primarily with the
internal problems of Nicaragua.
jI

43. It is important for those of us who are involved
in the regional negotiating process aimed at finally
achieving a comprehensive
regional solution which
would simultaneously
put an end to all the causes of
conflict in Central America that the international community influence the Government of Nicaragua to leave
behind its provocations, lest it fall into its own trap. We
hope that that Government will not continue to foster a
climate of distrust which affects the Contadora process.
Scheming and treachery are harmful to any negotiating
process, even when they seem to further it.

47. We would only urge that due account be taken of
the fact that the Contadora process will reach a successful conclusion only if there is a singleminded political
will on the part of all States. Duplicity is counter-productive. Honduras reiterates its devotion to peace and
its full support for the process in which we are already
involved.
48. Honduras, like any other sovereign State, is continuing to train its army to defend its territorial integrity. The people of Honduras are also united. I am not
talking about war, as does the representative of Nicaragua. I am talking about peace, for we are preserving
our internal peace and also want international
peace,
especially in Central America.

44. The representative of Nicaragua has referred to
what he called the obstructionist attitude, citing a fine
United States newspaper. With all due respect for the
press in the various countries and aware of its general
tenor, Honduras could still not base its international
position only on information from any single source, as
the Sandinist Government has so frequently done in
support of its position. Evidence of this can be found in
all the documents of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. But with regard to the position of the
Sandinist Government, what is most regrettable is that
it comes up with only those New York Times articles
which are favourable to it, not those which are harmful
to it. The New Yurk Times has questioned all of last
year’s so-called openings by the Nicaraguan Govemment allegedly aimed at reaching an agreement in Central America. Had the representative of Nicaragua not
been ignoring those parts of The New York Times that
were not to his liking he might have found a clarification
by a Honduran spokesman regarding the article referring to the “obstructionist
tactics” of Honduras and
explaining why the meeting to which he referred did not
take place on 21 December; that meeting had been
scheduled for 12 December, and Honduras had made a
genuine contribution
to its convening.

49. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
Sir, it is a particular pleasure to welcome your presidency of the Security Council, in part because of the
deep respect we have for your own personal talents as a
diplomat and for your personal integrity; in part, it is
a reflection of the admiration,
respect and friendship
which our two nations bear towards one another. It is a
pleasure as well for the United States to pay tribute to
your predecessor, the representative
of Nicaragua,
who discharged the office of President last month with
judiciousness,
even-handedness and a high degree of
competence and honour, as well as with a high degree of
consciousness of the seriousness of the business in
which the Security Council should always be engaged.
It is regrettable that the Government he represents does
not always share those attributes.
50. Every several months the dignity of this important
international forum and the patience of its members are
strained and abused by the Government of Nicaragua
with hysterical allegations of aggression by my Government and by neighbouring Governments in Central
America. We hear them every several months. I am
constrained to say that recycled refuse does not
improve with age, nor does the odour of sanctity which
it emits.

45. In addition to not having the necessary resources,
Honduras does not have a reason to pursue a systematic campaign like that pursued by the Nicaraguans
in order to create an apparent reality which is not in
accord with the truth about its actions. All we wish to
do is show the international community what the facts
are. The international community is familiar with all the
initiatives of the Contadora Group. The international
community knows that it was we who were the first to
put forward a peace plan for the Central American
region. The international community knows that we are
now establishing working groups. The international
community
is familiar with our efforts to achieve a

5 1. The United States has not engaged in aggression
against Nicaragua. The United States is not now engaged in aggression against Nicaragua. The United
States does not plan to engage in aggression against
Nicaragua. We do intend to continue to co-operate with
our friends in Central America, as elsewhere, in de6

fence of the freedom, the self-determination
and the
institutions of democratic pluralism of which the Sandinist regime so cruelly deprives its own people. It is
this betrayal, a’ betrayal of the principles of its own
revolution, which has caused substantial numbers of
Nicaraguans to take arms against the Sandinist regime.
!.J,
52. In the pa&our
years coffee has given way as
Nicaragua’s principal export to so-called indigenous
revolutions and ‘t;;’ ‘the systematic effort to destabilize
free and democratic Governments throughout Central
America. So long as that situation persists, so, unfortunately, will tension in the region. When that situation
no longer pertains, when the Sandinist regime begins to
fulfil its own promises to its own people, my Govemment does not doubt that peace, reconciliation
and
good-neighbourliness
can and will be restored in Ceni L
I
:,,

tral America. The Government
and people of the
United States will do all in their power to play a full role
in encouraging that process.
53. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers.
The next meeting of the Security Council to continue
the consideration of the item on the agenda will be fmed
in consultation with members of the Council.
The meeting

rose at 6 p.m.

NOTES

’ See MXf38lSR.65,
para. 75.
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 222, No. 3025.

‘::

.‘,

.
;:.

7

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

COMO

CONSEGUIR

ZI3AAHZIH

OPrAHH

PUBLICACIONES

3AIKIIII

Oli%E;WiHEHHI.IX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIMR

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoms
en
todas pattes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Yentas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

,

Litho in United

IIOJIY’IHTI.

Nations,

New York

00300

go-61313~Janualy

1993-2.050
