P

UNITED NATIONS

.:
. .
.“.’
.*.

SECURITY

COUNCIL

2242nd.

30 JUNE 1980

MEETING:

*:

.__
-_ .
.---

--*_
.-,

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2242)

.. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. .. ... .. ... ... .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May. 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 13966) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I--_.-.
.’

1

j. .

_

-_

. :-.

.-I_-_‘,
-.’

sIPV.2242

a

:

.--.‘*I
.:_*-

-.:
-.

.“:

-I-’
-^.

a’

.

? I, .

_

.I
I.
.

NOTE

II
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

-- .
a.-,
:
.--*.
..-.-. .

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Coancil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security cbuncil, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rewlations and
Decisiotis qf the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

.

‘.
.*
-%-

I

.
.

‘.

2242nd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 30 June 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

rain), Mr. Kessely (Chad), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. AI-Hamzah
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Farah
Dirar (Djibouti),
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. NguemaMba (Gabon), Mr, Kouyate’ (Guinea), Mr. Fernandes (Guinea-Bissau),
Mr. Suwondo
(Indonesia).
Mr. Shemirani (Iran), Mr. AI-AIi (Iraq), Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan), Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. Tuhni (Lebanon),
Mr. Elgariani (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya).
Mr. Halim
(Malaysia),
Mr. Saleem -(Maldives),
Mr. Samake
(Mali),, Mr. Kane (Mauritania),
Mr. Laraki (Morocco),
Mr. Aboul-Nasr
(Oman),
Mr. Jamal
(Qatar),
Mr. Zowawi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Djigo (Senegal),
Mr. A. M. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. Abdalla (Sudan),
Mr. Mansouri (Syrian .Arab Republic), Mr. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. Kilara (Uganda), Mr. Humaidan
(United
Arab Emirates),
Mr. Oyono (United Republic of
Cameroon), Mr. Ouedraogo (Upper Volta), Mr. Alaini
(Yemen) and Mr. Mujezinovic’ (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
zq
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2242)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13966)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Gambia, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13966)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings [2233rd to 2236th.
2238th and 2241st meetings], I invite the representatives of Israel and Pakistan to take a place at the Council table, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bahrain, Chad, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti,
Egypt, Gabon, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Cameroon, the Upper Volta, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber and I invite the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take
a place at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blain (Gambia) took a place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/14032,
which contains the text of a letter dated 30 June 1980
from the Charge d’affaires ad interim of the Observer
Mission of the Holy See addressed to the President of
the Council.
4. I have further been asked by the sponsors to
announce that the Gambia has become a sponsor of
the draft resolution contained in document S/14031.
5. I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of NORWAY.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Naik (Pakistan) took places at the Council
table, Mr. Bouzarbia (Algeria), Mr. Al-Strffar (Bah-

6. For more than three decades the attitude of Norway towards the question of Jerusalem has been
I

dictated by the special status of the City under both
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and spiritually as the Holy City of
three world religions.
I;

14. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The
United States is deeply committed to making practical
progress towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East which would permit the people of all faiths to live
in peace in an undivided Jerusalem. We strongly believe that Jerusalem must become a city of peace,
undivided, with free access for people of all faiths.
We also believe that its status should be determined in
the course of the negotiations for a comprehensive
peace. The, process of achieving a durable peace requires negotiation among the parties. Only in the’give
and take of negotiation can solutions be worked oui
with which all parties to anagreement can live in dignity
and at peace with each other.
?’
15. In recent weeks and months we have faced in
the Council a series of debates on issues related to the
Middle East. These debates and the unilateral actions
of the parties have the effect, if not the intention, of
undermining tIie one active negotiation currently in
progress. s
I’
16. Progress in any negotiation will be more difficult so long as we are expgnding our energy on the
treadmill of actions and reactions, resulting in resolutions in the Council, rather than devoting those energies to a realistic process of negotiation.

7. The special status and international rkgime of Jerusalem is defined in General Assembly resolutions 181
(Ii), 194 (III) and 303 (IV). This status was at the outset recognized by the Government of Israel. The
special status of Jerusalem was also recognized in the
Protocol signed at Lausanne on 12 May 1949by Israel
and its Arab neighbours.’
8. My Government has consistently supported those
resolutions as well as the relevant Security Council
resolutions on Jerusalem. Furthermore, Norway has
consistently maintained the view that the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,* applies to
all the territories occupied by Israel as a result of the
hostilities in 1967, including the part of Jerusalem
occupied by Israel in that year.
9. In our view, the final status of the City of Jerusalem can be settled only through a comprehensive
solution to the Middle East conflict. Such a solution
would have to maintain and guarantee the free access
to the Holy Places and places of worship for the followers of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. P&ding
such a comprehensive solution, my Government,
together with the overwhelming majority df the international community, has opposed all unilateral steps
whjch might alter the status of Jerusalem. Such steps
would constitute a serious obstacle to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
:
10. Thus, supporting the main thrust of the draft
resolution before us-and viewing the developments
in Jerusalem in the context of the urgent need for a
comprehensive peace settlement-my delegation will
cast a positive vote, although we do not associate
ourselves with each and every formulation of the
resolution. In particular, we want to be on record as
stating that in our view the steps called for in operative
paragraph 6 are not such measures as are envisaged
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

17. The United States, Israel and Egypt are currently engaged in a process of,negotiations designed
to provide full autonomy to the inhabitants of the
West Bank and Gaza. Those negotiations, under the
Camp David accords, are designed to resolve the Palestinian problem in all of its aspects, while fully protecting the security of Israel. They are the first effort
in 30 years aimed at ‘resolving some of the most intractable problems that stand in the way of Bjust and
lasting peace. We do not believe that resolutions which
undermine the negotiating process are consistent
with the search for a peaceful settlement to which the
Council and its members :ah*ecommitted.
18. The draft resolution before us contains a number
of deficiencies in its formulations. It does not, for
instance, root consideration of the Jerusalem issue in
the context of ihe negotiated peace envisioned in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) but rather quote.&
selectively from that resolution. It contains a provision which affirms the need for Israeli withdrawal
from territories occupied in 1967, without any reference to the other central provision of resolution 242
(1967)cIsrael’s right to secure and recognized boundaries in a just and lasting peace. Resolution 242 (1967),,
in all its parts, remains the basis for a comprehensive
peace.

11. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT of
the Council.
12. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution sponsored by three members of the Council: Bangladesh,
the Niger and Tunisia, and by 36 delegations invited to
participate in the discussion. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.

19. What is really needed is a resolution on Jerusalem which would provide a practical method for
bringing peace to the people of that City. We must
establish the basis for a negotiation to resolve the
final status of Jerusalem in the context of peace; We
must find a way to ensure in clear and unequivocal

13. I shall first give the floor to the representative of
the United States, who wishes to make a statement
before the .vote.
2

terms that the City is not again divided and that the
people pf alI faiths have free access to the Holy Places.
De .real challenge to those who seek peace in that
Holy City is to develop the basis for such a negotiation. In such a negotiation, the issues must be addressed in a more realistic manner than the impractical
call in the draft resolution for rescinding past actions.

26. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativk of
,‘r
Pakistan.
:j&
27. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): On behalf of the members
of the Islamic Conference, I wish to express our gratification over the adoption of the draft resolution contained in document S/1403 1. I also wish to express our
gratitude to the members‘ of the Council for their support of the resolution. They have once again upheld,
by categorically reaffirming, the principles of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force and
the specific status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, which
cannot be permitted to become a spoil of war.

20. At the same time, I must note that the’draft resolution in questioncontains much that is consistent with
the policy of the United States because in it are
deplored the unilateral acts which havei sought to
change the character of the City outside a negotiated
settlement. The significance of those acts .is that they
are inconsistent not only with international law but
with the very nature of negotiations essential for peace.
’
21. The position of the United States onJerusalem
has been stated consistently by successive American
Administrations, and remains as stated in *the United
Nations by Ambassador Goldberg on 14 July 19673
and by Ambassador Yost on 1July 1969[1483rd meeting]. Beyond that, the policy of the United States is
reflected in a framework for peace in the Middle East
accord agreed at Camp,David. It remains the view of
the United States that the comprehensive peace envisioned in that accord can come about’only when an
agreement has been negotiated on the final status of
Jerusalem.

28. Expressing grave concern over the legislative
steps initiated in the Knesset aimed at chansng the.
character atih status of the Holy City of Jerusalem,
the Council has once again declared that all legislative
and administrative measures and actions taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, which purport to alter
the character and status of the Holy City have no legal
authority and constitute a flagrant violation of international law. The Council has again called upon Israel
to rescind those measures and to desist forthwith from
persisting in the policy and measures affecting the
character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem.
The Council has further teaflirmed its determination,
in the event of non-compliance .by Israel with the
resolution, to examine practical ways and means in
accordance with relevant provisions of the Charter to
secure the full implementation of the resolution.

22. We do not intend to be diverted from our course
of negotiation by a series of actions and reactions
resulting in resolutions in the Council which do not
contribute to a negotiated peace. The clearest way for
us to indicate that determination is for us to abstain
in the vote on the draft resolution before the Council.

29. The comprehensive support which the rcsolution has received from the membeis of the Council
clearly demonstrates that the ‘Council is determined
to abide by its decisions, to uphold its principles and
never to acquiesce in the cynical designs by Israel to
legitimize its occupation of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. It is our
hope that the messagefrom the Council will not be lost
on Israel Zind that Israel will refrain forthwith from
carrying out its policy of the annexation of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the destruction of the historical and the
spiritual personality of the Holy City.

23. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote [S/14031].
A vote was taken

by show

of hands,

In ,favour:
Bangladesh, China, France. German
Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, NOI=way, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
apd Northern Ireland, Zambia.
: Against:
Abstaining:

30. The Council’s decision is a clear warning to Israel
and to those who support Israel, as well as to those
whose support has encouraged Israel’s belligerent
defiance of the repeated verdict of the international
community, which, if it persists, would lead to greater
violence and bloodshed, aggravating a situation
already on the brink of a major conflict. Only respect
for the decisions of the Council and the United Nations
can avert such a cataclysm and sustain hope for
achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

None.
United States of America.

The draft resolution
none, with I abstention

was adopted
by 14 votes
(resohrtion
476 (1980)).

to

24. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the United Kingdom, who has asked to speak following
the voting.

31. The decision adopted today by the Council and
the statements made in the Council are no shrill voices
of hate, incitement or prejudice, but are voices of
sanity, peace and justice. These voices represent the
will of the incemational community, which demands
respect for the rule of law in international relations and
an end to injustice against a people being denied its

25. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): My
delegation does not regard itself as committed to any
specific courses of action by the provisions of paragraph 6 of the resolution just adopted.
3

inalienable national rights and evicted from its homeland which it has inhabited since time immemorial and
where it has maintained ther.greatest spiritual tradition of monotheistic religions and developed a most
splendid culture and civilization.

the Holy Places. The text very clearly declares that
“the Jerusalem question cannot be reduced to mere
‘free access,for all to the Holy Places’ “. The statement fully underlines the deep religious significance
and spiritual value of the Holy City for Christians,
Jews and Muslims, which surpasses the interests of
any State or bilateral agreements between one State
and others. ’

32. On behalf of the members of the Islamic Conference, I wish to state our understanding that the only
practical ways and means prescribed by the Charter
to deal with non-compliance by the aggressor with the
decisions of the Council are those ,provided under
Chapter VII of the Charter.-The Council should not
hesitate to invoke the measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter if Israel disregards the decisions of the
Council and persists in its policy of annexing Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and altering the character and status of the
Holy City. The Foreign Ministers of the Islamic Conference will shortly meet in extraordinary session to
review the situation. They ,will be left with no alternative but to call for the imposition of these measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter if Israel persists in
its design to occupy permanently the Holy City.

36. Al-Quds Al-Sharif remains an ,occupied city in
the hands of an aggressor. The international community-the Islamic countries in particular-is committed to bringing an end to this occupation which is
out of harmony with the spiritual heritage of the Holy
City, the universal precepts of justice and peace and
the norms of international law.
37. Let me conclude by stressing that Muslims
throughout the world are dedicated to realizing this
objective. and to fulfilling their cherished desire to
pray in the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque of a liberated and
free Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

33. The representative of Israel has alleged that the
purpose of convening the Security Council has been to
divert attention from some other international issues.
At the same time, he’has asserted that we, the sponsors
of this debate, should have approached the question
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif with serenity and devotion. If
the Israeli representative were true to his words, he
would himself have refrained from bringing such a
bizarre insinuation into this solemn debate about a
Holy City. Al-Quds Al-Sharif evokes the deepest
reverence among Muslims throughout the world. They
regard the liberation of the Holy City as an article of
faith. Their indignation at the designs pursued by
Israel to annex the Holy City and desecrate its historical and spiritual character is immeasurable. It
was for this reason that the Islamic Foreign Ministers,
who met at Islamabad last month, issued a unanimous
call for the convening of an urgent meeting of the Council to consider the latest Israeli moves in the Knesset.
They also entrusted to the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, in his capacity as Chairman of the Islamic Foreign
Ministers, the honourable mandate of conveying the
sentiments of the Islamic nations to the Council.

38. The PRESIDENT: I call on the reoresentative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, who has asked
to speak.
39. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
In the name of the people of Jerusalem, in the name
of the Palestinian people and their representative, the
PLO, I wish to thank all those who voted in favour
of the draft resolution concerning the future of Jerusalem.
40. We express our thanks to the Chairman of the
Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, Mr. Agha
Shahi, who came personally to initiate the deliberations on this very serious issue, and also to Mr. Laraki
of Morocco.
41. We also wish to extend our thanks to the sponsors
of the draft resolution which has now been adopted,
as well as to the representative of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, the representative of Malta, and also to the
Chairman of the Non-Aligned Group.
ll
42. We are really grateful to His Holiness the Pope
that a statement was issued in L’Osservatore
Roman0
and was distributed in very timely fashion today to add
substance to our fears and to our hopes.

34. Al-Quds Al-Sharif, as the very meaning signifies,
is a sacred and noble trust which Muslims have nurtured and preserved for more than 13 centuries. It is
a most valuable spiritual heritage which they cannot be
deprived of. They will not desist from making the
highest sacrifices, as their struggle has already shown,
to save the Holy City from becoming a victim of aggression and pet-tidy. Spurious professions of permitting
access to the holy shrines cannot justify annexation of
the Holy City.

43. The resolution just adopted unanimously-and
I say “unanimously” intentionally, because we know
that the United States is in bondage now and cannot
really take a position; I will refer to that later-shows
the unanimous support of the international community
for the elements shown here: the overriding necessity
to end the prolonged occupation of Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and the
necessity of Israel’s rescinding all the acts and measures it has taken in the occupied territories, and par-

35. The Charge d’affaires of the Observer Mission
of the Holy See has distributed today in document
S/l4032 the text of an artic’.e published in the 30 June
issue of L’Osservatore
Romano
which reflects the
position of the Holy See concerning Jerusalem and
4

should be to provide guarantees for. the future of
4 million Palestinians, and not only for those residents
in the West Bank and in.Gaza. If the United States
is really interested in peace, it will -start thinking
seriously about the fate of the 2 million Palestinians
who are denied the right to return to their own homes
and to their own country.’
:
49. The representative
of the United States spoke
about resolution 242 (1967) as being the basis for a
settlement. In resolution 242 (1967) there is no word
about Palestinian rights, there is no word about selfdetermination
for the Palestinian
people and nowhere does it stress the necessity for the return of
the Palestinian
refugees to their, homes and their
property. That is why I say that the statement was
rather confused and confusing.

titularly
in the Holy City of Jerusalem. Moreover,
the international
community
is unanimous in calling
upon Israel, as the occupying Power, to abide by this
and previous Council resolutions and to desist from
pursuing the policies and measures affecting the char‘>
acter and status of the Holy City.
44. The Council met upon the request of the Islamic
Conference. The Conference will meet again in a special session early next month to consider the results of
the present deliberations.
The Conference will meet at
the ministerial level to take note of the resolution just
adopted, especially paragraph 6, in which the Council
has reaflirmed its determination
to examine practical
ways and means in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter to secure the full implementation
of the resolution.
Our understanding
is that every
single paragraph, every single sentence .and every
single word of the Charter applies. That is not up to
us to decide. That will be up to the Council to decide
at a later stage. But we shall take this resolution to
the ‘Conference as the decision of the Council.

50. Yet we were told that the framework for peace
deals with the settlement .of the Palestinian question
in all its aspects. What are the aspects of the question
of the Palestinian
people? The perpetuation
of the
exile of 2 million Palestinians outside their homes and
the perpetuation of Israeli, Zionist racist domination
with boots and bayonets for the other 2 million? If that
is what the United States understands by peace for
a people, then we beg to differ from them and we are
determined to correct their concepts.

45. The Council has unanimously asserted its rejection of the action which Israel unilaterally took in Jerusalem. The Council has unanimously
affirmed its
rejection of the Israeli diktat in the Holy Land. The
Council has unanimously
affirmed its support of the
Palestinian people.

5 1. If the United States is really interested in peace,
why does it not just revert to the peace formula that
was accepted by the General Assembly? Let us remember that on 1 October 1977, they presented a
formula, together with the co-Chairman of the peace
negotiations,
the representative of the Soviet Union,
and within 72 hours they retracted it. Are they really
interested in peace? I don’t know-1 would say that
they are not.

46. Peace, as Chairman Arafat told the General Assembly in 1974,4 starts in Palestine. If Chairman Arafat
were here today, he would say that peace and Jerusalem are inseparable.
47. The representative of the United States made a
very eloquent statement, but I would say it was rather
confusing and confused. The statement was inconsistent and not in line with what we had heard in the
statements made by Mr. Goldberg and Mr. Yost. The
representative
spoke about a comprehensive
peace
and said that the status of Jerusalem would be resolved
in the framework of a comprehensive peace. Yet, the
statement defended very eloquently the current negotiations and accused the supporters of this resolution
of trying to undermine the current negotiations. Well,
it is either comprehensive
peace or bilateral negotiations: it cannot be both. It is high time for the United
States to make up its mind. Does it want comprehensive peace in the Middle East or does it want
bilateral arrangements in the area?

52. What is the road to peace? There is only one road
to peace, namely, that the rights of all the people
should be recognized, respected and guaranteed. That
is exactly what the Camp David accords deny to the
Palestinian people. We were told about active negotiations currently taking place, How active are they?
The world was sort of traumatized or given some type
of sedative until 26 May. But what took place on
26 May? It was just another day. Apparently it is not
clear to the Government of the United States that it is
dealing with the World Zionist Organization,
which
has no intention whatsoever of bringing peace to the
Middle East. I challenge those who support the World
Zionist Organization,
whether ,it is called the Jewish
Agency or the State of Israel, to come out and say,
“Yes, it is high time to guarantee and implement the
right of the Palestinian
people to return to their
homes”. The Palestinians should be enabled to return
to their homes because, believe me, Mr. President,
with 2 million Palestinians denied that right there will
be no peace.

48. What I inferred from the statement-I
do not have
the text before me-is that the aim of the representative of the United States was to make sure that the
process of negotiation continues. My question is this:
is the aim negotiations or are negotiations a method to
reach an aim? And if so, what is that aim? If the aim
is to secure what he calls “full autonomy to the residents in the West Bank and Gaza” Iparu. 17 above],
I think that is a self-defeating
aim. As we have
explained in previous Council meetings, the aim

53. We shall take this resolution and we shall keep
under close observation how the friends or the bene5

_’

-^

:

factors of Israel will deal Wiih it when the Knesset
resumes debate on trying to. legitimize Israel’s military occupation of Jerusalem.
:
54. Mr. President, this has.been a very long month
for you. It started when the Israelis attempted to assassinate the elected Mayors ,bf Palestinian towns. It
was followed by a debate on the assassination of
Africans by South Africa. Anii while we were debating
the future of Jerusalem, th& South African racists
attacked Angola and the Iiraelis attacked southern
Lebanon, so the linkage is veiy clear. I do realize that
you have done an excellent job during this month and
I wish to commend your great ability.

I’

:

55. The PRESIDENT: Thi ‘representative of Israel
has asked to speak.

:_

56. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In+my statement this moming [2241st meeting], I pointed out that a balanced
approach required in the deliberations on the matter
before us cannot be achieved in the contentious atmosphere prevailing in the Council.

:

equally ignsred the fundamental rights and interests as
well as the legitimate concerns of Israel.
58. Israel has always recognized the existence ‘of
genuine universal interests in Jerusalem. However,
the debate that has taken place in the Council over the
last week, as well as the resolution that has emerged
from it, do, not reflect those interests. Instead, the
resolution haters to the views and interests of thbse
who have sdught all along to exploit the discussitins
here in their relentiess and ongoing warfare against
Israel. The:time has surely come for all here to recognize that exercises of this kind do not and cannot
contribute to the promotion of peace in our region.
That objective can ,be attained only through honest
dialogue and negotiation and not by deliberation con-,
ducted in an atmosphere of incitement or by rancorousi
i
and biased _’
resolutions emanating from them.
59. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers .
The Council has thus coxicluded the present stage 01
its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting

57. The resolution just adopted, with its obvious
one-sidedness and blatant bias, fuIly bears out the conclusion as to the unsuitability of the Council to address
itself in a proper and positive manner to this issue. It
is, of course, superfluous to point out that resolutions
of this kind cannot affect the realities of the situation
prevailing in Jerusalem which 1 described in detail in
my statement. This resolution serves neither the cause
of peace in the Middle East nor the genuine interests
and concerns with regard to Jerusalem, nor those of
the people of Jerusalem. The resolution comes in the
wake of a long series of other resolutions which have

-_

.’

rose ut 4.55 p.m.

NOTES
I Oflcial

Records

Ad Hoc Pulitical

of the
Committee,

General
Annex,

annexesA andB.

Assembly,

Fourth

Session

vol. II. documentAl927

2 United Nations, 7’reaty Series,

vol. 75, No. 973. p. 287.
3 Oficial
Records
of the General
Assembly,
F$th Emergence
Special Session,
Plenary
Meetings,
1554thmeeting.
“Ibid.,
Twenty-ninth
Session, Plenary
Meetings,
2282ndmeeting.

,‘.

-_

.;

Liiho in United Nations, New York

Km0

83-61462-Octolxr 1!987-2.050
