S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5493rd meeting
Friday, 21 July 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière/Mr. Duclos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Li Junhua
Mr. Ikouebe
Ms. Løj
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Haneda
Mr. De Rivero
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Taj
Ms. Wolcott Saunders

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-43915 (E)

*0643915*

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have just received letters
from the representatives of Pakistan, South Africa and
Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The representatives of Pakistan, South Africa and
Viet Nam took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The growing confrontation and bloodshed in
the region — in Lebanon and the Palestinian
territories — are causing the most serious concern in
Russia and around the world. The number of victims
among the civilian population is growing, and the
threat of a full-scale humanitarian disaster is
increasingly real.
A comprehensive assessment of the Middle East
situation was provided by participants in the Group of
Eight (G-8) Summit in Saint Petersburg. The United
Nations Security Council, having ended its involuntary
vow of silence, should make its authoritative voice
heard. We anticipate that its members will shoulder
their full responsibilities and will be strictly guided by
the principles of the Charter and by the interests of
establishing a lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region, taking into account the positions of all parties
and existing accords.
Russia has consistently been committed to
vigorously combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We reaffirm the need for immediate
and unconditional release of abducted Israeli soldiers.
Israel has a legitimate right to ensure its security.
However, the scale of the use of force, the casualties
and the destruction demonstrate that the actions stated
for achieving this purpose go far beyond a counterterrorist operation. We believe that there must be strict
compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law.

2

Our sense of alarm regarding the fate of the
civilian population in the area of hostilities was
heightened by the fact that there were hundreds of
Russian citizens at the epicentre of the conflict. We
thank the United Nations and other international
partners for helping to evacuate them.
Normalizing the situation in Lebanon and the
Palestinian territories will require a multifaceted effort
by the international community. The most important
requirement at this point is an immediate cessation of
hostilities. We support the appeal made by Prime
Minister Siniora of Lebanon. It is essential that all acts
of violence, including terrorist attacks and acts of
provocation, incitement and destruction, be brought to
an end. A ceasefire would allow civilians to freely and
safely leave the conflict zones and make it possible to
address the relevant problems through political and
diplomatic channels.
That is precisely the current focus of diplomatic
efforts by Russia, which has sent high-level
representatives to the Middle East. We will continue to
work to achieve those goals in cooperation with all
interested parties.
We are certain that there can be no military
solution to this conflict, or to any of the problems in
the Middle East. The thrust of collective diplomatic
efforts must in future be directed towards the search for
practical steps to create conditions for a prompt end to
bloodshed and to place this crisis on the track of a
political settlement.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to begin by
paying respect to the memory of the victims of
violence, whether in Lebanon, Israel or Palestine, and
expressing our deep condolences to their families for
their loss. As Greek Prime Minister Karamanlis said,
this violence — any violence — cannot be
distinguished as being good or bad. We condemn it in
its totality, unequivocally and categorically.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union.
The current situation in the Middle East is cause
for grave concern and risks having far-reaching
repercussions for the entire Middle East. Recently in
Lebanon and Israel the use of force has inflicted a blow
against the highest right — the right to human life. It
tests the conscience, the principles and the values of

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

the international community. It is high time that the
violence stop. We must return to diplomacy and create
the minimum level of trust among the people of the
area to allow for the development of a political process
of negotiation leading to a peaceful and lasting
solution. In particular, the dire humanitarian situation
and the extensive destruction of civilian infrastructure,
along with the indiscriminate taking of civilian life,
require the immediate attention of the international
community. It is obvious that a situation as serious as
the current one cannot continue.
We deplore the suffering of the civilian
population, whether in Lebanon, in Israel or in the
occupied territories. We call upon all parties to use the
utmost restraint, and we call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to prevent further loss
of human life. United Nations agencies and
humanitarian workers should be allowed to have access
to southern Lebanon to assess the needs of the civilian
population and deliver the humanitarian assistance that
is needed. In this respect, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to establish safe corridors to allow
humanitarian workers and relief supplies to reach the
civilian population.
We call for the immediate and unconditional
release of the abducted Israeli soldiers, as well as for
the immediate cessation of all attacks on Israeli cities
and towns. We recognize Israel’s legitimate right to
self-defence. However, in exercising that right, Israel
must abide by its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law. Actions
contrary to international law cannot serve anyone’s
legitimate security concerns. In this respect, we repeat
our call on Israel not to resort to the disproportionate
use of force. In our view, that will not solve the
existing problems.
The sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
political independence of Lebanon must be
safeguarded and respected. The air and sea blockade of
the country must be immediately lifted, and the
stability of the country, as well as of its legitimate
Government, must not be further undermined.
At the same time, it is imperative that the
Lebanese Government be supported so that it can take
immediate and effective strong action to prevent
further attacks against Israel by Hizbollah. We urge the
full implementation of Security Council resolutions

06-43915

1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), including the disbanding
and disarming of all militias.
The proposals made yesterday by the SecretaryGeneral in his briefing to the Council constitute a
good, sound basis for a sustainable solution and merit
urgent consideration by the Council. The Security
Council must now take immediate action, because
further delays and silence will impair our collective
credibility.
At this critical juncture, we believe that, above
all, we should not lose sight of our agreed common
vision for a lasting, comprehensive and viable solution
of the Palestinian question, which lies at the heart of
the whole Middle East conflict.
Greece remains committed to the achievement of
such a solution, based on all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace, leading to the existence of two States, Israel and
an independent, viable Palestine, living side by side
with each other, in peace and security, within
internationally recognized borders.
In this context, we firmly support the position of
the Quartet that all members of the Palestinian
Government must be committed to non-violence, to the
recognition of Israel’s right to exist and to the
acceptance of previous agreements and obligations,
including the road map.
It is on that basis that the international
community stands ready to continue to support the
Palestinians in their quest to achieve their goals of
building the institutions of a democratic State and
economic and social development.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation once again deplores the escalation of
violence in the Middle East and the loss of hundreds of
human lives. This escalation of violence and its
extension to Lebanon was provoked by an attack by
Hizbollah, an act of aggression unacceptable to any
State and which prompted a military reaction by Israel
in Lebanon.
The actions of Hizbollah aggravated the spiral of
violence in the Middle East, which has been
deteriorating since 25 June as a result of a similar act
for which the Hamas-led Government of the
Palestinian Authority was responsible.

3

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

Those abductions and attacks, whose similarity is
not coincidental, prompted in both cases a military
response by the Israel Defense Force to combat the
actions of armed groups that have not renounced
violence — groups that form the Government, or part
of the Government, of the Palestine Authority and of
Lebanon, respectively.

We firmly support the actions being undertaken
through the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) to bring about the release of the Israeli soldiers
kidnapped by terrorist groups in Lebanon and in Gaza
and to secure their immediate repatriation to Israel, as
well as the freeing of elected Palestinian officials who
were recently illegally detained by Israel.

We recognize the right of Israel, which is
constantly being attacked by missiles launched by
Hizbollah, to defend itself. Nevertheless, it should
exercise that right while complying with the principles
and norms of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as with international humanitarian law, avoiding the
disproportionate use of force, which is causing the
deaths of many innocent civilians, damaging civil
infrastructure and creating a humanitarian crisis.

Furthermore, we are in favour of the substantive
reinforcement of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and its transformation into a force that will
help the Lebanese authorities to guarantee the full
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).

The Security Council should address the conflict
in Lebanon with a double action. The first action
should consist in achieving as soon as possible a
cessation of hostilities and, in any case, while this is
being achieved, bringing about an immediate
humanitarian truce to avoid further deterioration of the
situation of the Lebanese population.
The Council’s second action should be to achieve
a lasting peace agreement, in accordance with
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) — in other
words, an agreement that re-establishes the sovereignty
of Lebanon over all of its territory, including the
disarmament of Hizbollah and of all the forces that
operate outside the authority of the Lebanese State. We
therefore support the elements proposed by the
Secretary-General and the special mission dispatched
to the Middle East, and we are confident that those
elements will be duly taken into account by all parties
concerned in order to resolve the crisis.
Likewise, with regard to Palestine, it is
indispensable to recall here that any agreement should
take into account the requirements that the Quartet has
made of the Government of the Palestinian Authority.
In other words, Hamas must recognize Israel, renounce
violence and comply with the agreements previously
accepted by the Palestinian Authority itself. A
negotiated solution for the peaceful coexistence of two
States, Israel and Palestine, with secure and
internationally recognized borders is a utopia so long
as one of the parties denies the right of the other to
exist.

4

While the cessation of hostilities is being
achieved, it is indispensable that we deal with the
humanitarian crisis that is being suffered by the
population of Lebanon. According to the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, there are half a
million people affected by the conflict, including those
who have been internally displaced. Further, more than
70,000 people have had to be evacuated from Beirut,
while 115,000 third-country nationals are still in
Lebanon. According to the ICRC, more than 100 towns
and cities in Lebanon have been attacked by air, sea
and land.
Also, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has gathered
information suggesting that 300 people have died and a
further 860 have been injured, including civilians and
militants, and that there has been widespread
destruction of public infrastructure, including
hospitals, road networks, bridges, fuel stores, airports
and seaports.
In the face of this dramatic humanitarian
situation, Peru calls for an immediate humanitarian
truce, a truce that would permit the establishment of
air, sea and land corridors for immediate access for the
humanitarian agencies and the evacuation of civilians
and third-country nationals. We are sure that we can
count on the cooperation of Israel and Lebanon in this.
Such a truce is necessary to avoid further loss of
innocent life and further suffering of the population. It
is also necessary to ensure that the humanitarian
agencies have access to those who need them in the
present moment. And, finally, it is necessary to take
this first step against violence.
Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank Mr. Vijay Nambiar and his team for the report on
their mission to the Middle East. We commend the

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

team for being able to cover much ground within a
short time, and we are encouraged by their efforts,
together with other diplomatic initiatives that are being
undertaken to explore ways to defuse the crisis. We
also thank Mr. Egeland for his update on the
humanitarian crisis in Lebanon and Palestine.
We are alarmed and saddened by the destruction
of Lebanon and Gaza in the last 10 days, resulting in
death and injury to hundreds of innocent civilians.
Over half a million people have been displaced by the
ongoing war, disrupting the life of the Lebanese and
Palestinian people with devastating consequences. As
mentioned by Mr. Egeland, essential supplies are
running out and a huge humanitarian crisis is
unfolding, which calls for an urgent response from the
international community.
Mr. President, since we have been discussing this
issue for the past week, and in order to heed your call
for short statements, we will not repeat what we said in
previous meetings and will limit ourselves to a few
comments.
First, while calling again for maximum restraint,
we believe that a plan to end the crisis can be
assembled quickly. The elements proposed by the
Secretary-General yesterday on practical action aimed
at stemming the spiralling violence have our full
support. In addition, we believe that it is extremely
essential that the Security Council respond, preferably
through a resolution preceded by a press statement,
along the lines discussed in our previous meetings.
Secondly, an immediate requirement is to bring
the hostilities to an end in order to stop further loss of
life and suffering. We have taken note of the proposal
by Mr. Nambiar to secure some form of cessation of
hostilities while working on an agreement for a
ceasefire, and we rally ourselves to the idea. We also
hope that Mr. Egeland’s request for the establishment
of corridors to Lebanon and inside Lebanon will be
granted.
Thirdly, with regard to the Blue Line, we strongly
recommend the strengthening of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to make it more
responsive and effective. UNIFIL cannot discharge its
mandate in its current form, as the operative
circumstances have changed. We therefore call for a
more robust force with a new concept of operation and
powers, if not immediately, then soon enough.

06-43915

Fourthly, we believe that it is not too early to
begin reflecting on the mammoth task of reconstructing
Lebanon. In this regard, we support the idea of
organizing an international conference to consider
timelines for the implementation of the Taif
Agreement, together with resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1680 (2006). The conference should also focus on the
delineation of the border with Israel and resolve the
dispute over Sheba’a Farms.
Lastly, we wish to reaffirm the need and urgency
to find a lasting, comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question based on relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Quartet road map.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): First, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his public briefing
yesterday and for his proposals. We are studying his
proposals urgently. I should like also to thank
Mr. Nambiar for his briefing on his very important
mission, and also Mr. Egeland for his briefing on the
United Nations efforts to deliver much-needed
humanitarian relief.
The United Kingdom fully subscribes to the
statement that will be delivered shortly by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.
The United Kingdom is gravely concerned by the
escalating crisis in the Middle East. It threatens the
wider security of the region and is causing huge harm
to the civilian population, with civilian casualties
mounting, particularly in Lebanon. We fully echo the
Secretary-General’s call yesterday. Hostilities must
stop.
I will focus first of all on the situation in
Lebanon. We offer our condolences to the
Governments of Lebanon and of Israel for the losses of
civilian life and to the families of all those affected. We
were also very concerned to hear from the SecretaryGeneral that two United Nations personnel are still
missing in south Lebanon.
The United Kingdom appreciates the pressure
that both the Israeli and Lebanese Governments are
under at this very difficult time. Both have a
responsibility to help to end the crisis. In that respect,
we welcome the Lebanese representative’s statement
today of Lebanon’s desire to extend its authority over
all of its territory.

5

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

It is important to remember that this crisis was
precipitated by Hizbollah. Its militants crossed into
Israel and killed eight Israeli soldiers and kidnapped
two more. This is a calculated attempt by Hizbollah to
further destabilize the region, without the slightest
regard for the potential impact of its actions on the
people of Lebanon, the Lebanese Government and the
wider region.
The quickest and the easiest way to end the
current crisis would be for the soldiers to be freed. We
reiterate our call for their immediate and unconditional
release.
Hizbollah does not act alone. As other speakers
have said, behind it, lending support and giving
direction, are Syria and Iran. Syria provides material
support to Hizbollah and facilitates the transfer of
weapons, including thousands of missiles, which
appear to be supplied by Iran to Hizbollah.
Ultimately, long-term stability will be possible
only if Syria and Iran end their interference in
Lebanese internal affairs, in accordance with
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). I should like
to take the opportunity of this statement to urge Iran
and Syria to use their influence to rein Hizbollah in.
Against this difficult and dangerous background,
the focus of the international community must be on
what action can be taken to bring about a durable
ceasefire and help the Lebanese people. The United
Kingdom is seriously concerned by the number of
deaths, casualties and displaced persons that have
resulted from this conflict. We have repeatedly and
forcefully made clear to Israel that it must act with
restraint — the utmost restraint. Israel has every right
to defend itself against these terrible acts of
provocation, but we call on it to make greater efforts to
avoid civilian casualties.
We welcome the United Nations efforts to deliver
humanitarian relief, as outlined to us by Jan Egeland.
The European Union is also ready to play a key role, as
the situation on the ground allows. The United
Kingdom has agreed to provide £2 million in
immediate humanitarian assistance to Lebanon. We are
also arranging for two humanitarian advisers and
construction advisers to be sent to the region as soon as
possible to assess what more we can do to help.
It is clear from aid agencies in Lebanon that they
need immediate access to the displaced and the

6

wounded. They need that access to be safe and secure,
not under threat of attack, in order to bring relief to
those who need it most. We fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the immediate establishment of
humanitarian corridors. We welcome what the Israeli
representative has said today about evacuation and
what other people have said about getting these
humanitarian corridors in place. But it is crucial that
everyone on the ground cooperate in putting in place
not only evacuation facilities but also ways of ensuring
that humanitarian assistance gets to the Lebanese
civilians on the ground.
We all agree that the hostilities must end, but, as
we have heard from the Secretary-General’s team,
there are serious obstacles to reaching a ceasefire or
even to reducing the violence quickly. That
underscores the need to create the conditions necessary
for a ceasefire which is both credible and durable. We
welcome the proposals put forward by the SecretaryGeneral, in particular to the effect that the Israeli
soldiers must be released immediately and that
Hizbollah must end its attacks on Israel. We must also
help the Government of Lebanon have complete
control over all Lebanese territory.
In that context, the United Kingdom is working
with key partners, including the United Nations, on
ideas for an international force to support the
Government of Lebanon in implementing resolution
1559 (2004) in order to ensure security in southern
Lebanon.
Beyond the immediate crisis, as the SecretaryGeneral said, we need a political framework for
Lebanon’s future. The United Kingdom is committed to
working with him to give effect to this as quickly as
possible.
We heard also from Mr. Nambiar and
Mr. Egeland about the situation in the occupied
territories. The United Kingdom also has deep
concerns about the situation in Gaza. The escalation in
violence since the 25 June attack at the Kerem Shalom
crossing has caused great suffering on both sides and
mounting casualties. We offer our condolences to both
sides for their civilian losses. We reiterate our call for
the immediate and unconditional release of Corporal
Shalit. We also condemn the continued rocket attacks
from Gaza on Israeli towns. We have called on the
Palestinian Authority to prevent all terrorist attacks,
including the rocket attacks, and to work for the release

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

of Corporal Shalit. We very much welcome the work
President Abbas is doing to achieve that.
The United Kingdom continues to have serious
concerns regarding the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
I repeat — we recognize Israel’s right to defend itself,
but we insist that its actions must be proportionate and
in accordance with international law.
We need an urgent end to the current crisis, as
many speakers today have said eloquently. At the same
time, and as Mr. Nambiar heard from many
interlocutors in the region, real peace can come only
through a lasting settlement. Our priority must be to
create the conditions for an early resumption of
negotiations. The events that we have witnessed around
Israel’s borders in recent days have reaffirmed the
great urgency of constructing a lasting settlement and
the perils of assuming that there is somehow a military
solution to this conflict.
We believe that negotiation is the only viable way
to move the peace process forward. Our goal remains a
negotiated two-State solution achieved through the
road map. There is no alternative to this, and it is
incumbent on all of us to work together to find a way
through the current crisis to get back onto that track.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): At the outset, I should like
to thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Nambiar, and Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland for their briefings. Denmark, too, aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered later by the
representative of Finland speaking on behalf of the
European Union.
Last week, I expressed to the Council Denmark’s
concern that the prospects for lasting peace in the
Middle East were fading. Today, those prospects seem
more remote than ever. The biggest challenge facing
the Council, the United Nations and the broader
international community is to work with the parties
involved to bring about lasting peace and stability in
the Middle East and to bring back hope to the people of
the region.
Last week, we condemned in the strongest terms
those behind the kidnapping of the Israeli soldiers and
the firing of missiles into Israel. We stressed that such
actions are simply irresponsible and unacceptable.
Without a doubt, Hizbollah bears full responsibility for
those deadly crimes. But I want to reiterate another
critical point: These extremist elements, and those that

06-43915

support them, are equally responsible. What we have
seen and heard over the past few days has only
confirmed that those behind the actions are opponents
of stability and lasting peace.
Being attacked, as Israel was, grants the right to
self-defence. However, defensive actions must be in
line with international law. Israel must ensure that its
response is proportional and measured and is carried
out with full respect for a State’s obligation to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure in times of war.
Denmark is gravely concerned about the mounting toll
of civilian casualties and the extensive damage to the
civilian infrastructure. Israel must show utmost
restraint and avoid disproportionate action.
Also, Denmark stands firmly behind Prime
Minister Siniora’s Government in Beirut. A failure of
his Government could result in further polarization and
radicalization. The overall challenge is to avoid the
strengthening of extremism in general in the region.
Trapped in the middle of these grim hostilities are
the Lebanese people and other countries’ citizens.
Their democratically elected Government is struggling
to cope with the burden. The humanitarian crisis is
deepening with each passing hour. Under-SecretaryGeneral Jan Egeland’s gripping assessment of the
gravity of the situation underscores the urgent need for
international action. We therefore strongly hope that
agreement can be reached urgently to create
humanitarian corridors to provide desperately needed
assistance to those under siege and to other countries’
citizens. My Government is ready to respond
immediately to the United Nations flash appeal that is
being prepared.
Denmark agrees that there is an urgent need to
stop hostilities and return to the political process. At
the same time, there can be no return to the status quo
ante. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
efforts and hope that all relevant parties will engage in
the process and support it. The concrete proposals are
still being studied carefully.
The best solution lies in supporting the Lebanese
Government’s efforts to restore full sovereignty over
all its territories and to exercise the sole right to use of
force on that territory. That is essential if Security
Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) are
to be fully implemented.

7

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

We agree that a stabilization force will be needed
to assist the Government of Lebanon in that
considerable task. Such a force can be effective only if
all relevant parties agree with its deployment and
mandate. We pledge to work with the Council and the
Secretary-General to develop the concept of such a
force.
In my statement today, I have not mentioned the
worrying developments in Gaza, since I did that last
week. But a lasting solution must thoroughly address
all of the outstanding issues in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, in order to be
viable.
In conclusion, I would like to repeat that it is of
paramount importance that all parties involved in the
conflict refrain from any action that would inflame an
already critical situation.
Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
specifically the tragedy in Lebanon. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser, Mr. Vijay
Nambiar, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, for their briefings.
We are appalled by the violence that is going on
and saddened that the United Nations Security Council
has not been able to do the minimum required of it
under the United Nations Charter, which is to call for
an immediate ceasefire. We totally reject the deliberate
and systematic undermining of international law and
international humanitarian law and affirm in the
strongest terms the time-honoured moral values of
justice, equality and respect for the sanctity of human
life to which we are all equally bound.
The methods and actions of Hamas and Hizbollah
are objectionable. Peaceful settlement rather than
violent resistance to the occupation is the answer. The
captured Israeli soldiers deserve and must obtain their
freedom immediately. But fairness also demands that
we do not pretend that there are no innocent victims of
Israeli operations, the so-called collateral damage.
More often than not, we hear of pre-emptive actions
but are offered little evidence. No human life should be
so easily dismissed as collateral damage. If we lower
the standards of international norms of behaviour, it
will come back to haunt us. So we must always be
vigilant and consistent in defending our shared values.

8

Lest our position be misunderstood, let me
emphasize that it is not Israel’s sovereign right to
protect its civilian population and territorial integrity
from aggression that is at issue. It is the manner in
which Israel, a respected democracy in the Middle
East, has gone about exercising that right. The
asymmetry in the death toll is marked and disturbing,
and it is growing steadily. Lebanon is under complete
siege, its land, air and sea under a relentless Israeli
blockade. The reality of Israel’s absolute military
dominance in the region belies the oft-repeated claim
that this powerful country must take extreme measures
to protect itself, even if that means laying waste
another sovereign State that obviously is very weak.
What can justify the sudden displacement of over
half a million people and the death of over 300 others,
including children? While some countries have the
means to evacuate their privileged citizens from the
relentless bombardment and wanton destruction going
on, where do the displaced Lebanese go? Is this war
really about dismantling Hizbollah? The use of force to
combat terrorism has often proved to be
counterproductive.
My delegation is deeply concerned by reports of
the conditions imposed by Israel on the troops of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as
lucidly described by the Secretary-General yesterday.
As a member of the United Nations, Israel has an
obligation to ensure the safety and security of all
United Nations personnel, who should not be made to
suffer for their selfless response to international duty.
It is regrettable that Israel has rejected as
premature the clarion call by the Secretary-General and
the international community for an immediate
cessation of hostilities. That was to allow diplomacy to
assume a central role in the search for a lasting
solution to the conflict. We are convinced that it is in
the interest of all parties to heed the SecretaryGeneral’s call, because there can be no military
solution to the crisis. Continued fighting would only
worsen the situation and cause further disenchantment.
In that connection, the set of proposals
announced by the Secretary-General yesterday merits
serious consideration, and my delegation fully supports
them. The proposed deployment of an expanded
international peacekeeping force along the Blue Line is
of utmost importance. We hope the parties will agree to
that deployment. However, peacekeeping is one thing,

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

while counter-insurgency is entirely different. The
effectiveness of such a mission would depend mainly
on its military capabilities. Certainly, such a force must
be larger in size than UNIFIL and must have a broader
mandate if it is to be stronger than the militias on the
ground. In the meantime, we await the details on the
exact location, size and composition, as well as the
mandate, of the proposed mission.
In conclusion, I must reiterate my delegation’s
expectation that this Council will live up to its
responsibilities under the Charter as the organ with
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It must not allow its
integrity to be compromised by failing to take a firm
position on the situation in Lebanon, and it must be
seen to be doing so by the interested public.
It is not too much to ask of this Council, which
has been known to be vocal and ready to act on
situations deemed as potential threats to peace and
security elsewhere, to react to an on-going war in the
most volatile region of the world.
The minimum that the Council can do is to
support the Secretary-General’s appeal, which has been
echoed by some other world leaders, for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and examine the other elements
of his proposals dispassionately. It is important that we
also assist the Lebanese Government to establish full
control over its territory and to abide by its
commitment to implement resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1680 (2006). We should bear in mind, though, that we
cannot attain comprehensive peace in Lebanon unless
it is linked with the broader Middle East question, at
the core of which is the Palestinian issue.
Ten days into the conflict in Lebanon, the
Council has remained silent. By its silence or perceived
paralysis, the Council is lending credence to
accusations of selectivity and double standards in its
consideration of issues. Who can fault those who are
agitating for a comprehensive reform of the Security
Council?
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): In
recent weeks my delegation has frequently had
opportunity to express its views on the current serious
crisis in the Middle East. I shall therefore limit myself
to commenting on what we consider to be priority
aspects.

06-43915

First of all, with regard to the immediate causes
of the current crisis in the Middle East, we reiterate
once again that the primary responsibility falls on
Hamas and Hizbollah due to their provocative and
irresponsible actions in recent months. Argentina has
already unequivocally condemned those actions and
the rocket attacks against Israeli territory, which have
caused death and injuries to numerous innocent Israeli
civilians. I take this opportunity to reiterate that those
attacks should stop and that kidnapped Israeli soldiers
should be immediately and unconditionally released.
In recent weeks we also expressed our serious
concern about the disproportionate and excessive use
of force by Israel. We reiterate our condemnation of the
military actions that have caused the deaths of
hundreds of innocent Lebanese and Palestinian
civilians and the destruction of basic infrastructure in
the Gaza Strip and on Lebanese territory.
There is no doubt that all of that constitutes a new
historic tragedy in the region.
Argentina recognizes that Israel has a legitimate
right to self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter. However, we believe that such a right
should be exercised in conformity with international
law, in particular with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and respect for the human rights of
the population. It is clear that those who suffer the
most in the Middle East are the innocent civilians, be
they Lebanese, Palestinian or Israeli. Protecting them
should be the priority of the Security Council and the
international community.
Argentina believes that immediate measures
should be taken to alleviate the suffering of the
Lebanese civilian population. The first step to that end
should be a cessation of hostilities and the granting of
access to humanitarian organizations to all affected
areas. We are witnessing a very serious humanitarian
crisis. The establishment of humanitarian corridors is
essential so that assistance can reach the affected
population, as well as to carry out the necessary
evacuations.
We believe that the Security Council should act
urgently and declare a cessation of hostilities. That has
been Argentina’s position since the beginning of the
conflict. Unfortunately, our call has not been repeated
by all the other members of the Security Council.

9

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

While seeking a solution to the most urgent
issues, we should also work to create the foundations
for a lasting and sustainable ceasefire. We therefore
believe that the proposals presented to the
Governments of Israel and Lebanon by the SecretaryGeneral’s envoys are an appropriate basis for solving
the problems linked to southern Lebanon and for fully
implementing Security Council resolutions 425 (1978),
426 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). We are
prepared to work on the basis of those and other ideas
with a view to drawing up a draft resolution that sets
out the framework for a lasting solution to the conflict
between Israel and Lebanon.

resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), as well the road map, the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace.

I cannot fail to mention my country’s concern
about the situation regarding the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and its personnel.
We remind the parties of the need to guarantee the
safety and security of United Nations personnel.
Likewise, we believe that UNIFIL should be able to
carry out its mandate, and it should therefore be
allowed freedom of movement.

Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this public debate on the situation
in the Middle East, which is currently experiencing the
horrors of war. There is nothing routine about this
monthly meeting, given that it is taking place against
the backdrop of open warfare in both Gaza and
Lebanon.

With regard to the Gaza Strip, I would like to
reiterate Argentina’s concern about the suffering of the
civilian population. We believe that right away a
package of measures should be considered that
addresses an end to the launching of Qassam rockets
against Israeli territory by Palestinian groups, the
release of the Israeli soldiers, the release of Palestinian
officials and legislators, the cessation of the excessive
use of force by Israel, the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from the territory and the acceptance by the
Government of the Palestinian Authority of the three
principles set out by the Quartet.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is also very
serious and has worsened even more as a result of the
extensive destruction of civilian infrastructure of the
territory. We once again demand that the crossing
points be reopened immediately to allow for the
importing of food, medicine, other basic goods and
fuel. We call on the donor community to respond
generously to the humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip.
We believe that it is important to recall that the
underlying cause of these conflicts and of other
unresolved situations in the Middle East is the absence
of comprehensive regional peace. Argentina therefore
once again calls for renewed efforts aimed at achieving
a just and lasting peace based on the resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular, as we have said,

10

The Security Council has an important role to
play in all the aspects I have referred to. We should rise
to the challenge, act with determination and resolve to
fulfil our responsibilities regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security. The lives of hundreds
of innocent civilians and the prospects for peace in the
Middle East depend upon our immediate and decisive
action. I believe the time has come to take urgent
action.

My delegation would like to thank Mr. Nambiar
for the briefing he has given us regarding the mission
to the region carried out by the high-level team. I
should also like to thank Mr. Egeland for the
information he has provided to us about the
humanitarian crisis.
It is undeniable that the situation in the Middle
East in recent days is greatly alarming. It is also urgent
that an effective response from the international
community be provided to relieve the suffering of
civilians, particularly women and children, hostages
and victims of acts of war of unprecedented violence
both in Lebanon and Palestine and in Israel.
We already had an opportunity in this Chamber to
say what we think about this situation. Today, the time
has come to seek appropriate solutions. The destructive
violence must rapidly give way to a peaceful
settlement and to an end of fighting, which is a
precondition for a peaceful solution but is above all a
necessary condition to relieve the unspeakable plight of
the civilians in that region.
The Security Council, fortified by the primary
responsibility that falls to it within the framework of
maintaining international peace and security, must
clearly and firmly call upon the protagonists to the

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

conflict to immediately cease hostilities. That is the
least that we can do today.
My delegation believes that it is unacceptable,
indeed inconceivable, that the Council would maintain
a prolonged silence, given the increased deterioration
of a situation with dramatic consequences for the life
of civilian populations. It is unacceptable that we
would indulge in speculations on the outcome of an
armed conflict because experience tells us, particularly
in this region, that no military victory will produce a
sustainable resolution of the complicated issues facing
the States and entities of the Middle East.
More than ever, we must heed the moving appeals
of leaders and populations in the region and not
abandon them to their own fate. We must contribute to
easing their suffering, particularly by establishing
conditions by which they can move about and have
access to emergency assistance via humanitarian
corridors in Lebanon.
Yes, we are duty-bound, in order not to be
complicit, to respond to the distress of innocent
populations who are trapped by a pattern of war and
extremism. My delegation calls upon all parties to the
conflict to comply with their highest obligation to
protect civilians against attack, in accordance with the
principles of international humanitarian law.
Yes, we must also, with a view to a lasting
settlement, give diplomacy a chance to seek a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict in
the Middle East, for which the instruments have
already been created and a road map established. In
this respect, my delegation greatly encourages the
many and varying initiatives that are emerging and that
need to be channelled.
Already, our delegation welcomes the personal
involvement of the Secretary-General and welcomes
the avenues for a settlement explored by the high-level
team that he sent to that region. The initial conclusions
that were presented to us yesterday are, to our mind, a
good basis for a settlement of the crisis in that they
give priority to the need for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, which is a precondition to political
negotiations and diplomatic efforts on all of the
problems set out, which need to be considered
concomitantly.
That is an approach which would make it possible
to reduce tensions and open the door to a lasting

06-43915

settlement of the crisis in the Middle East based on
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road
map and the principles of international law.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.
I would like to thank Mr. Nambiar and
Mr. Egeland for their statements, which supplement the
Secretary-General’s very interesting speech yesterday.
I wish to state that my delegation fully subscribes
to the speech that will be made by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.
France is extremely worried at the escalation of
violence in the Middle East. In Lebanon, Hizbollah
bears responsibility for the unleashing of hostilities,
and we condemn in the strongest terms the continued
firing of rockets on Israeli cities that blindly kill and
wound civilians. But we also condemn the
disproportionate response by Israel, whose military
operations are holding the Lebanese people hostage,
killing large numbers of civilians and causing
substantial material damage in Lebanon.
France solemnly reiterates its call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities to spare people
further suffering and give the search for a diplomatic
solution a chance. For now, the parties must observe
the utmost restraint and refrain from any action that
might put civilians in greater danger. As President
Chirac said, humanitarian corridors in Lebanon itself
and between Lebanon and the outside are immediately
essential in order to guarantee the safety of displaced
persons who are trying to leave Lebanon and to deliver
humanitarian aid.
At the same time, the international community
must urgently tackle the task of finding a solution to
the conflict. We know that in order to be effective and
lasting, the solution will have to include, on the one
hand, the disarmament of Hizbollah or to begin the
neutralization of the threat it poses to Israel, and, on
the other, the extension of control of the Government
and Lebanese army to the south. How is this to be
achieved?
While the purely incentive-based approached we
tried with resolution 1559 (2004) did not produce the
desired effects on this point, we are convinced that
there can be no military solution. Israeli military
operations are undoubtedly weakening Hizbollah’s

11

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

military capabilities, but they are also fuelling hate,
and they risk reinforcing its audience in Lebanon and
elsewhere. By systematically destroying the country’s
infrastructure, strangling its economy and targeting the
Lebanese army, Israel is greatly weakening the
Lebanese State. We must think of the day after, when
we will have the greatest need for a strong Lebanese
State, able to count on a credible army in order to
extend its authority throughout its territory.
The Secretary-General reported yesterday to the
Council on his efforts and those of the mission he sent
to the Middle East. He presented us with parameters
and leads for resolving the crisis. We are pleased to
observe that they are close to the ideas that France has
developed. They provide the basis for developing a
coherent solution to the crisis. The Council must face
up to its responsibilities. It must intensify its efforts
and begin as soon as possible developing a resolution
that will offer the framework for a lasting settlement to
the crisis.
As far as the Palestinian territories are concerned,
France is also extremely concerned at the continued
deterioration in the security and humanitarian situation,
especially in the Gaza Strip. While recognizing Israel’s
legitimate right to defend itself against terrorism — in
particular against Qassam rockets, which nothing
justifies — we call on the Israeli Government to
exercise the utmost restraint, particularly to protect
Palestinian civilians. We condemn the recent
disproportionate military operations against Palestinian
towns and refugee camps in the Gaza Strip, which
resulted in a heavy human toll, especially among
civilians, and considerable damage to basic
infrastructure, vital equipment and institutions of the
Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority, for its part, must
immediately take all necessary measures to stop the
firing of rockets and acts of violence against Israel and
its citizens, and to encourage the release of the
kidnapped Israeli soldier. We reaffirm that the Hamasled Government must adhere to the three principles
laid down by the Quartet, namely, renunciation of
violation, recognition of Israel and acceptance of the
agreements that have been signed.
It remains essential to protect the Palestinian
Authority as an institution and forerunner of a State
and to guarantee the possibilities for future dialogue
and negotiation. In this regard, we again call on Israel

12

to release the members of the Government and of the
Legislative Council and Palestinian political leaders.
The agreement on the crossing points, particularly
those of Rafah and Karni, must be implemented and
respected.
In the longer term, the international community
must not lose sight of the objectives set out in the road
map. France remains deeply concerned about the fact
that, although the International Court of Justice issued
its advisory opinion on the construction of the wall in
the West Bank two years ago, the settlement policy and
the construction of the separation wall within the
occupied Palestinian territory are continuing. Such
practices compromise the future establishment of a
viable Palestinian State.
It is essential that all the parties take urgent
measures to put an end to the hostilities and respect
civilians, who are the main victims of and hostage to
the conflicts in the Middle East. Diplomatic efforts by
the Secretary-General and by a number of countries are
under way with a view to helping to bring about a
resolution of both crises, which is essential for the
future of the region and beyond. France will continue
to work tirelessly to promote a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement, based on the rule of law, so that the
States and peoples of the region will at last be able to
live in peace and security.
I resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Security Council — the body entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security — is meeting against the backdrop of war
crimes and crimes against humanity being perpetrated
by Israel against the territory and the people of
Lebanon and of Palestine. Those crimes have not
spared Arab nationals, foreign tourists or even a soldier
working for the international force deployed on the
border between Lebanon and Israel. Those whose lives
were not directly threatened by the actions of the
terrorist State have been denied the right to live in
conditions of peace, safety and stability and prevented
from satisfying the most basic daily needs, including
attending school and university and seeking treatment
in hospitals.

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

Today more than ever, the Security Council is
called upon to hold Israel accountable for its crimes
and to bring their perpetrators and masterminds to
international justice. The degree to which Israel and
those who cover for it and support it distort facts and
manipulate words is shocking, while the value
accorded to the human lives that are being wasted
depends on circumstance. An Israeli life has a different
value and a different degree of dignity from others,
especially if the others are Arab or Muslim. The right
to life is not considered to be the same in both cases.
According to that distorted view, therefore, the Israeli
prisoner’s suffering is not the same as the suffering of
each of the 700,000 Arab and Palestinian prisoners — I
repeat, the 700,000 Arab and Palestinian prisoners —
thrown into Israeli prisons since 1967. The suffering of
hundreds of thousands of Arabs is not equal to that of
one Israeli prisoner. The suffering of a single Israeli
individual is greater than the suffering of the whole
population in Palestine, Lebanon and Syrian.
The distortion of facts does not stop with ethical
or moral considerations, but extends to include legal
aspects. Israeli claims, and the claims of those who
support it in its hostile right to self-defence, lay that
distortion bare. It is Israel that has occupied the lands
of others by force since 1967. It establishes illegitimate
and internationally condemned settlements thereon. It
forces out the population and deprives them of the
most basic rights provided for in international law and
international humanitarian law. Those two laws are
considered the biggest victims of Israel’s State
terrorism.
How can the occupiers, the aggressors — those
who have perpetrated carnage against civilians for
decades — be in a position of self-defence? Can any
member of the Security Council, or other Members of
this international Organization, understand the reason
why Israeli fighter jets and warships would destroy the
Rafik Al-Hariri Airport in Beirut and the infrastructure
in Tripoli, Sidon, Tyre, Baalbek and other Lebanese
towns?
Can we understand why Israel would kill scores
or even hundreds of children, women and other
innocent civilians in Lebanon and Palestine? Can we
understand the meaning or the scale of the bombing by
Israel of the Damascus — Beirut highway used by
Arabs and foreigners, including diplomats, residing in
Lebanon, who were seeking a safe refuge and fleeing
the indiscriminate Israeli war machine?

06-43915

My country has received hundreds of thousands
of Lebanese, as well as foreign diplomats and Arab and
foreign tourists seeking a safe haven, away from the
indiscriminate
Israeli
destruction
machine.
Nevertheless, the Israeli war machine has made that
road to Damascus fraught with danger. Israel did not
even spare buses and other vehicles transporting those
people, let alone Arab humanitarian convoys.
Unfortunately, volunteers have fallen victim to the
Israeli acts of aggression.
While we understand the efforts made by some
internationally influential countries to transport their
citizens out of Lebanon, we ask about the validity of
the concept that discriminates between peoples’ lives.
Were not those countries supposed to be bringing
pressure to bear on Israel in the Security Council to
cease firing and to put an end to the bloodbath that is
currently under way?
The barbaric Israeli acts of aggression are not just
targeting Lebanon, or even international peace and
security. They are designed to undermine the
credibility of the United Nations itself. Throughout its
long history, the United Nations and its resolutions
have never been ignored as they have been in the case
of Israel.
More than a thousand resolutions have been
adopted calling on Israel to comply with resolutions of
international legitimacy. However, those resolutions
have never been implemented or seen the light of day.
Some act as if the law is to be respected by the weak
only. That leads us to question the degree of
commitment by the mighty to the law and the need for
it. What about its credibility or usefulness? Applying
such a double standard to international norms would
lead to the hegemony of the law of the jungle. We and
the people of the world ask: “Where are we going?”
While Israel declares that it reserves the right to
interpret the question of self-defence unilaterally, it
ignores the right of others to defend themselves, too,
against
foreign
occupation,
colonization
and
aggression, as stipulated in the Charter. Israel, and
those who protect it, will always seek, while
continuously attempting to distort facts, to abridge the
Arab-Israeli conflict — to minimize it — and to ignore
the fact that the problem is primarily one of occupation
of and settlement in occupied Arab territories since
1967. It is also a problem of displacement of peoples of
the region, depriving them of their most basic rights to

13

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

return to their homeland, in a flagrant violation of
international law.
Lebanon suffered considerably over the past
years as a result of Israel’s defiance of international
legitimacy. The repeated Israeli invasions of
Lebanon — in 1978, 1982 and 1996 — and the
occupation of southern Lebanon for over 20 years are
stark examples of how Israel flouts this legitimacy.
Obstructing the role of the Security Council by this or
that country — for reasons related to a well-known
political agenda, reasons far removed from its role in
maintaining international peace and security —
contributes to beating the drums of war, gives a green
light to Israel to continue its aggression and covers its
criminal acts. It also blocks the international
community’s desire to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement in the region.
We therefore question the benchmark against
which we can measure the weight of statements made
by a representative of a superpower that is supposedly
entrusted, under the Charter, with the responsibility to
maintain international peace and security when this
representative uses the veto privilege against a draft
international resolution to protect the Palestinians,
when he calls explicitly for continued aggression
against the Palestinians and the Lebanese and rejects a
ceasefire. That flagrantly contradicts the concept of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
constitutes a deliberate obstruction to international
legitimacy in carrying out this responsibility.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the Security
Council to assume the responsibilities entrusted to it by
virtue of the Charter, to put an immediate end to the
Israeli aggression against the Lebanese and the
Palestinian peoples. We hope that the Council’s
measures will be independent and compatible with the
Charter and based on protecting Lebanon’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity from Israeli aggression, rather
than on interference in its internal affairs.
Whoever defends this aggression and shields its
continuation is obstructing the Security Council’s role
to achieve a peaceful and just settlement of a dispute
that is as old as the United Nations. In obstructing the
Council’s role it thus continues to adopt its agendas
and unsuccessful policies in the region, and increases
the sufferings of the peoples there.
Instability in the region is caused by Israel’s
continued occupation of Arab territories and the

14

impunity given to Israel by certain influential Powers,
allowing it to act as if it was above the law, to the
detriment of our legitimate rights in Palestine, Lebanon
and the Golan. Furthermore, the unfair and biased
policies pursued in our region by superpowers further
increase instability and tension there. We therefore
wonder: is the new Middle East promised by some
superpowers in the region based on granting Israel a
licence to kill and to commit aggression against the
peoples of the region, and on providing justification,
cover-up and protection in order to allow the
aggression to continue?
The foreign ministers of the Arab States decided
that it was necessary for the peace process to be
restored to the United Nations, because Israel and its
supporters killed every prospect for peace in the
Middle East. The peace that they themselves perceived
and tried to impose on certain peoples of the region is
agonizing and can no longer be enforced. We do not
want the United Nations to be sacrificed on the altar of
tragic and irresponsible policies.
My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, was
among the founding fathers of the United Nations and
among those who contributed to the San Francisco
Charter. We will remain committed to the United
Nations, because it is our only option in the face of
those who break the law and perpetrate State terror,
and against those aggressors who destroy the standards
of human existence itself. The Syrian Arab Republic
has persistently stressed its readiness to achieve a just
and comprehensive peace, as well as stability and
security in the Middle East region, through the Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian, Syrian and
Lebanese territories.
In the face of the Israeli aggression campaign
against Lebanon and Palestine, the Syrian Arab
Republic urges the Council to exert pressure on Israel
for an immediate ceasefire and put an end to the
destruction of the two countries. We also call on the
Council to hold Israel responsible for this aggression
and for compensation for the ensuing casualties and
losses.
The Syrian Arab Republic is making genuine
efforts to pave the way for a serious opportunity for
diplomatic action aimed at ending aggression and
establishing a just and comprehensive peace in the
region.

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

The statement by the representative of the United
States, accusing my country of supporting terrorism, is
totally unfounded and far from the truth, both in letter
and in spirit. The representative of the United States of
America wilfully ignores the fact that the Syrian Arab
Republic was the first — even before his country — to
address collectively the threat of terrorism. Since 1986
Syria has persistently called for the convening of an
international conference to define terrorism. It has
worked with many delegations here at the United
Nations to submit a resolution to the General Assembly
to that effect. Since the early 1990s, the United States
of America persistently voted against that resolution.
The Syrian Arab Republic works with a high
sense of responsibility with the Security Council ad
hoc committees established pursuant to Council
resolutions to counter terrorism. The chairpersons of
those committees have continuously commended
Syria’s cooperation. Furthermore, Syria has even
cooperated with the United States of America to
counter terrorism. The information provided by my
country to the American side saved the lives of many
Americans. Therefore, many senior officials in the
former
American
Administration
expressed
appreciation for this cooperation. It has become
necessary, on both moral and legal grounds, and in
every possible humanitarian consideration, to avoid the
issue of counter-terrorism in pursuit of certain political
agendas aimed at covering up aggression.
Syria abides by internationally agreed legal
norms. We in my country idolize President George
Washington because he chose to liberate his country.
We do not consider him a terrorist. We also respect the
principles embraced by President Wilson and teach
them to our schoolchildren. We also consider Gandhi to
be a nationalist fighter who resisted foreign
occupation. We view Jeanne d’Arc of France as a
national heroine who fought against foreign
occupation. Then there is Djamila Bouhired of Algeria,
a national heroine who also resisted foreign
occupation. And let us not forget Nelson Mandela.
We view with respect — and I believe others do
the same — all who resist foreign occupation and
defend the dignity of their homeland. Let me recall
here that part of my homeland — the Syrian Golan —
has been under Israeli occupation since 1967. The
Security Council has adopted a number of resolutions
condemning that occupation and calling for its end.
Where is the terrorism in the examples that I have

06-43915

cited? How can we consider it that in the light of the
experiences of our people? We have to stop confusing
the two issues. Counter-terrorism efforts should be
based on purely legal considerations and norms, not
political agendas that undermine the credibility of the
Council and raise questions as to its legitimacy.
As for the accusations levelled against my
country in the statement made by the representative of
Israel, I think that the same thing can be said about
their credibility. However, in that respect, we have to
recall yet again that the State terrorism perpetrated by
Israel has included many distinguished figures from the
United Nations itself. I do not think I would be wrong
if I were to say that Count Bernadotte was the first
martyr of this international Organization to fall victim
to Israeli State terrorism and acts of aggression.
Israel has refused to receive numerous
commissions of inquiry established by the United
Nations, the last of which was entrusted with
investigating the Jenin massacre.
What we are really seeing is a cancer — State
terrorism perpetrated by Israel against the peoples of
the region, including the Israeli people. The heads of
Zionist gangs have become prime ministers in Israel
and are known as such in many parts of the world.
Therefore those Israeli leaders responsible for war
crimes and collective massacres of the Palestinian and
Lebanese people, such as the Jenin, Nablus and Qana
massacres, as well as the Marwahin massacre a few
days ago, have inherited the propensity to do so from
their forefathers, who perpetrated the Deir Yassin, Kafr
Qasim and Bahr Al-Baqr massacres, among many
others.
The real terrorism in the region is the continued
occupation by Israel of Arab lands. It is Israel’s hostile
acts that are given infinite support by some influential
countries that have tried to cover up their failed
policies by blaming others for their own failures.
In conclusion, let me say that, like Martin Luther
King, I have a dream. I have a dream that the Israeli
acts of aggression will come to an end. Like Martin
Luther King, I have a dream — that peace will prevail
in our region and that our people will know stability,
peace and development, instead of war, threats of war
and the drums of war.

15

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Finland, to
whom I give the floor.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
countries — Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Iceland, Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova — align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union is acutely concerned at the
situation in the Middle East. In particular, we are
concerned at the deteriorating humanitarian situation
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure. The
European Union deplores the loss of civilian lives on
all sides. These developments pose a serious threat to
peace and security in the region. The European Union
calls for the release of the abducted soldiers and an
immediate cessation of hostilities.
The European Union recognizes Israel’s
legitimate right to self-defence, but it urges Israel to
exercise utmost restraint and not to resort to
disproportionate action. All parties must do everything
possible to protect civilian populations and to refrain
from actions that violate international humanitarian
law.
It is urgent to stop the violence and return to
diplomacy. Only a political process of negotiation can
bring lasting peace to the region. It is urgent that the
international community engage actively in this
process. We express our full support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General and of actors in the region. The
European Union welcomes an active role on the part of
the Security Council, including through considering the
possibility of an international monitoring presence. We
support the agenda set out in the G-8 statement. The
European Union’s High Representative, Mr. Solana, is
also actively engaged in the region.
Concerning the developments in Lebanon and
Israel, the European Union condemns the attacks by
Hizbollah on Israel and the abduction of two Israeli
soldiers. The European Union calls for their immediate
and unconditional release and for the cessation of all
attacks on Israeli towns and cities.
The European Union recalls the need for the
Lebanese State to restore its sovereignty over the
whole of its national territory and to do its utmost to

16

prevent such attacks. The European Union expresses its
support for Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora.
The European Union urges the full implementation of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), including the
disbanding and disarming of all Lebanese and nonLebanese militias, and strict respect of the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and political independence of
Lebanon. Continued escalation will only aggravate the
vicious circle of violence and retribution.
The European Union appeals to all parties to
ensure the safe and speedy passage from Lebanon of
all those citizens of European Union member States, as
well as other expatriates, who wish to leave Lebanon in
the current situation. The European Union calls on
Israel not to hinder shipping in international waters.
Concerning the situation in Gaza, the European
Union remains deeply concerned at the deteriorating
situation between Israel and the Palestinians and
deplores the resulting loss of civilian life. The
European Union reiterates its call for the immediate
and unconditional release of the abducted Israeli
soldier. It calls on the Palestinian leadership to bring an
end to violence and terrorist activities, including the
firing of rockets into Israeli territory.
The European Union calls on both parties to
alleviate the desperate humanitarian situation of the
civilian population and urges Israel to engage in the
restoration of the destroyed civilian infrastructure. The
Israeli air strikes on Gaza’s only power plant have had
a far-reaching impact on Gaza’s hospitals, food
production facilities, water and sanitation systems. The
Rafah crossing was open for passage from Egypt to
Gaza on 18 July. In addition to the Rafah crossing, the
European Union urges that other border crossings such
as Karni be opened and remain open to allow at least
the passage of humanitarian aid and basic products to
Gaza and the safe return of Palestinians currently on
the Egyptian side of the border.
The European Union remains particularly
concerned about the detention of elected members of
the Palestinian Government and legislature and calls
for their immediate release.
The European Union commends the efforts of
President Abbas to create the widest possible
consensus in support of the objectives of the road map.
The European Union reiterates that it stands ready to
work with a Palestinian Government that meets and
implements the three principles of non-violence,

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

recognition of Israel’s right to exist and acceptance of
existing agreements and obligations, including the road
map. The European Union encourages progress in the
Palestinian national dialogue to that end.
The European Union is committed to pressing
ahead with the further expansion of the proposed
temporary international mechanism in order to channel
humanitarian aid directly to the Palestinians. The
European Union and its member States have
contributed significantly. The European Union
encourages donors and others in the region to make full
use of the mechanism. The European Union urges
Israel to resume transfers of withheld Palestinian tax
and customs revenues.
This crisis underlines the need for the negotiation
of a just and lasting settlement. The European Union
calls on both parties to demonstrate urgently an active
commitment to the search for a negotiated two-State
solution. The European Union supports the central role
of the Quartet in that process.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My
statement should be read in conjunction with the
statements of the Movement that I have transmitted to
you, Mr. President, concerning the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory and Lebanon dated 6
July 2006 (S/2006/491, annex) and 19 July 2006
(S/2006/548, annex), respectively.
Our positions on the situation in the region, as set
out in this Chamber on many occasions and as
contained in the two statements just mentioned, are
clear and consistent. The Movement reaffirms those
positions and calls on members of the Council to
consider them seriously during the ensuing
deliberations. I shall not repeat them here. I believe
that the members of the Council could better use the
time at their disposal to deliberate on practical
measures to end the crisis currently enveloping the
region, as well as to facilitate efforts to end the
occupation by Israel of the Palestinian territories,
thereby achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution in the Middle East, which should be the
overarching framework in this regard.
The Non-Aligned Movement is gravely
concerned about the deteriorating situation and the

06-43915

escalation of violence in the Middle East, particularly
in the occupied Palestinian territory and in Lebanon.
We condemn all acts of terror, violence and
destruction. We condemn attacks against civilians and
civilian property and infrastructure and deplore the
resulting death and destruction. We condemn the
abduction and detention of cabinet ministers,
government officials, soldiers and other individuals,
and we demand their immediate and unconditional
release.
Innocent human beings, including infants and
children, in the occupied Palestinian territory, Lebanon
and Israel are dying and suffering even as we speak in
this Chamber. The life of each human being is sacred
and must be protected. We realize that no matter how
much condemnation there is against anyone and no
matter how much we deplore death and destruction,
that will not in itself bring an end to the violence,
hostilities and casualties in the region. We recognize
that the solution could be achieved through the Council
and by the parties in the Middle East.
The Non-Aligned Movement appeals to the
Council to take decisive action without delay. The
barbaric and senseless killings and total madness in the
Middle East must be halted immediately. This Council
holds the key to peace, security and tranquility in the
region. Delay in taking action will result in more death
and destruction. Concrete proposals, old and new,
including those by Secretary-General Kofi Annan, that
would enable the Council to act are before each and
every one of you — representatives of States, members
of this august body — for consideration. We need not
remind you of your duties and responsibilities. You
know exactly what they are and what needs to be done,
and you must do that now in order to save the lives of
other human beings and, equally important, in order to
avoid catastrophic consequences in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to present Switzerland’s view on the
current crisis affecting the Middle East. If my oral
statement appears limited, as requested at the
beginning of the meeting, I refer Council members to
the written text.
Switzerland attaches the greatest importance to
respect for international humanitarian law and human

17

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

rights law. It has repeatedly reminded the parties
concerned of their obligations in that respect and will
continue to work in that direction. Respect for the law
is not a matter for negotiation, nor is it subject to
principles of reciprocity. The effects of the violations
now being committed in the Middle East can be
measured in terms of death, injury and destruction.
Those acts also impede humanitarian action.
Switzerland reminds the parties to the conflict
that international humanitarian law prohibits attacks on
civilians who are not directly participating in
hostilities, as well as attacks on civilian property. It
reminds the parties of their obligation to distinguish
between civilians and combatants and between civilian
and military infrastructure, to take all the necessary
precautions to preserve the lives of civilians and to
avoid damaging civilian property, to respect the
principle of proportionality in all military operations,
and to refrain from any form of collective punishment
against the population.
The personnel, installations and vehicles bearing
emblems recognized by the Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols are protected by
international humanitarian law and must be respected
in all circumstances. The parties to the conflict are
obliged to authorize and facilitate the rapid passage of
all humanitarian aid and to take all practical and
possible precautions to avoid attacking them.
In view of the magnitude of the political and
humanitarian crisis, the international community has a
responsibility to act, and Switzerland hopes that the
Security Council is in a position to take such action.
Switzerland supports the efforts of the United
Nations and the special good offices mission conducted
by Mr. Nambiar and his colleagues. In that context, I
would also like to commend the Secretary-General for
his judicious suggestions with regard to the
establishment of a sustainable ceasefire. My country
hopes that the Council will seriously consider the
proposals and act swiftly upon them.
Switzerland condemns all acts of violence,
provocation and terrorism. There is no doubt that Israel
has the right to protect its territory and its population
against such acts committed by Hizbollah.
Nevertheless, in the light of law and the facts,
Switzerland considers the reaction of Israeli armed
forces in Lebanon to be clearly disproportionate. The
repeated air strikes of recent days against civilian

18

targets are a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. The indiscriminate firing of rockets
by Hizbollah against population centres in Israel also
seriously violates the rules of international
humanitarian law.
It is also important to underscore that the
situation in Lebanon must not cause the international
community to lose sight of the scale of the
humanitarian, economic and social crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially in Gaza. In
that context, under international humanitarian law it is
incumbent upon Israel, as the occupying Power, to
meet the basic needs of the Palestinian civilian
population and facilitate the rapid, secure and
unimpeded passage of equipment and aid personnel.
In order to respond to the crisis in Lebanon,
Switzerland would like to stress three proposals.
First, we call upon the parties to the conflict to
establish an immediate ceasefire. A ceasefire is
necessary, given the serious and steadily deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Lebanon.
Secondly, we call for the establishment of
humanitarian corridors to make it possible to provide
full and unrestricted access to victims. We must ensure
that access to basic goods and services is ensured.
Supplies of water and electricity are becoming
precarious. Such humanitarian corridors between
Beirut and southern Lebanon, between Beirut and
Cyprus and between southern Lebanon and Cyprus, as
well as between northern Israel and southern Lebanon
and the Bekaa Valley, would guarantee safe and
unimpeded access to humanitarian personnel and
goods. They would also enable the transport of injured
and sick persons to hospitals and the evacuation of
civilians from combat zones.
Thirdly, Switzerland supports the proposal for the
deployment of an international security and monitoring
force to southern Lebanon. In order to respond
effectively to the present crisis, such a mission would
need to have a mandate to guarantee a ceasefire, secure
the Israeli-Lebanese border and facilitate, by its
presence, a negotiated settlement of territorial disputes.
Such an international security and monitoring force
could also temporarily take control of the Sheba’a
farms area while a settlement of that territorial
disagreement is awaited and in order to reduce tensions
resulting from it. The force should also make it
possible to contribute to the implementation of

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), in particular
as regards the disarmament of all militias.

conflict should allow humanitarian assistance to
immediately reach the affected population.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General, the
establishment of an international force should be
supplemented by a set of political and security
measures that would ensure that the ceasefire is
sustainable and that the situation does not relapse into
the status quo ante.

At least seven Brazilian nationals, including three
children, perished as a consequence of the Israeli
military incursions into southern Lebanon. The
Government of Brazil has already extended its
condolences to all the victims in Lebanon and their
families. We are arranging for the evacuation of a large
number of Brazilian nationals. I should note that many
thousands of Brazilians currently live in the affected
regions.

Switzerland welcomes the efforts of all actors
who are working to resolve the current crisis. However,
it is imperative not just to manage the crisis but to find
a real solution for all the unresolved conflicts in the
Middle East. The crisis in Lebanon, like that in the
Palestinian occupied territory, cannot be viewed solely
from the perspective of terrorism and counterterrorism. A comprehensive approach to settle the
totality of Israeli-Arab and Israeli-Palestinian conflicts
is required.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): It is with deep sorrow
that we are once again witnessing the escalation of
violence in the Middle East. The spiralling and
unchecked use of force that started in Gaza has reached
Lebanon. The conflict, which is deplorable per se, is
now characterized by a rapidly growing use of
indiscriminate force. Brazil strongly condemns the
attacks perpetrated by Hizbollah, initiated by the
kidnapping of two military personnel. Those attacks
have killed or wounded several military and civilian
persons in northern Israel. We also condemn the attacks
carried out in Gaza. No cause or grievance justifies
terrorism, which we firmly repudiate.
Brazil reiterates the provisions of resolution 1559
(2004), which calls for the dismantling and
disarmament of all militias in Lebanon. Although we
recognize Israel’s right to self-defence, we are of the
view that Israel should act with utmost restraint in
order to avoid further civilian casualties and damage,
which are likely to spur a new cycle of violence,
causing more victims. Such restraint will be the key to
any solution to the present crisis.
Brazil condemns the disproportionate use of force
that has resulted in the loss of innocent lives and heavy
damage to the Lebanese and Palestinian infrastructure,
in flagrant violation of the most basic principles of
international humanitarian law. All forces in the

06-43915

Peace can be attained only by the resumption of a
diplomatic process involving all interested parties. The
Government of Brazil supports the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations to achieve a ceasefire and the
release of the abducted Israeli soldiers. We believe that
the diplomatic and humanitarian initiatives currently
being undertaken by Secretary-General Kofi Annan
must be seriously considered by the Security Council
with a view to obtaining an immediate cessation of
hostilities and establishing conditions for achieving a
durable solution to the crisis.
Through the Security Council, the international
community must urgently fulfil its responsibilities and
take immediate action to prevent a further escalation of
the conflict. A lack of action by the Council in such a
flagrant case threatening international peace and
security would only contribute to weakening its
credibility.
Brazil is convinced that stability ultimately
depends upon the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
in all its aspects. Unilateral and other types of nonnegotiated solutions are not likely to bring about peace,
but only precarious truces that are broken in bloody
conflicts such as the one we are witnessing today. The
international community must not remain passive
before the deterioration of the conflict and the
destruction of Lebanon as a viable nation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to wish you every success.
We are convinced that, given your wisdom, qualities
and abilities, you will guide the work of the Council to

19

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

a successful conclusion. I should also like to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Denmark, for her wise and brilliant leadership of the
Council in the month of June.
I would also like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this public meeting of the Council to once again
consider the serious situation engulfing the occupied
Palestinian territories and Lebanon as a result of the
actions of the Israeli Government, its aggression, its
intransigence and its insistence on continuing a policy
that has led to much damage and destruction and has
produced many dead, wounded and displaced persons.
Yesterday we heard a briefing by the SecretaryGeneral that focused on the need to end the aggression.
We appreciate his efforts and those of his staff to bring
about peace and security. We agree with the briefing on
the need to have the international community assume
its role with courage and creativity in order to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian issue and also settle the root
causes of the conflict in the region, namely, the lack of
comprehensive and just peace.
No one would doubt Israel’s ability and skills at
slapping together a pretext to justify pursuing its
aggression and to cover its tracks, create chaos and
expose the region to greater disruption and tension.
This all-out war pursued by Israel against Lebanon
and, earlier, against Gaza cannot be justified by Israel’s
pretext. It is regrettable that, despite what has taken
place in Lebanon — planned destruction, premeditated
killings and planned sabotage — the Security Council
has not yet found enough reasons to intervene, while
its responsibility is to maintain international peace and
security.
Today’s international relations are in a very
dangerous state because of the primacy of the concept
of use of force over law and human values and custom.
That has taken us further from the rules of justice and
equity and has enshrined a double-standard policy in
political positions. It has also undermined the rules of
international law in an effort to erroneously justify the
legitimate right to self-defence that is set forth in the
United Nations Charter. This runs contrary to the
opinions of the International Court of Justice with
respect to the basis of the legitimate right to selfdefence and the conditions that justify such right. This
principle is enshrined in international law, but it has
been converted into an instrument to justify the
aggression pursued by the Government of Israel.

20

International disputes such as this one can be
resolved not by sending in armies or firing rockets or
bombing from the air, but instead by a commitment to
implement the provisions of international law and the
principles of justice and equity. It is urgent to end the
illusion and arrogance of military power, of barbarous
oppression, targeted killings and collective punishment
in violation of international law and humanitarian
norms and values.
History will not pardon the international
community for its failure to ensure justice for the
Palestinian people and the people of Lebanon, for
leaving any solutions to the conditions set by Israel and
for erroneous arguments and pretexts put forward, and
leaving the task to Israel to create peace as it sees it
and according to its positions — not peace that is based
on international law. This is not peace; it is surrender.
Failure to use the criteria of justice, the passivity of the
Council and its failure to assume its duties and
responsibilities have allowed for the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the expansion of Israeli settlements.
Those failures have also allowed for addressing the
Middle East question on the basis of Israeli interests.
All of this continues to be the very reason for the
failure of the peace process in the past and in the
present. The imbalances and biases with respect to the
Israeli State and the failure to implement the road map
set by the influential Powers and the Arab peace
initiative have killed the peace process in the past and
will kill it in future phases. Meetings and conferences,
statements and promises are all in vain if they are
aimed at just pretending to implement something
without addressing the root causes, namely, occupation
and repeated aggression by Israel against civilians and
the destruction of their property and livelihoods.
Saudi Arabia condemns the war pursued by Israel
and its premeditated and repeated destruction and its
unlimited violations of human rights, with the express
purpose of inflicting suffering on civilians without any
regard for international law or human considerations.
We issue a warning to the international
community of the seriousness of the situation in the
region and the fact that it is sliding towards a climate
of war and a new circle of violence whose results will
be difficult to predict, particularly given the failure of
international action and of Israel’s aggressive policies.
Israel must bear responsibility for its barbaric
acts and must undertake to compensate Lebanon for

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

serious material damage caused by its aggression. This
barbaric war is an extension of policies of occupation
and hegemony as pursued by Israel in the region.
Saudi Arabia firmly supports the Government of
Lebanon and supports its efforts to uphold the interests
and the sovereignty and independence of Lebanon, as
well as its efforts to extend its authority throughout its
territory.
Our Kingdom also supports the Palestinian
Authority in its efforts to control the situation and to
uphold the unity of Palestine. Based on Saudi Arabia’s
position of principle — solidarity with the legitimate
national regimes of brotherly Lebanon and of occupied
Palestine — we call upon the international community
to shoulder its legal and humanitarian responsibilities,
in order to put an end to the condemnable Israeli
aggression, to protect the Lebanese people and their
infrastructures and to support the efforts of the
legitimate Government of Lebanon that are aimed at
protecting the independence and sovereignty of
Lebanon and its people and at extending its authority
throughout the national territory.
We also call for an end to the blockade imposed
by Israel against the Palestinian people. We need to
support the efforts of the National Authority to achieve
their unity within the framework of national dialogue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting, which has been called for so
many times by the majority of the United Nations
family, who are concerned at the dramatic worsening of
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and
in Lebanon. For the second consecutive week Lebanon
has been subjected to intense bombardments, the
victims being the civilian population, which are
causing massive destruction to the basic infrastructure
so vital for the functioning of the country.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his presentation yesterday to the Security Council
and say here that my country takes note of the
proposals to put an end to the crisis that he detailed.
We share the concerns with regard to the alarming
humanitarian situation following the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon.

06-43915

Algeria is following with the deepest concern the
developments of the tragic events in the Middle East.
We robustly condemn the blind attacks by the Israeli
army on the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples. The
incidents that appear to be at the origin of the new
aggression cannot justify or explain the collective
punishment that Israel, by flouting the rules of
international law and international humanitarian law, is
inflicting today on a sovereign State and on its
innocent civilian population.
Algeria calls upon the international community to
end its silence, to abandon the complicit silence in
which it has taken refuge since the start of the recent
dramatic events in the region, and to unreservedly
condemn the Israeli aggression and impose an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire in order to find
a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the crisis in the
Middle East.
In particular, we call upon the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities under the Charter and to
respond without delay to Lebanon’s request for a
ceasefire and for the lifting of the blockade imposed by
Israel on the air and sea borders of the country so that
the Lebanese Government can extend its authority
throughout the country and recover all of its territory,
including the Sheba’a farms, and implement the 1949
armistice, as reaffirmed in the inter-Lebanese Taif
Agreement.
We also express grave concern about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation following
the attacks by the Israeli army, and we appeal to the
international donor community for a massive and
generous response to the distress call by the Lebanese
Government to relieve the suffering of the people, who
are so sorely tried.
The tragic situation in Lebanon — like the
repression, behind closed doors, in the occupied
Palestinian territories — shows us more clearly than
anything else could the urgent need for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question, which remains at the core of the
upheavals that have beset the region for decades.
Unless one wants to make entire peoples
disappear from the face of the Earth, legitimate
resistance to occupation will not go away as long as the
causes that have given rise to it are not eliminated. The
pretext of fighting terrorism through the pure and
simple recourse to State terrorism that is now being

21

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

employed against Lebanon and its people will probably
have effects opposite to what is sought. There is no
doubt that the resistance will emerge from the new acts
of aggression and the massacres being committed with
even more determination. Rather than melting away,
the resistance will simply grow in the face of the
Israeli occupation of Arab lands and the blind
repression that is being systematically carried out.
In addition to its disproportionate response and
the excessive use of force against the innocent
population and vital civil infrastructure of Lebanon,
Israel is making thinly veiled threats against other
countries, raising the spectre of a conflagration in the
entire region of the Middle East. The dubious pretexts
that have now practically put an end to a peace process
that had shown such promise must not once again fool
the international community and cause it to succumb to
the temptation to allow Israel to continue its new
enterprise. It is up to the Security Council to assume its
full responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and to oppose attempts by certain
countries that wish to impose their own vision of peace
on neighbours that unfortunately have made the
mistake of being weak.
In conclusion, I reaffirm my country’s position
that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace is one
indivisible whole that cannot be achieved without
Israel’s total withdrawal from occupied Arab
territories. A just and lasting solution to the conflict in
the Middle East must be based on the Arab peace
initiative adopted at the Beirut Summit, on respect for
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), 1397 (2002)
and 1515 (2003) and on the principle of land for peace.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Egypt, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Although today’s meeting is being held within the
framework of the periodic review of the situation in the
Middle East, in particular the occupied Palestinian
territories, it has particular significance, as it is being
held at a critical time for the Middle East — a time of
tragic violent incidents from which innocent civilians
are suffering. The gravity of the situation is
intensifying daily.
The current source of threat and tension is not
only the continuous military operations by Israeli
forces in Palestine and Lebanon — the region has

22

witnessed more violent wars in the past. The real
problem is the feelings of frustration among the Arab
peoples vis-à-vis the feeble positions taken by the
Security Council in the face of these repeated Israeli
aggressions, which seek to achieve long-term strategic
goals through military force, in total contradiction with
what all of us here — including, I would hope, the
permanent members of the Security Council — are
striving for: a comprehensive and sustainable peace
through negotiation, based on justice, equality and
mutual interests.
The core issue is not the capture of one Israeli
soldier in Gaza, or two others in Lebanon, but the
continued occupation by Israel of Arab lands in
Palestine, Lebanon and Syria since 1967, as well as its
determined effort to change the facts on the ground in a
manner that does away with any opportunity for the
Arab parties to regain their legitimate rights to their
usurped occupied lands. That is the issue that the
Security Council has completely failed to address,
despite numerous Council resolutions confirming that
the only solution to the vicious circle of violence and
counter-violence is to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of Arab lands.
In this context, it must be made clear that Arab
States have accepted mediation efforts outside the
scope of the United Nations, as a way to bridge the
differences in opinion, with the aim of reaching a just
peace that responds to the interests of both the Arabs
and the Israelis. That does not in any way imply that
the Council or any of its permanent members should
relinquish their responsibility towards the Middle East
peace process as an issue that affects and poses a threat
to international peace and security, including violence
against civilians. The Council has held meeting after
meeting on the protection of civilians and of children
in armed conflict. Indeed, it is planning to hold another
meeting on the subject on Monday.
It is regrettable, therefore, that the Council has
failed to provide a minimal level of concrete protection
to civilians and children in Palestine and Lebanon only,
among other conflict areas all over the world. This
raises questions about the supposed link between the
Council’s theoretical discussions on these issues and its
ability to address them on the ground.
Egypt has worked over the past years with
various parties to prevent escalation and to achieve
peace, focusing on diplomacy to contain repeated

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

threats in the region. Egypt will continue those efforts,
whether between the Israelis and Palestinians, or
between Israel and Lebanon, with a view to achieving
an immediate ceasefire that opens the door for a
comprehensive political settlement.
In this context, we have closely followed the
ongoing consultations in the Security Council
concerning the elements that the Secretary-General
proposed yesterday, 20 July, as a potential basis for a
settlement. However, Egypt believes that any
negotiations on a settlement requires a firm decision by
the Council today for an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire on both the Palestinian and Lebanese fronts.
At the same time, the Council must address, as
quickly as possible, the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in Gaza, in addition to responding to
Lebanon’s call for relief and for the lifting of the land
and sea blockade imposed on it by Israel, and to allow
Lebanon to receive the much-needed humanitarian
assistance.
Once this is done, it will be possible to negotiate
some of the elements that can constitute a basis for
temporary
arrangements
between
the
parties
concerned, including the exchange of prisoners and
detainees, asserting Lebanese sovereignty over all its
territories, thus allowing it to implement the Armistice
Agreement of 1949 and the Taif Agreement, in addition
to Israel’s acknowledgment of its own responsibility
for the destruction that it has inflicted on Palestine and
Lebanon,
and its responsibility
to provide
compensation for such damages. All these elements
should be a prelude to commencing the final status
negotiations on all tracks, as quickly as possible, under
the auspices of the United Nations, and in accordance
with a plan of action to be elaborated and monitored by
this international Organization as an honest and trusted
broker, one entrusted with fully implementing the
relevant resolutions of the international community
related to the settlement of the conflict, particularly
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1515
(2003) and the principle of land for peace.
The
current
situation
places
additional
responsibility on the Council, not just in terms of
expressing sympathy for the victims, condemning the
targeting of civilians and infrastructure, or providing
humanitarian assistance, but also in terms of resolving
the key problem, which generates one crisis after

06-43915

another. This is to be achieved by ending the continued
Israeli occupation of Arab lands in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon.
Today’s crisis is yet another test for the Council
and its role in the region. We believe in the Council’s
ability to succeed in the face of this challenge and to
assume its responsibilities in achieving peace and
security in the Middle East through undertaking
credible measures leading to the end of the Israeli
occupation and the achievement of a comprehensive
peace — a peace that will guarantee all countries of the
region the security and stability for which they strive.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Enge (Norway): Norway calls for an urgent
cessation of hostilities.
Hizbollah must cease its armed attacks and return
the abducted Israeli soldiers immediately.
While we recognize Israel’s inherent right to selfdefence, we believe that all use of armed force must
satisfy requirements of necessity as well as
proportionality. It is imperative that the civilian
population be protected in accordance with
international humanitarian law. The indiscriminate and
excessive use of force is prohibited.
Norway urges Israel not to resort to
disproportionate action. We must prevent the violence
and conflict from expanding into neighbouring areas.
We call on the parties to end hostilities
immediately and to take all necessary measures to
protect the population from the consequences of war.
Civilians must be protected and given safe passage.
Moreover, humanitarian and relief workers must be
given unrestricted and safe access, both for themselves
and for relief supplies. All protected persons who
desire to leave the areas concerned, including foreign
nationals, shall be entitled to do so in accordance with
international law.
A peaceful solution to the situation in the Middle
East cannot be found through military action. Only a
political process and negotiations involving all parties
can yield a comprehensive and lasting peace. What is
needed is that the parties return to the negotiating table
as soon as possible. This is the only place where a
lasting solution may be found. We fully support the

23

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

efforts of the Secretary-General and call for active and
urgent Security Council efforts in this regard.
Norway expresses its full and undiminished
support for Prime Minister Fouad Siniora of Lebanon
and calls on all parties to respect the political and
territorial independence of Lebanon.
We remain deeply concerned about the continued
deteriorating situation in Gaza. Israel’s attacks on vital
infrastructure constitute a form of collective
punishment that is unacceptable.
It is obvious that the humanitarian needs are
enormous. Norway is deeply concerned by the swiftly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Middle East.
In accordance with the assessment given by the
Secretary-General in his statement to the Council
yesterday, the lives of more than 500,000 people in
Lebanon are being directly affected by the military
operations.
Norway stands ready to respond substantially,
and the Norwegian Government has decided to allocate
$30 million in humanitarian assistance to the region.
The Norwegian contribution will be channelled
through non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Prince Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and to extend my appreciation to your
predecessor for her efforts in administering the work of
the Council during the month of June.
We are gravely concerned at the dangerous
escalation in our region as a result of the engagement
between Israeli forces and Hizbollah that quickly
escalated throughout the past week, resulting, as is
usual in such circumstances, in civilian casualties. I
wish to reiterate the Jordanian Government’s clear
position in condemning the practice of violence and the
killing of civilians, whoever they may be.
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan strongly condemns the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon, its use of force and actions outside
the scope of international law, leading to the loss of
innocent lives and the destruction of civil institutions
and infrastructure in Lebanon. What is taking place in

24

Lebanon runs counter to our vision of a region living in
peace and prospering as a result of reform efforts and
democratic processes. The region, as we see it today,
is, unfortunately, headed towards destruction. Indeed,
the region will suffer significant strategic losses as a
result of disproportionate Israeli military operations in
Lebanon and the occupied Palestinian territories —
actions in blatant, grave violation of the provisions of
international law — but also as a result of the positions
of some radical groups that run contrary to our vision
of peace. Those groups have chosen to advocate and
promote violence and escalation rather than align
themselves with the track initiated in Madrid in
1990 — a peace process that we all have been working
so hard to maintain over the past years so that peace
could be enjoyed by all the peoples of the region.
Clearly, they chose violence and escalation over
contributing to the building of a sustainable peace.
A decision to go to war is not taken by a faction
or a group. Legitimate Governments should act
responsibly and in accordance with international law
and international legitimacy. In this context, I wish to
reaffirm Jordan’s position in supporting Lebanon’s
unity and enabling the Lebanese Government to
exercise full sovereignty over all of its territory.
The Jordanian Government views these
dangerous developments with grave concern. My
Government warns against taking any measures that
could undermine Lebanon or its sovereignty and which
could lead to unforeseen results. Accordingly, Jordan
calls on the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities to stop this dangerous escalation. It
calls on all parties to de-escalate and to take rational
and responsible steps to prevent any further
aggravation of the situation, and it also calls on all
parties within and neighbouring the Middle East region
to cease any other provocative activities.
I wish, on behalf of the Jordanian Government, to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
efforts to resolve this crisis.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is continuing to deteriorate due to the
continuing excessive military operations by the
occupying Israeli forces in Gaza and in various areas of
the West Bank, which lead, on a daily basis, to the
death of innocent Palestinian civilians. I reiterate my
Government’s condemnation of Israel’s continued
widespread military operations in the occupied

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian territories and of the use of collective
punishment that Israel imposes on the Palestinian
people. This has caused a serious humanitarian crisis
that threatens also to cause a security catastrophe in the
Palestinian occupied territories.
We call on both sides, Israeli and Palestinian, to
respect all signed agreements reached between them,
including the understandings reached at Sharm elSheikh. We call on them to put an end to all measures
that could further escalate and aggravate the situation.
We call on them to focus, alternatively, on the political
process. In particular, we call on Israel to respect
international law that it violates with great indifference
and to end all practices that violate the human rights of
the Palestinian population, including all forms of
occupation.
We condemn Israel’s continued restrictions on the
freedoms of the Palestinian population, its military
measures, its ongoing settlement activities and the
building of the separation wall — practices that do not
help the Palestinian Authority implement its part of the
parallel obligations under the road map. We call on all
Palestinian groups and factions to deal with the
situation in a way that serves supreme Palestinian
interests and aspirations. We applaud President Abbas
for his genuine efforts to contain the situation and
revive the political process.
Peace in the Middle East requires an end to the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories on
the basis of internationally binding resolutions. It
requires that a final, agreed solution be found to the
Palestinian refugee problem, on the basis of General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). To achieve this result,
all concerned parties need to take responsible steps,
motivated by strong political will, to stop the current
escalation across the board and immediately resume
negotiations, because unilateral measures and the use
of force will not lead to a lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East.
Military operations do not lead to stability and
security in the region. We therefore call for an
immediate ceasefire and for the exercise of maximum
self-restraint. We all realize the different political and
security challenges we face in the region. We call for
an immediate return to the peace process. Failing that,
the region will suffer devastation to the extent that it
will be very difficult to start over from any
recognizable point.

06-43915

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Indonesia, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me start
by thanking you for having convened this extremely
urgent meeting. I wish also to thank Special Adviser
Nambiar and Under-Secretary-General Egeland for
their valuable briefings.
The rapidly deteriorating situation in Lebanon
and Palestine has brought the region once again into a
situation of deep crisis and taken both countries to the
edge of a humanitarian catastrophe, with repercussions
far beyond the region. The Government and the people
of Indonesia are in full solidarity with the people and
the Governments of Lebanon and Palestine.
On television, on an hourly basis, we see the
faces of the hundreds of innocent civilians, many of
them children, who have fallen victim to the brutal
Israeli military campaign, and we are witness to
countless civil infrastructures being destroyed. We
strongly condemn this collective punishment, which
unfairly and unjustly holds hostage all innocent
Lebanese and Palestinians.
Yesterday, in his briefing to the Council,
Secretary-General Kofi Annan also underlined the
precariousness of the situation and proposed a package
of concrete actions to defuse the conflict. My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to him for
his efforts and initiatives to resolve this crisis.
Israel’s military action clearly constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and other rules of humanitarian
law. My delegation strongly condemns this and urges
the international community to take action to
immediately halt it. We believe that a sense of urgency
is required in the Council, given the dire humanitarian
situation and the continuing loss of innocent civilian
life and destruction. In view of the scale of destruction
and the casualties resulting from Israel’s indiscriminate
attacks and its disproportionate use of force, it is
difficult for my delegation to comprehend why the
Council — as the main organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security — is
still unable to respond quickly and effectively.
In that connection, we join the call for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire as the most
critical step towards the speedy delivery of

25

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian assistance, particularly to civilians, in the
conflict areas. Indonesia supports fully the
establishment of an international peacekeeping force,
under the auspices of the United Nations, to be
deployed immediately to monitor and enforce the
ceasefire. Indonesia stands ready to participate by
contributing a military contingent to the force.
We further observe that the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) expires at
the end of this month. In view of recent developments,
this is a timely opportunity to extend and reconfigure
its mandate to respond to this complex situation,
including providing security for the channelling of
humanitarian assistance. We are pleased that the
Secretary-General reflected this important aspect in his
briefing yesterday. This is particularly important in
view of the need for security, not only for all the
peoples in the region, but also for the humanitarian
personnel who will be putting their lives on the line.
Another important aspect of this package of
solutions is the need for a reconstruction and
rehabilitation programme for Lebanon and Palestine. It
is the position of the Indonesian Government that this
reconstruction and rehabilitation must form part of the
peacebuilding process in the region.
Indonesia further wishes to reiterate its
commitment to peace in the Middle East and to the
creation of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State
under the two-State solution, as provided for in the
road map. We emphasize the urgency of reviving the
peace process in order to achieve a just solution to the
conflict, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the road map and the Arab peace initiative
of 2002. It is also important to support the Lebanese
Government in its efforts to maintain its political
independence, extend its authority over all of its
territories and exercise its full sovereignty over them,
and implement the 1949 agreement, which was
reaffirmed by the Lebanese in the Taif national accord.
We call on the international community to take
urgent steps to avert a wider humanitarian crisis and
further bloodshed, and we hope to see the path to peace
reopened as soon as possible. We appeal to the Security
Council to deliver a unified and constructive resolution
to immediately halt the atrocities and the cycle of
violence in the region.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent

26

Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me to begin by
thanking you for having convened this meeting and
offering us the opportunity to participate in the
deliberations of the Security Council today to discuss
developments in the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian issue, and assess the
repercussions of Israel’s invasion of the Gaza Strip and
its continued aggression against Lebanon.
In the absence of a clear response by the Security
Council to the Israeli acts of aggression and escalation
of the situation in Lebanon and Gaza, and in view of
the regional and international consequences related to
this issue, as well as the Security Council’s failure to
act decisively vis-à-vis that situation — Israel
continues its aggression against the Lebanese and
Palestinian peoples. Israel is deliberately destroying
the infrastructure of Lebanon and Gaza, in order to
impose the fait accompli policy and achieve objectives
and interests that are broader than what Israel claims to
be the goal of its military campaign — the release of
the Israeli soldiers. The goal is actually to destroy
Lebanon and Gaza and impose the logic of force in the
Arab-Israeli conflict.
Despite the good offices and the positive
proposals of the Secretary-General and his team, as
well as other international parties, to find a solution to
the conflict, Israel continues with a stark, defiant
attitude, to reject the repeated appeals of the
international community, target civilians, destroy vital
services and infrastructure and impose collective
punishment on the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples
while holding them under siege. Moreover, it denies
international relief organizations access to the sick and
wounded, as well as to the hundreds of thousands of
displaced and disaster-stricken families. The report
submitted today by Mr. Egeland stresses the need to
provide access to humanitarian assistance in Lebanon
in order to avoid an imminent humanitarian crisis.
Therefore, we urge the Security Council to adopt
a resolution calling for a comprehensive and immediate
ceasefire and a halt to all military operations, to pave
the way for negotiations and diplomatic consultations.
Israel’s destruction of Lebanon will have grave
repercussions in the region that will not serve any
interests but only exacerbate extremism and lead to a

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

further deterioration of the situation. We believe that
Israel may have agendas and objectives that exceed
those it claims to have.
It is clear that the current situation is a tragic
reflection of the failure and total collapse of the peace
process and relevant committees aimed at finding a
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Against the backdrop of this grave and
deteriorating situation, the Council of Ministers of the
League of Arab States met on 15 July 2006 to address
the situation. It condemned the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon and decided to call upon the
international community, and, particularly, the Security
Council, to assume its responsibilities and act
immediately in order to call on Israel to put a complete
stop to its military operations. In addition, it urged all
parties to respect the principles and provisions of
international law and international humanitarian law,
implement the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 on
the protection of civilians in time of war, de-escalate
the situation, put an end to the spiral of violence, and
seek a settlement through dialogue and negotiation.
The Council of Ministers stressed the fact that the
continuation of the current situation poses a grave
threat to regional and international peace and security.
Therefore, it is imperative that a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict be
achieved, in accordance with the terms of reference of
the peace process and the relevant United Nations
resolutions — given the fact that occupation is the root
cause of all the violence and tension in the region.
The Council of Ministers of the League of Arab
States reiterated the Arab position, as expressed in the
Arab peace initiative of the fourteenth Arab League
Summit, held in Beirut in 2002, and decided to call
upon the Security Council to convene a high-level
meeting to consider the Arab-Israeli dispute in an
innovative and comprehensive manner, given the
halting of the political process and the failure of all
other efforts to resume the peace process. It entrusted
the presidency of the Council, the Chairmanship of the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Secretary-General with
the coordination of efforts for that purpose.
The Middle East stands at a historic crossroads
today. Thus it is incumbent upon the Security Council
to fully assume its responsibilities and discharge its
mandate to address the issue of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, with a view to preserving the Council’s

06-43915

credibility and enabling us to achieve fair,
comprehensive and lasting solutions, and be able to
implement them, in such a way to ensure lasting peace
and security in the region.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Australia, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving us the opportunity to contribute to this very
important debate. Australia is gravely concerned about
the escalation in violence in the Middle East, which
has already resulted in a large number of casualties.
Australia extends its condolences to the Governments
of Lebanon and of Israel, and to the families of all of
those affected. Australia recognizes Israel’s right to act
in self-defence. We call on both sides to exercise
restraint, to avoid civilian deaths, to avoid damage to
civilian infrastructure and to refrain from acts which
escalate an already dangerous situation.
We need to bear in mind responsibility for the
current crisis. It began with the attacks on Israel by
Hamas and Hizbollah, including the capture of Israeli
soldiers and the launching of rockets and mortar bombs
into Israel. Australia condemns those actions and calls
for the unconditional release of the hostages taken by
Hamas and Hizbollah. We also call for an immediate
end to the rocket attacks on Israel. Those must be the
first steps towards the resolution of the current conflict.
The Australian Government is extremely
concerned with the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. The Australian Government has already
provided some $A 2 million through the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for humanitarian
assistance to Lebanon.
The Government is also working to ensure the
safe evacuation of Australians from Lebanon. We have
about 25,000 people in Lebanon. We are extremely
worried about the situation of Australians in southern
Lebanon in particular. We call on all parties to
facilitate the safe evacuation of foreign nationals.
Our priority must be to create conditions for a
comprehensive and lasting ceasefire. This can be
achieved only through the full implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolutions 425
(1978), 426 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), in
particular those elements that address the disbanding
and disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese

27

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

militias and the extension of the control of the
Government of Lebanon over all Lebanese territory.
This means the disarming of Hizbollah and control by
the Government of Lebanon of the area between Beirut
and the Israeli border.
A long-term solution to the Middle East conflict
must involve acceptance of Israel’s right to exist in
peace and the need for the emergence of a Palestinian
State. Those countries in the region with influence over
Hizbollah — Syria and Iran — should exercise that
influence to prevent continuation of acts of violence.
By arming and supporting those extremist groups, they
are threatening the wider security of the Middle East.
Australia also expresses support for ongoing
diplomatic initiatives, in particular the mission team
dispatched to the region by the Secretary-General. We
also note once again that the G-8 would welcome an
examination by the Security Council of the possibility
of an international security/monitoring presence. In
Australia’s view, any multilateral force must have a
robust mandate to enable it to guarantee both Lebanese
sovereignty and Israel’s security. That means the force
would have to assist the Lebanese Government to
exercise its sovereignty and prevent Hizbollah from
repeating its actions that have precipitated the current
crisis.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Although Turkey has aligned
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Finland on behalf of the European Union, I should
nevertheless like to expound upon a number of issues
that we deem fundamental at this critical and highly
sensitive juncture in the region.
The briefing that the Secretary-General gave to
the Security Council yesterday clearly illustrated the
dire and dangerous situation prevailing in the Middle
East. It also pointed to the ways and means to put an
end to the bloodshed and to emerge from the present
turmoil and impasse.
Innocent Lebanese, Palestinian and Israeli
civilians are losing their lives. Lebanon is facing
destruction, and the infrastructure in the Gaza Strip is
being devastated. What is more, those tragic events, if
unchecked, might have negative implications for the
region, which is already burdened with intractable
problems. Given the volatile situation on the ground,

28

the international community should have been more
active in preventing the escalation of tension from
reaching its current proportions.
We cannot in any way condone hostage-taking,
and we cannot deny the right to self-defence. Israeli
military personnel have to be released immediately.
The hostage-takers should have realized by now that
their action has been totally counter-productive and has
led to great loss and suffering among their own
peoples.
On the other hand, Israel should not resort to
disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force and
violence. We cannot allow the destruction of Lebanon
or of the hopes of Palestinians for a viable State. What
is currently taking place in the region goes far beyond
self-defence and in the long-run will not serve the
interests of Israel. Furthermore, by fomenting negative
sentiments, it damages prospects for dialogue and
reconciliation, which are at the heart of the two-State
solution. We call on all parties to act with the utmost
restraint.
In order to stop civilian casualties and the
destruction of infrastructure, the first thing that needs
to be done is to achieve a ceasefire. At the same time,
the three abducted soldiers should immediately be
handed over to Israel. The elected Palestinian officials
should be freed. We hope that we will eventually reach
a stage when women and children prisoners could also
be released. The relevant parties should immediately
start to work on putting in place the elements that
could form the political basis of a lasting ceasefire, as
stressed by the Secretary-General. The countries in the
region, as well as the international community, have a
moral duty to create a positive atmosphere towards that
end and to prevent the region from falling victim to
violence, misery and desperation. We must ensure that
common sense and moderation prevail in the Middle
East.
On the other hand, we should all agree that the
root cause of what we are witnessing is the
continuation of the Middle East problem. Until and
unless a just, equitable and lasting solution is found to
the problem, there can be no permanent peace and
security in the region. Unilateral steps and
arrangements and the use of force are no substitutes for
a comprehensive settlement.
For decades, Turkey has provided substantial
assistance to Palestinians. In the light of recent events,

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

that assistance will continue unabated. Turkey is also
prepared to contribute to the efforts to bring relief to
the suffering Lebanese people. Both peoples need the
full solidarity and support of the international
community.
What is happening in the region, if not stopped
immediately, will go down in history as a most
regrettable episode for all of humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members
of the Security Council for having convened this urgent
meeting to address the new escalation in the Middle
East. We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his efforts and good
offices aimed at finding a solution to this crisis. We
also thank him for his briefing to the Security Council
on the recent developments in the Middle East.
The Moroccan Kingdom is, of course, following
with great concern the current serious situation in the
Middle East and the developments of the past few
days, in both Lebanon and the Gaza Strip. In this
connection, the Moroccan Kingdom strongly condemns
the use of excessive force, in contravention of all
international humanitarian instruments. In that regard,
we would like to express our solidarity with the
brotherly Palestinian and Lebanese peoples.
The current situation in the region is likely to
worsen, given Israel’s determination to continue its
aggression against the brotherly Lebanese State,
targeted at its basic infrastructure, and its vital sites
using the methods of collective punishment and
displacement of thousands of innocent and defenceless
civilians. Because of the bombardment, the number of
displaced persons is constantly increasing, which will
lead to a serious humanitarian crisis unless the
international community responds in a serious manner.
It is also worth noting that, in view of the worsening
crisis in this brotherly country, it is increasingly
difficult for our Lebanese brothers to access food and
other basic supplies, given that there is no emergency
plan to provide assistance to victims. In that context,
the Moroccan Kingdom urges the international
community to act promptly to contain this crisis and
allow humanitarian relief agencies to deliver
emergency humanitarian assistance to victims. In
solidarity with the Lebanese people, the Moroccan

06-43915

Kingdom responded swiftly to the Lebanese
Government’s appeal, and sent humanitarian assistance
to alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Lebanese
people.
Needless to remind the Council that this
aggression adds up to another aggression against the
Palestinian people, perpetrated in silence and in the
absence of the international community. The
Palestinian people are experiencing destruction of
infrastructure, the murder of innocent people and
arbitrary arrests of symbols, officials and leaders of the
Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian people’s
legitimate representatives.
We note with great concern the inability of the
Security Council to take the necessary measures in the
face of this tragic situation to put an end to this
aggression, so as to pave the way for diplomatic action
to find a solution to this crisis. We strongly urge the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security. In that context, the Moroccan Kingdom would
like to express its support for any initiative that could
contribute to the following: first, an immediate
ceasefire, in order to pave the way for diplomatic
action to defuse the crisis; secondly, a lifting of the
blockade against the Lebanese State; thirdly, support
for the Lebanese authority in its endeavour to exercise
its sovereignty and control over its entire territory;
fourthly, the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
Lebanon so that it can face this crisis, and the opening
of secure humanitarian corridors in order to bring the
necessary aid to civilian populations; fifthly, the free
movement of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) so that it can carry out its mission,
particularly in providing humanitarian assistance and
protection to innocent civilians.
Lastly — and this pertains to the Palestinian
cause — the Moroccan Kingdom, calls for the release
of all Palestinian ministers and elected representatives,
who were arrested by the Israeli army, and reaffirms
the need for an immediate end to the violent campaign
in the Palestinian territory and for the urgent
withdrawal of the Israeli army from the Palestinian
territories, as well as for an end to the policy of
collective torture and the targeting of civilians.
The Israeli Government’s persistence in its
present policy signals that the cycle of violence and

29

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

counter-violence will continue. This represents a
concrete threat to regional and international peace and
security. In this context, the Moroccan Kingdom urges
the international community to strive for a lasting, just
and comprehensive settlement to the Middle East issue
and expresses its deep conviction that negotiations
remain the only way to bring about a peaceful
settlement and international legitimacy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating your
delegation on assuming the Council presidency, as well
as your predecessor for her able stewardship of the
Council last month. I also wish to thank you for
convening this open meeting on an issue that is truly
threatening international peace and security.
The international community is witnessing with
horror and indignation the daily exacerbation of two
cases of blatant and premeditated aggression and
multiple war crimes perpetrated by the Israeli regime
against the people of Palestine and Lebanon under
absurd and all too familiar pretexts. Meanwhile this
Council, entrusted with the responsibility of preserving
international peace and security and suppressing acts of
aggression, is forced into inaction and appeasement by
the patrons of the aggressor.
Ten long days of blanket and indiscriminate air,
missile and artillery strikes against civilians and
civilian infrastructure across Lebanon have gone by
while this Council has been prevented from even
calling for a ceasefire. Meanwhile, more than 350
innocent civilians have been murdered, over a thousand
maimed and hundreds of thousands rendered homeless
in a proclaimed response to the capture of two soldiers.
Terrorism in the truest sense of the word is on
display, as the aggressor gives short notice before
beginning to bomb entire neighbourhoods and regions.
With bridges, roads, tunnels, seaports and airports
already hit and a complete blockade imposed,
terrorized civilians are left to wonder how to flee and
where to seek refuge. Still more daunting, with the
increasing lack of food and medicine, attacks on
humanitarian convoys and disrupted water and
electricity supplies, a serious humanitarian crisis is in
the making.

30

No stretching of international law or of the
principles of the Charter — even by the most highly
paid lawyers, pundits or politicians — can logically
sell
such
unbridled,
disproportionate
and
indiscriminate barbarism and collective punishment
against civilians as self-defence.
The aggression against Lebanon followed similar
aggression against the Gaza Strip. The Palestinian
people were and continue to be subjected to the same
collective punishment by the same perpetrators. In
Gaza too, the civilian infrastructure is devastated and
the civilian population terrorized. The latest United
States veto in the Council further emboldened the
aggressors to continue and widen their crimes with
apparent impunity.
Yet if history is any guide, while the war machine
of the aggressor may be able to lay waste to buildings
and infrastructures, kill and maim civilians and take
their elected representatives hostage, it is impossible to
intimidate the people of Palestine and Lebanon into
submission, quash their desire to live free from
occupation and terror and crush the hope of refugees to
one day return home. In fact, experience indicates that
such onslaughts strengthen, not weaken, the resolve of
the people to resist aggression, occupation,
intimidation and terror.
And while the massive propaganda machine may
try to reverse the truth and spread smokescreens to hide
the ugly face of aggression, millions of the peoples of
the United Nations who have turned out in the streets
across the globe know exactly where the blame should
lie and which regimes rightly belong in the axis of evil
and terror. They know who are the culprits and their
supporters who have destabilized the region, frustrated
the aspirations for peace and justice, punished entire
populations for their democratic choice and plunged
the Middle East into chaos and who are actively
provoking a wider conflict.
The brutal collective punishment that the
Lebanese and Palestinian people are now enduring is
the Israeli signature brand of aggression, which the
peoples in the region have experienced time and again
in the past several decades. The new round is more
alarming as it occurs at a sensitive time when various
Lebanese communities and parties are engaged in a
national endeavour to reach a comprehensive
understanding through an all-inclusive national

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

dialogue, an effort that the aggressors aim to defeat as
well.
It is important to note that this Israeli onslaught is
part of their designs on Lebanon, exemplified in their
repeated violations of Lebanese borders and airspace,
holding on to the Shaba’a farms and keeping Lebanese
detainees. Those designs have continued in the years
since their retreat from that country. In fact, the blanket
air strikes and artillery and missile attacks against
targets across Lebanon immediately after the border
incident on 12 July are indicative of a pre-existing
plan. Wide-ranging operations aiming at, among other
things, imposing sea, air and land blockades on a
whole country in a sensitive region could not have
been carried out without prior planning and prior
coordination with the supporting Power and the receipt
of the necessary green light. The joint rejection of all
calls for ceasefire is further proof.
The current position of the United States
Government is not only the culmination but pushing to
the extremes of decades of unswerving support for
Israeli aggressions against the Muslim and Arab people
in the region, leading, inter alia, to 31 vetoes and
supporting the flouting of those resolutions that, under
special circumstances, escaped the United States veto.
More importantly, it is regrettable that the
Security Council, long after such grave breaches of
international peace and security and the threat of their
spillover into adjacent areas, has been rendered
incapable of addressing the crisis, utterly failing to live
up to its responsibility under the United Nations
Charter. That failure has been taken as a licence by the
aggressors to kill and wreak havoc across Gaza and
Lebanon.
It would be a travesty of justice and grossly
against the interest of peace and stability in the region
if the Council, after 10 days of inaction, was forced to
simply relay the Israeli conditions and help to impose
them on the Lebanese and Palestinian people. An
immediate and unconditional ceasefire and an end to
the siege of Lebanon is what the peoples of the United
Nations demand and what the Security Council should
try to achieve. While many lives are being shattered,
families broken apart, civilian infrastructure devastated
and the stability of the wider region threatened, it is
cynical to place the plans and interests of the
occupying regime ahead of those of others and refrain
from even calling for an immediate ceasefire.

06-43915

We support a comprehensive solution to the crisis
that takes the legitimate demands of the aggrieved
people into account, including the release of the
Lebanese and Palestinian detainees, and holds the
aggressors accountable for the lives lost and the
infrastructure devastated.
Let me just state for the record, in response to
what has become a patented and, indeed, tired
smokescreen for the Israeli representative and his
supporters in their attempts to evade responsibility for
the crimes that are being perpetrated, that my
Government categorically rejects the baseless
allegations against Iran that were repeated today in the
Council. Those allegations are merely part and parcel
of an elaborate Zionist scheme to break resistance to
aggression and invasion in the region and to deflect
attention from the root cause of all tensions in the
Middle East, that is, the continued occupation of
Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian territories and its
fallout, including the illegal detention of thousands of
Arabs and the violation of their rights. Those
allegations emanate from the occupying regime and are
relayed by Zionist quarters across the globe to
overshadow its crimes.
Iran supports the people and the Governments of
Palestine and Lebanon and is prepared to provide them
with political and humanitarian assistance in helping
them restore their legitimate right to territorial integrity
and self-determination.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I commend you
personally, Mr. President, for having calmly but
persistently nudged your colleagues in the Council to
do something, and to do it immediately, to halt what is
increasingly becoming a dangerous, senseless and
destructive war. I would also like to strongly commend
the Secretary-General for laying before the Council
yesterday comprehensive, bold and far-reaching
proposals to bring about an immediate end to the
carnage.
First and foremost, however, we must work to
achieve an immediate and unequivocal ceasefire. The
elements contained in the Secretary-General’s
proposals provide the basis for diplomatic and political
efforts to bringing about a lasting solution to the
hostilities in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions.

31

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

We are faced with a tragedy in the Middle East
that threatens the viability and liveability of that region
as we know it. An extensive array of weapons is being
deployed to such an extent as to threaten the lives of
everyone. No one, it appears, is out of range or safe. As
the Secretary-General has said, what is most urgently
required is the immediate cessation of hostilities,
without which relief for survivors — the wounded and
the suffering — cannot be given, or even humanitarian
assistance provided to those in need. Even the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon itself has no freedom
of movement and is running out of basic necessities.
Given those circumstances and dangers, it was
reassuring to hear the Secretary-General proclaim that
we are not going to desert the Lebanese people in their
hour of need.
The Hizbollah abduction of Israeli soldiers was
both reckless and senseless and must be condemned. In
the highly tense climate of the Middle East, that act
was tailor-made to provoke a response from Israel,
which it did. Israel lost no time in describing
Hizbollah’s action as an act of war. And what followed
was, indeed, a war. The response was so excessive, so
destructive and so inhumane as to bring into question
the real motives of Israel. Israel declared a unilateral
war on Lebanon, citing the unprovoked action by
Hizbollah as a justification for the relentless and
massive destruction of infrastructure and the collective
punishment of the Lebanese people.
Was the overreaction worth the virtual
obliteration of a nation and its physical infrastructure?
That war is in its tenth day and is continuing as I
speak, causing untold loss and suffering on both sides.
Any country’s right to self-defence is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Inherent in this right,
however, is the principle, as well as the responsibility,
of justified response to aggression. Israel’s
unchallenged large-scale assault and systematic
destruction, before our very eyes, of a sovereign nation
that is a Member of this Organization cannot be
justified under any pretext as self-defence. The siege of
Lebanon is illegal, unwarranted and reckless. It is
totally unacceptable, unjustified and immoral to bring a
whole country to a halt by subjecting it to a merciless
and relentless pounding and blockade on all sides.
Lebanon has suddenly become a large prison, a
huge humanitarian crisis, with people crying in
desperation, “Where is the international community?
Where is the Security Council?” If the destruction of a

32

whole sovereign nation matters less than the capture or
death of one or two soldiers, is not this scary for our
civilization? Where is the proportionality? Are we
condoning this bizarre act of impunity, a sort of law of
the jungle that has no parallel in recent memory? Will
we not heed the embattled Lebanese Prime Minister, in
his sheer helplessness, crying that his country has been
torn to shreds and that no Government can survive on
the ruins of a nation? No doubt what has been
unfolding over the past 10 days has created a
dangerous precedent in international governance and in
inter-State relations.
It has been equally dismaying to observe the “no
action” mode pursued by the Security Council and key
players in the international community, many of whom
have assumed the classic pose of the three monkeys
who see no evil, hear no evil and speak no evil. The
world is virtually devoid of leadership, to say the least,
in bringing about the urgently needed immediate
cessation of hostilities. What now exists is a
conundrum in which each side must present a face
more resistant to compromise than the other. The
consequences for the region can only be further
escalation and destruction, moving further and further
away from peace and security for all.
Again, as the Secretary-General notes, whatever
damage Israel’s operation may be doing to Hizbollah’s
military capabilities, they are doing little or nothing to
decrease popular support for Hizbollah in Lebanon or
the region. Israel’s actions are seen there for what they
are: collective punishment of the entire civilian
population of Lebanon. As one analyst has pointed out,
what we are viewing on our television screens day in
and day out is sheer arrogance, a distortion of reality
and a projection of military superiority — all to the
detriment of reaching a comprehensive, genuine and
peaceful settlement of the conflict.
We agree that, in due course, there will be an
urgent need to arrange an international conference on
the situation regarding Lebanon, to assemble an
appropriate peacekeeping force capable of maintaining
peace in the area, and to rapidly put together a donors
conference to secure funding for an urgent aid package
for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and development
of Lebanon. Sadly though, while the Security Council
and key players maintain a resounding silence as the
carnage continues, each passing hour makes progress
towards the realization of such goals much harder.

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

We all know that, following the kidnapping of an
Israeli soldier in Gaza by Palestinian fighters a few
weeks ago — which we condemned — Israel resorted
to a full-scale war of bombardment that included major
destruction of vital infrastructure, including power
plants, depriving hundreds of thousands of civilians of
electricity and water in the sweltering heat of summer.
The blockade of Gaza — and the indiscriminate,
disproportionate and collective punishment of
Palestinians continue. We urge Israel to lift the siege
and to allow for the flow of humanitarian relief to
affected people.
The Secretary-General’s impassioned urging of
Israel yesterday here in the Council to reopen the
closed crossing points — without which, in his words,
“Gaza will continue to be sucked into a downward
spiral of suffering and chaos and the region further
inflamed” (S/PV.5492, p. 4) — must be heeded. As we
all know, until Israel accepts the rights of Palestinians
and refrains from shortcuts and unilateral acts that
prejudice final status issues, and until it negotiates in
good faith, there will be no end in sight, regrettably, to
the vicious cycle of violence. What is required is
boldness, determination and farsightedness on the part
of Israel to use its power towards achieving peace with
its neighbours, in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). That is very long overdue.
Surely, as we all know by now, peace and
security in the Middle East can never be driven by
either sheer power or misplaced pride, but by
pragmatism and realism. Security for all comes not
through unending conflict and warfare but through a
desire for genuine peace that recognizes the existence
and rights of all the peoples in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand has
observed with deep concern the escalation in hostilities
in the Middle East, involving the occupied Palestinian
territory, Israel and Lebanon. We condemn the loss of
innocent civilian lives and the destruction of vital
civilian infrastructure. We strongly urge all sides to
pull back from violence, observe international law and
allow international facilitators and mediators a chance
to put a peace process together.
We condemn the killing and detention of Israeli
soldiers by the military wing of Hamas and by
Hizbollah. The soldiers must be released immediately,

06-43915

and unharmed. Hizbollah must stop its rocket attacks
on Israel, which have taken civilian lives. States with
influence over Hamas and Hizbollah must act for
restraint, in the interests of the wider international
community. The message to Hamas and Hizbollah must
be that confrontation and violence are destroying the
prospects for a peace settlement in the Middle East.
At the same time, we cannot accept that Israel has
reacted with due proportionality or caution. Its attacks
on the occupied Palestinian territories and on Lebanon,
targeting militants and infrastructure, have also
destroyed housing and caused hundreds of casualties,
most of them civilians. It is causing further suffering
through the denial of the basic necessities of life and
through forced displacement that is affecting hundreds
of thousands of people. Israel must heed the many calls
to restrain itself and allow full and immediate access to
relief efforts. It must release officials of the Palestinian
Authority whom it has detained.
The Secretary-General is to be commended for
his efforts to bring about an immediate ceasefire and to
begin the process of negotiating and implementing a
solution to the crisis. He will need the full and active
support of the Security Council to achieve that
objective. New Zealand supports the thrust of his
proposals and urges the Security Council to give them
active and positive consideration.
There has been an ongoing failure to address and
resolve the root causes of the conflict in the Middle
East. The extremist message, which we deplore, has
resonated where injustice, deprivation, fear and
hopelessness reign. That philosophy is very dangerous
for the Middle East region and the rest of the world. A
ceasefire in Lebanon and the resolution of the
immediate causes of the conflict must be followed by
negotiations for a comprehensive peace in the region, if
such crises are to be avoided in the future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Sen (India): We thank you, Mr. President, for
scheduling this meeting. As this is the first time I take
the floor during your presidency, allow me to
congratulate you on your skilful and capable handling
of your presidency. I also wish to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Ambassador of Denmark for her
presidency of the Council last month.

33

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

India is seriously concerned about the escalating
tension in West Asia as a result of the developments in
the Gaza Strip and on the Israel-Lebanese border and
in Lebanon, which have the potential to inflame the
region further and widen the conflict.
India condemned the abduction of two Israeli
soldiers on 12 July 2006 and has called for their
immediate release. We have equally strongly
condemned the excessive and disproportionate military
retaliation by Israel, which has targeted civilian
infrastructure, including the Beirut airport, and resulted
in the killing and suffering of innocent civilians,
including women and children. The responsibility to
protect women and children in conflict has to be real,
and not theoretical.
At least one Indian national has been killed and
several injured in the bombings in Lebanon. There can
be no justification for the targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure, which merits condemnation and
is contrary to international law.
In his briefing to the Security Council yesterday,
the Secretary-General called for a ceasefire to prevent
further loss of life, provide humanitarian access and
give diplomacy a chance to work. In addition, the
Secretary-General elaborated the elements of a plan,
suggested by the United Nations mission to the region,
which he said must form the basis of any lasting
ceasefire. We believe that the international community
can no longer remain silent in the face of the severe
escalation of the conflict, in which civilian populations
have been affected and a humanitarian crisis is
looming. A spillover of the conflict beyond the region
is a distinct possibility.
The Secretary-General’s plan offers a firm basis
for discussions in the Security Council on how the
issue has to be addressed. An immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire would be predicated on the
return of the captured Israeli soldiers, the extension of
the authority of the Government of Lebanon over all of
its territory, and immediate measures to provide relief
and rehabilitation to the people of Lebanon, and
therefore a withdrawal of Israeli forces.
As a major troop contributor to both the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), India is concerned about the conditions
under which United Nations peacekeepers in the
conflict zone are required to perform their duties. The

34

Secretary-General, in his update yesterday on UNIFIL,
stated that UNIFIL had no freedom of movement,
which precluded it from even providing humanitarian
escorts for displaced people; that it was experiencing
difficulties in receiving essential supplies; and that it
was exposed to considerable risk from the ongoing
exchange of fire. These are cause for serious concern.
Unilateral restrictions on UNIFIL have to be removed,
and the mandate of the United Nations and the sanctity
of its personnel have to be respected.
There is equal concern about the situation in the
Gaza Strip. On 12 June, India condemned the killing of
innocent civilians, including women and children, by
the Israel Defence Force in an unprovoked attack on 9
June. India also condemned the incident at the Kerem
Shalom crossing near Gaza on 25 June, which
provoked the threat of massive retaliatory measures by
Israel.
India is seriously concerned at the hardships and
suffering of the Palestinian people as a result of the
evolving situation in Gaza and the West Bank — a
situation that, I may add, has been exacerbated by
Israel’s destruction of Palestinian infrastructure,
including roads, bridges and power plants. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
determined that nearly half the population in the Gaza
Strip is currently without electricity and that this
situation could persist for up to nine months. This
reduced capacity is affecting the provision of water,
with daily access for families being cut by up to 50 per
cent in some parts of the Gaza Strip. India condemns
the wholly unjustified arrest and continuing
incarceration of Ministers of the Palestinian National
Authority and members of the Palestinian Legislative
Council. There can be no justification whatsoever for
taking such action against duly elected representatives
of the Palestinian people. We call upon Israel to release
them immediately and unconditionally.
The international community needs to call for an
immediate halt to hostilities on all sides, counsel
utmost restraint, especially in the excessive use of
force, and urge a return to dialogue. We also reiterate
our call on all parties to renounce violence and to
resolve their differences through peaceful means. Israel
must halt its offensive, withdraw its forces from their
positions inside Gaza and release all political figures
and other Palestinians. At the same time, the
Palestinian leadership should make every effort to
facilitate the release of the Israeli soldier and prevent

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

any escalation of the conflict through rocket attacks
against Israel or other extremist actions by militants.
In response to a request from the Palestinian
authorities, and in keeping with India’s traditional and
consistent policy of extending sympathy and support to
the people of Palestine, the Government of India has
decided to give immediate humanitarian assistance in
the amount of 100 million rupees to the Palestinian
people in order to alleviate the difficult situation in
which the Palestinian people find themselves. This is in
addition to the approximately 700 million rupees of
assistance pledged last year during the visit of
President Abbas to India. The assistance will be
primarily in the form of life-saving drugs and medical
supplies requested by the Palestinian authorities.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for an
immediate
cessation
of
indiscriminate
and
disproportionate violence in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and a reopening of the closed crossing points.
It is unfortunate that President Abbas was held
incommunicado in Gaza for the last three weeks and
not allowed to meet anyone. The international
community needs to support a peace track for Gaza and
President’s Abbas’s call for a proper dialogue with the
Government of Israel.
It is our firm belief that a negotiated outcome of
this longstanding conflict is the only way to ensure
long-term peace, security and stability in the region,
leading to the establishment of a viable, united and
sovereign State of Palestine, living in peaceful
coexistence and harmony with the State of Israel.
In conclusion, it is vital that the international
community act to put an immediate end to the
hostilities and to ensure that the conflict does not
widen and engulf the entire region. We support the role
of the regional powers in finding a solution to the
crisis, as solutions imposed through unilateral
measures may not prove enduring. A comprehensive
solution to the situation in West Asia, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, offers the best
way forward. Our commitment to the Palestinian cause
was articulated by Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru,
Indira Gandhi and other leaders. What Jawaharlal
Nehru, one of the great founders of the Non-Aligned
Movement, wrote in a letter dated 11 July 1947 to
Albert Einstein remains relevant:
“I do not myself see how this problem can
be resolved by violence and conflict on one side

06-43915

or the other. Even if such violence and conflict
achieve certain ends for the moment, they must
necessarily be temporary. I do earnestly hope that
some kind of agreement might be arrived at
between the Arabs and the Jews. I do not think
even an outside power can impose its will for
long or enforce some new arrangements against
the will of the parties concerned.”
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Chile, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
very important meeting.
The Government of Chile expresses its deepest
regret at the situation prevailing in the Middle East as a
result of the escalation of violence in the region. We
condemn the disproportionate measures taken by the
Israeli forces, which have caused hundreds of deaths in
Lebanon — a majority of them civilians — as well as
the intentional destruction of infrastructure in the Gaza
Strip and in Lebanon, which threatens to engender a
humanitarian disaster.
We condemn also the attacks carried out by
Hizbollah, which have caused the death of civilians, as
well as its kidnapping of two soldiers. The
indiscriminate missile attacks against cities in northern
Israel are unacceptable. The soldiers should be
released, as should the Palestinian Authority officials
who remain under arrest in Gaza.
All of these factors only intensify the spiral of
violence that is endangering peace and stability
throughout the region. For that reason, we call on all
parties involved to put an immediate end to armed
actions, and we call on Israel forces to withdraw from
Lebanon and from the Gaza Strip. We call also on
Hizbollah to stop the violence and its indiscriminate
attacks, and we urge that the Government of Lebanon
exercise its sovereignty throughout its territory, with
the help of the international community, if Beirut so
requests.
We firmly support the suggestion made yesterday
by the Secretary-General that a diplomatic approach be
taken involving a package of practical measures aimed
at addressing the emergency situation and providing a
solution — hopefully a lasting one — to the crisis.

35

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
includes Chilean military officers, and Chile will
continue to work along the lines that the SecretaryGeneral has suggested.
With regard to the severe humanitarian crisis that
is affecting the Palestinian and Lebanese people, the
Government of Chile has taken the following
measures.
First, we supported the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council, which decided to send a
special mission to assess the human rights situation in
Palestine. Secondly, we have sent a shipment of
medicines so as to help alleviate, at least in part, the
severe humanitarian and health situation of the
Palestinian people in Gaza. Thirdly, we will very soon
be sending medicines and other humanitarian
assistance to the thousands of civilians affected by
the bombings in central and southern Lebanon.
Fourthly, just today we sent a Boeing 707 to Damascus
in order to repatriate numerous Chileans and other
Latin American nationals trapped in the midst of the
conflict.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
the Israeli military incursions into the occupied
Palestinian territories and into Lebanese territory and
the violation of Syrian airspace. On this occasion, more
than ever before, what has happened in the last few
days is extremely serious. From this same place, where
effective measures should have been devised to avoid
death and destruction, we send our condolences to the
families of all the countries affected by these
abominable acts.
Deeds have been carried out that indiscriminately
affect the territories and peoples of Lebanon and
Palestine. A military campaign to bomb the physical
infrastructure of Lebanon and parts of Gaza has been
undertaken. Bridges have been destroyed, as have
power stations that provide for the energy needs of
those peoples. Lebanon has been blockaded by land,
sea and air. These incursions are completely out of all
proportion and have destabilized the Middle East
region. One third of the deaths have been of children.
Venezuela condemns those acts and demands that they
cease immediately.

Finally, we repeat our call to return to the path of
dialogue and reason. The history of the region shows
that military solutions have always failed, and the cost
has been mainly paid by innocent victims.

The United Nations staff members who provide
humanitarian assistance to victims in Lebanon have
been attacked, which has prevented them from
fulfilling their role in assisting those who have been
affected by the confrontation.

The Government of Chile reiterates the
importance of strictly adhering to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly with respect to the settlement of disputes,
condemnation of the use or threat of the use of force
and full compliance with the resolutions of the Security
Council.

We condemn the arrest of parliamentarians and
members of the Palestinian National Authority. Those
acts are a flagrant violation of international law. The
fact that the Palestinian people freely chose a given
political group is no justification for this deplorable
conduct.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Arias Cárdenas (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, I bring greetings to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela fully supports the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia on behalf of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement.

36

Our country is convinced that maintaining peace
and international security depends on the premise that
relationships between States, quite apart from
ideological, cultural and political differences, should
be governed by the very strict adherence to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and by respect for international law, including the
principle of peaceful coexistence between States.
The Security Council cannot become an
accomplice of destruction and death. For a long time
now within the Council there has been an
obstructionist policy with regard to a balanced, just and
consensus action to resolve the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. That
demonstrates double standards that in no way

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

contribute to a fair, broad and lasting solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict. The Security Council should
fulfil the role that is incumbent upon it in a courageous
and responsible way.
The recent recourse to the veto could be
understood as complicity with the death and
destruction that is now occurring in the Middle East.
In the United Nations, we are witnessing a new
outrage that joins a long list of failures that represent,
one after another, lamentable episodes that taint the
history of the Organization — Iraq, Afghanistan,
Rwanda …. Is it possible that we could finally put an
end to this situation of death and destruction?
We cannot set aside the idea that, in view of the
Council’s failure to act, we should invoke the
resolution entitled “Uniting for Peace” (General
Assembly resolution 377 (V)) of 3 November 1950 for
an emergency session of the General Assembly to
discuss in a very broad, transparent and democratic
way the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and in this way adopt a resolution
that would not be vetoed.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates its solidarity with the innocent
victims and calls upon the Member States of the
Organization to develop a joint effort that would lead
to the immediate cessation of hostilities and the
resumption of negotiations that would promote the
advent of a much desired peace, to which all peoples of
the world have the right.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba fully supports the statement made by
the representative of Malaysia on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At this difficult time Cuba reaffirms its full
solidarity with the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples,
who are suffering again today the ruthless and cynical
aggression of the Tel Aviv regime.
Once more, we are gathered in this room to
discuss issues related to the continued and flagrant
violations of international peace and security, in the
face of which this Council — the United Nations organ
that supposedly should confront acts of aggression,
according to the mandate conferred on it by the United

06-43915

Nations Charter — sits with hands folded, as further
evidence of the double standard to which we are
becoming accustomed.
Israel’s escalation of military attacks on the
Palestinian people continues and increases despite
strong international condemnation. Every day the
number of innocent victims grows; every day the
situation worsens for more than a million defenceless
civilians, because practically all the infrastructure
necessary to their survival is being destroyed. The
already critical humanitarian situation is further
deteriorating in the illegally occupied territories.
Cuba condemns this inhumane and criminal
aggression that deliberately seeks to put an economic
and military stranglehold upon the resistance of the
Palestinian people. The Security Council keeps silence
and does not seem to be in a position to take strong
action against the aggressor. With that inaction the
Council is ensuring the impunity of this barbarism.
This unpunished and continued aggression has
undermined the spirit of the agreement reached
between Palestinian political forces, which would
allow for the resumption of peace negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis, as provided in relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
Israel continues to act with impunity under the
cover of the United States permanent veto in the
Security Council. Just few days ago, that country
wielded its veto power for the thirtieth time in
connection with Council draft resolutions related to
occupied Palestinian territories. Once again, the
hegemonic Power is utterly paralyzing the Council and
disregards the will of the overwhelming majority of the
international community.
One front of aggression is apparently not
sufficient for the Zionist State. On 12 July Israel
launched a new large-scale military operation, this time
against the Lebanese Republic. The number of civilian
deaths is increasing with every passing day. The
destruction of the country’s infrastructure — including
the runways of the Beirut international airport — is
ongoing, and the water and power supplies for the
civilian population have been seriously affected. As
part of its aggression, the Israeli Government has
imposed a tight naval and air blockade on the entire
country and has openly and directly threatened to
proceed with its aggression and to raze the southern

37

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

suburbs of the capital of Lebanon as further proof of its
known genocidal policy against the Arab peoples.
Cuba has on countless occasions denounced
Israeli violations of all the norms of international law
by its military attack on a sovereign country under the
spurious pretext of protecting its security, with the
economic and military support and blatant and
perfidious complicity of the United States Government,
which through its veto power guarantees impunity for
the aggressor regime and acts as a wall in the Security
Council to prevent any form of condemnation.
Once again, the Security Council’s passivity
regarding any issue that perturbs Washington and its
allies could lead to a new humanitarian crisis with
grave consequences for the entire region.
On 16 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba issued a statement strongly
condemning the savage military aggression by Israel
against the Lebanese Republic and urging the
international community and peace-loving forces to
mobilize and demand that Israel immediately put an
end to such barbaric acts, return to Lebanon the
territories that it has occupied and respect the most
basic norms of international law.
This meeting has been convened to debate the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We ask what issue relating to the region
could be brought before the Security Council under the
present circumstances other than the barbaric Israeli
acts against the Palestinian people and the direct
attacks against a sovereign State — the Lebanese
Republic. The only valid outcome of this meeting
would be the adoption of measures to put a stop to the
genocide and aggression and to condemn the
perpetrator of the genocide and aggression.
We therefore reiterate once again that the
Security Council must act without delay and assume
the responsibilities conferred on it by the Charter. This
body cannot continue to remain silent and complicit in
the face of these grave developments that are
endangering international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of the Sudan, to whom I
give the floor.
Mr. Abdelsalam (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this
open meeting. We hope that our deliberations will

38

awaken the conscience of the international community
and put an end to the barbaric acts that have shocked
the world. This is a tragedy that has taken us back to
the law of the jungle.
We are addressing the Council today as the Israeli
killing machine goes on a rampage. It is running amok,
indiscriminately killing innocent and unarmed
Lebanese civilians, spilling the blood of children and
women, including the elderly, the disabled and the sick.
It has spilled the blood of innocent people in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. It has deliberately demolished houses and
killed and injured hundreds of people. All of these
actions continue as we speak, yet there is a suspicious
silence on the subject. We are shocked that all of the
killing and destruction is being committed under the
pretext of self-defence — a pretext that seems to have
magical power. It lets the genie out of the bottle so as
to allow the killing and destruction to continue.
We condemn the Israeli military operations and
the bombing that has targeted the Lebanese
infrastructure. The Israelis have bombed Beirut
international airport. They have destroyed bridges, sea
ports and residential neighbourhoods. Israeli bombs
and missiles have killed entire families, and the
number of casualties is now in the hundreds. More than
1 million unarmed citizens have been forced to flee.
They have been displaced or are confined to shelters
under desperate humanitarian conditions and require
urgent assistance and relief from the international
community.
The Sudan strongly condemns the systematic and
methodical State terrorism being perpetrated by Israel
in an unprecedented manner. This should remind
everyone that we are gathered together under the
banner of this Organization to hold steadfastly to the
norms of humanitarian law, the Articles of the Charter
and the guarantees provided by United Nations bodies,
particularly the Security Council, which is entrusted
with the maintenance of peace and security. All
Member States should continue to firmly uphold those
principles on an equal basis. Where is that equal basis
now? A State has flouted and violated all of those
norms and covenants. Where is the political will of the
Council to rise to meet the expectations of the peoples
of the world and put a stop to the practice of State
terrorism and the killing of innocent civilians, the
destruction of infrastructure and the excessive,
indiscriminate and unjustifiable use of force?

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

The world was frustrated a few days ago when it
witnessed the total failure of the Council to halt the
Israeli aggression against Gaza and the other occupied
Palestinian territories. We are saying that so that Israel
does not think it is perpetrating those crimes under the
cover provided by the Council.
We appeal for decisive measures to halt the
Israeli war against Lebanon and to find a just solution
to the crisis. The international community should
shoulder its responsibility. The Council should act to
bring about, first, a comprehensive and immediate
ceasefire under United Nations auspices; secondly, the
restoration of all the occupied Lebanese territories;
and, thirdly, the release of all Lebanese prisoners and
detainees in Israeli prisons. Fourthly, it should respond
to the Lebanese appeal for relief and the provision of
urgent humanitarian assistance and lift the air, sea and
land blockade imposed by Israel against Lebanon.
Fifthly, it must hold Israel responsible for the
humanitarian crisis and the destruction of the economy
of Lebanon and demand compensation for that
destruction. Sixthly, an urgent plan must be drawn up
for the reconstruction of Lebanon in which friendly
countries and international organizations participate.
Finally, the Council must demand the immediate
cessation of the crime of genocide perpetrated by Israel
against the Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Today violence rages in
the Middle East once again. It is civilians on all sides
who pay the heaviest price. We extend our deep
condolences to the families of all the victims affected
by this crisis. Canadians have been directly affected by
this crisis. Recently, eight Canadians visiting relatives
were killed in southern Lebanon. As we speak, Canada
is working hard to rescue its nationals and others who
wish to leave Lebanon.
The dynamics in the region must change.
Sovereign, democratic countries like Lebanon cannot
be held hostage by terrorists. As we have all seen to
our dismay, the independent acts of terrorist
organizations, encouraged by countries supporting
them, can quickly embroil neighbouring countries in
hostilities. This serves no one’s interests.
The crisis in Lebanon has escalated at an
alarming pace, and the greatest toll has been exacted
upon innocent civilians in Lebanon and Israel.

06-43915

Hizbollah violated Israel’s sovereignty, unprovoked.
Israel’s response to the abduction and killing of its
soldiers was an exercise of its right to self-defence.
The G-8 reinforced this principle in its 16 July Saint
Petersburg Declaration — to which Canada adheres
strongly — calling upon Israel to exercise utmost
restraint and seek to avoid casualties among innocent
civilians and damage to civilian infrastructure, and to
refrain from acts that would destabilize the
Government of Lebanon.
It is now clear that Hizbollah’s objectives went
far beyond the abduction of Israeli soldiers. It is also
obvious that the abduction was only the prelude to a
major offensive intended to inflict as much pain and
suffering as possible, which is evident in Hizbollah’s
indiscriminate launching of hundreds of rockets into
urban areas deep in Israel with devastating
consequences, including the deaths of innocents. It was
also intended to sabotage the internal Lebanese
democratic political dialogue, whose objectives include
fulfilling resolution 1559 (2004). And finally, it was
intended to serve the interests of Hizbollah’s backers in
Damascus and Tehran.
This body passed resolution 1559 (2004) in an
earnest effort to disarm the terrorist organization
Hizbollah. It is a tragedy for Lebanon that since that
time Hizbollah has been allowed to operate with
impunity in southern Lebanon. The heaviest costs in
this regard continue to be borne by the Lebanese
people. Canada is already contributing to international
humanitarian efforts to assist them.
Although the Lebanese Government has been
faced with a formidable challenge, Syria and Iran —
countries that aid and abet Hizbollah with financial and
military support — must be held accountable. It is also
essential that any country in the area that has influence
on this terrorist organization should encourage an end
to violence and the recognition of Israel’s right to exist.
The key to ending this senseless violence lies
with Hizbollah. It must stop the rocket attacks. It must
release the abducted soldiers.
Canada also reaffirms the G-8’s call for the
Security Council to examine without delay the
possibility
of
deploying
an
international
security/monitoring presence in Lebanon. This should
be accompanied by the development of a political
framework to create conditions for stability and a
lasting peace. Canada also strongly endorses the G-8’s

39

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

appeal to the Council to develop a plan for the full
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). This body
must play a role in the implementation of that
resolution, and we welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts in this regard.
The situation in Gaza is also deeply troubling.
Canada is committed to supporting President Abbas
and continues to call on the Palestinian Authority to
take immediate steps to bring peace and stability to its
people. The resolution to this crisis begins with ceasing
the launching of Qassam rockets into Israeli towns and
immediately and unconditionally returning the young
Israeli corporal to his family.
(spoke in French)
Canada urges Israel to exercise the utmost
restraint in its operations in Gaza and to respect
international humanitarian law, including with regard
to the free flow of basic necessities of life. Civilian
infrastructure in the Gaza Strip has already been
largely devastated, and the civilian victims are more
numerous every day. Ultimately, a negotiated
settlement is the only road forward.
Canada endorses the Quartet’s conditions for the
Palestinian Authority — that is, to recognize Israel’s
fundamental right to exist, to accept previously signed
agreements, and, finally, to renounce violence. An end
to violence includes recognizing Israel as a legitimate
neighbour and its right to lasting security. It also
includes recognizing the right of Palestinians to their
own State, independent, viable and capable of
achieving the aspirations of their people.
It is the responsibility of all parties to work for
the cessation of violence. Only then can the
international community move towards repairing the
terrible damage that has been done over the past week
and generate a process aimed at a lasting solution to
this conflict that has gone on for too long. Not only the
Security Council, but also all of the United Nations and
its Member States must play a more significant role in
the Middle East if we are to achieve long-term security
and stability in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, first of all I would like to
thank you for having organized this open debate, which
allows those countries that are not Council members to

40

put forward our views with regard to the dramatic
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East, which
is extremely dangerous for the security of the whole
region.
As have the majority of delegations that have
participated in this debate, the delegation of Guatemala
wishes to express its concern and regret at the
deepening crisis in the Middle East. My delegation
joins the statement made by the representative of
Malaysia on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
Guatemala deplores the tragic death of innocent
civilians in the last few days due to the crisis between
Israel and Lebanon, and what has been happening in
the Gaza Strip since 25 June. We are concerned at the
grave situation and call on all parties to exercise
utmost moderation. We also stress the importance of
diplomatic and political measures and urge all parties
to carry out all possible efforts to solve the present
situation through peaceful means in order to put an end
to hostilities.
We urge the parties to respect international law at
all times, including international humanitarian law. We
remind them of their responsibility to protect the lives
of civilians and to refrain from attacking essential
civilian infrastructure. It is absolutely necessary to
re-establish electricity and water supplies and to ensure
unrestricted and continuous access to humanitarian
organizations, guaranteeing the safety of their staff, in
order to avoid a humanitarian crisis in the region,
especially in the Gaza Strip and in the south of
Lebanon.
My delegation condemns the arrest by Israel of
democratically elected authorities and other officials of
Palestine. At the same time, we condemn the
kidnapping and detention of an Israeli soldier by
Palestinian militants. The quick freeing of all of them
is an essential step to avoid a worsening of the
situation in the region. It is also essential for the
Government of the Palestinian Authority to adopt
effective and immediate measures to improve the
security and prevent terrorist attacks on Israel,
including the launching of missiles against its territory.
We reiterate our commitment to cooperate with
all the parties in seeking a broad, just and lasting peace
for the Middle East, based on compliance with
pertinent Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

1515 (2003), as well as the agreements of the Madrid
Conference and the principle of land for peace. In
effect, Israel has the right to live in peace within secure
borders, as does Palestine.
Guatemala deplores and vehemently condemns
the confrontations provoked by Hizbollah in the border
area between Lebanon and Israel since 12 July, and the
launching of missiles against the Israeli civilian
population in that area. We are extremely alarmed at
the increase in tensions in that area, and so my
Government once again urges all parties to stop the
escalation of hostilities that would mark a new and
dangerous deterioration in the regional situation.
In that context, Guatemala urges the Government
of Lebanon to spare no effort to ensure that the two
Israeli soldiers captured by the Hizbollah militia are
unconditionally released as soon as possible. It also
urges the Government of Israel to withdraw as soon as
possible from Lebanese territory and to respect the
Blue Line in order to re-establish stability in the region
and guarantee the security of the civilian population.
Israel has every right to act in self-defence.
However, it should act with moderation and ensure that
its actions are proportionate and reasonable. Our
country is extremely concerned at the Israeli military
actions, in particular at the excessive use of force; the
destruction of civilian infrastructure, especially
airports, power grids, bridges and roads; attacks
against densely populated areas that endanger the lives
of innocent civilians; and the imposition of a sea, air
and land blockade against Lebanon. We urge that an
immediate end be put to such practices.
On the other hand, we demand also that
Hizbollah stop launching rockets into Israeli territory.
My delegation calls for an immediate end to the
hostilities and for the beginning of peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations.
In that respect, we call once again for the
implementation, without further delay, of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
425 (1978), 1559 (2004) and other, subsequent ones.
Guatemala welcomes and supports the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to send a high-level delegation to
contribute to defusing tension. It calls for respect for
international humanitarian law and for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure, as well as for the
deployment of a multinational force in the area.

06-43915

For all those reasons, we reiterate the call made
by the Non-Aligned Movement, as we believe that the
Security Council has the responsibility to prevent an
even greater polarization among all the parties
involved and to help them find alternatives to the
escalating violence. We view the work of the Council
as a complementary effort, in a spirit of convergence,
to those of other actors in the international community,
including the Secretary-General’s measures. The
Council cannot abdicate its responsibility to protect
civilians or its competence in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Guatemala, as a nation that has suffered from
conflict and the resulting violence, calls for reason to
prevail, for the protection of human life and for the
safeguarding of human rights, with a view to putting an
end to all violence and intolerance, so as not to
condemn the region to a future of even greater violence
and suffering.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is Mr. Paul Badji, Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Badji: Mr. President, allow me at the outset
to congratulate you on the exemplary manner in which
you have steered the work of the Council during the
month of July. I am grateful to you and to the other
members of the Council for having given me the
opportunity to participate in this debate on behalf of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
The Council is meeting today to consider the very
alarming situation in the Middle East. While the
world’s attention is mostly focussed on the grave
situation in Lebanon, Israel’s military activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory are continuing unabated.
Since Israel’s escalation of its military operation in the
Gaza Strip after the capture of an Israeli soldier on 25
June, more than 100 Palestinians have been killed,
including many civilians. Hundreds more have been
wounded. The number of casualties is also rising in the
West Bank, where Israeli incursions into major cities
continue.
The military activities of the occupying Power
are also deliberately causing a major humanitarian
crisis among the innocent civilian population. The only
power plant in the Gaza Strip was destroyed by Israel
right at the outset of its operation, and more than

41

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

1 million people are living without electricity for most
of the day — electricity which is needed, among other
things, to operate water wells, the main source of
drinking water. International relief efforts are
constantly being hampered, if not completely
prevented, by the occupying Power, because of the
almost total closure of the Gaza borders.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People condemns the
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of Israel’s
military might against the Palestinian population.
Deliberate attacks by Israeli forces against civilian
property and infrastructure in the Gaza Strip violate
international humanitarian law. The continued closure
of the crossing points of the Strip constitutes collective
punishment of an entire innocent population. Israel
needs to be reminded that, as an occupying Power, it is
bound under international law to protect and safeguard
the basic human rights of the Palestinian population.
The Committee has also called for a cessation of
rocket attacks on Israel and other violent actions by
Palestinian armed groups that put civilians in serious
danger and inflame and destabilize the already fragile
situation.
The Committee would also like to voice its
frustration at the inability of the international
community to de-escalate the alarming situation in
Lebanon and in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. We deplore the fact that the
Council was not in a position to adopt a draft
resolution that was widely perceived as a balanced first
step to engage the parties to end violence and embark
upon a comprehensive ceasefire. The Committee
considers that the Council should live up to its
responsibilities and help end the current escalation,
which is causing bloodshed and misery in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The Committee continues to consider that the
occupation by Israel of Palestinian territory remains
the root cause of the conflict. This longstanding
conflict can have no final solution without the
achievement by the Palestinian people of their
inalienable rights, defined by the General Assembly in
1974 as the right to self-determination without external
interference, the right to national independence and
sovereignty, and the right of Palestinians to return to
their homes and property from which they have been
displaced and uprooted. The Committee will continue

42

its work under the mandate given to it by the General
Assembly.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Al-Otaiba (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I am delighted, on behalf of the United Arab
Emirates, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
distinguished manner in which you have presided over
the Security Council this month, and I wish you every
success. I would like also to seize this opportunity to
thank your predecessor, the representative of Denmark,
for her wise leadership of the Council last month.
Lebanon and the occupied Palestinian territories
are facing barbarous destruction at the hands of Israel.
It is general and deliberate destruction of their social
and economic infrastructure as well as the
displacement and massacre of thousands of their
inhabitants — in particular women, children and the
poor — by Israeli forces that are equipped with the
most sophisticated weapons, including weapons
condemned by the international community. Those
actions are a stark and blatant violation of all
international law provisions, the United Nations
Charter, and human rights conventions, including the
Geneva conventions. In addition, those actions
constitute an organized war crime and State terrorism,
which are punishable under international law.
Under no condition can those barbarous and
criminal Israeli acts, committed largely against
civilians, be justified. Those actions include the
adoption by Israel of a scorched-earth policy and
collective punishment targeting civilian infrastructures
that had been funded by donors over many years.
Electricity and water supplies have also been cut, as
well as humanitarian assistance. Israel has justified
those actions through its legitimate right to selfdefence. The question may be raised, however — how
can two peoples, in their entirety, be punished, and
how can they be exposed to such treatment for the sake
of the so-called campaign by Israel to release its
soldiers who have been abducted for a swap with
political prisoners detained in Israeli jails for years,
including children and women?
My country condemns the use of force and
military solutions, as such solutions do not solve the
problems of the civilian population. On the contrary,
military action complicates and prolongs such

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

problems. Therefore we strongly condemn the
continued Israeli aggression against Lebanon and the
Gaza Strip.
In addition, we remain deeply concerned by the
inability of the Security Council to put an end to the
suffering of the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. We
believe that such inaction incites Israel to continue its
barbarous violations and destruction in the Lebanese
and Palestinian territories. Therefore, we urge the
Security Council to reject the double-standard policy
and put pressure on Israel to end its aggression against
the Lebanese and the Palestinian peoples, and thus,
create greater balance in the region, rather than
conflict.
We urge the United Nations to take action to
mobilize humanitarian support on the part of the
international community in order to alleviate the
suffering of the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. In
that respect, we support all the current diplomatic
efforts aimed at finding a just, peaceful and
comprehensive solution to the crisis in the region.
Moreover, we support the attempts aimed — as far as
Lebanon is concerned — at the proclamation of an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire under the
auspices of the United Nations, calling upon Israel to
end its aggression against the Lebanese people, to stop
targeting civilian populations, to ensure access to
emergency humanitarian assistance in the affected
areas, and to stop targeting humanitarian convoys,
which has resulted in, among other things, the recent
and unfortunate destruction of a convoy from the Arab
Emirates which was carrying basic foodstuffs and
medicines.
We also call for the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004), including the
immediate withdrawal of Israel from the Sheba’a
Farms, as well as the start of negotiations for the
release of the detainees. Assistance should also be
provided to the Lebanese Government so as to enable it
to extend its authority over the entire Lebanese
territory. An emergency meeting of donors should be
convened in order to organize assistance for Lebanon
and to reschedule Lebanese debt to enable it to cope
with the current difficult conditions.
We reaffirm that our country, which has shown
great generosity to Lebanon so far, will continue to
offer assistance whenever it is required.

06-43915

Concerning the occupied Palestinian territories,
we call upon the Israeli Government to immediately
cease all military operations in the Gaza Strip,
withdraw all its troops from the occupied territories,
release the thousands of detainees held in Israel, stop
taking unilateral measures — including settlement
activities and the construction of the separation wall —
halt the implementation of extrajudicial measures and
assaults with regard to the Palestinian people, and
ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
affected areas. We also call for the liberation of the
detainees of the Palestinian Authority, so that the
Palestinian
Authority
can
assume
its
full
responsibilities with regard to its people.
Finally, we call upon Israel to compensate all
victims of its actions in the region, in order to end the
crisis and guarantee its own security. We cannot accept
aggression. A solution to the problem can be achieved
only through continued negotiation, a continuation of
the peace process and the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all the occupied Arab territories — including the
Golan Heights, Jerusalem and southern Lebanon — in
accordance with international resolutions, and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which calls for the establishment of
two States, a Palestinian State and an Israeli State,
living peacefully, side by side, in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): Mr. President, we
wish to thank you for convening this important meeting
and also to commend you for the exemplary manner in
which you have stewarded the Council during the
month of July.
We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The South African Government is deeply
concerned at the escalation of the conflict in Lebanon,
northern Israel and the Gaza Strip, which has resulted
in the loss of many lives and the destruction of critical
infrastructure. Those attacks are clearly raising
tensions in the region to new dangerous heights at a
time when all sides in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
should be looking at ways to end the deadlock in
negotiations and move the peace process forward.
The South African Government reiterates that
Israel’s use of air strikes in heavily populated areas to

43

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

carry out extrajudicial killings is against international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions. We
cannot accept the principle of collective punishment.
We do not believe that an entire nation can be attacked
because of tensions with Hizbollah. The Government
of South Africa calls on the Israeli Government to
refrain from that type of action and, as a major military
Power in the region, to act with restraint to avoid
further civilian casualties and the destruction of vital
infrastructure.
Furthermore, we call on the Palestinians and
Hizbollah to release the Israeli prisoners, and we call
for an end to the launching of rockets into Israel.
Failure to do so is resulting in the Israeli military
offensive that is causing massive death and destruction.
We welcome the package of elements put forward
by the Secretary-General after the return of his
diplomatic mission to the region. We believe that it is
only through a cessation of hostilities — which would
prevent further loss of innocent life, allow for full
humanitarian access and give diplomacy a chance —
that there will there be an opportunity to end the crisis.
We therefore urge the Security Council to act
decisively and to assume its Charter-granted
responsibility of contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security by working to urgently
resolve this conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): We are grateful for the
opportunity to share our deep concern over the
prevailing chaos and gloom that afflict Lebanon and
Palestinian territories.
The Government of Pakistan strongly condemns
the Israeli aggression against Lebanon, which
continues to cause bloodshed, loss of innocent life and
damage to infrastructure and property. The President
and Prime Minister of Pakistan, and many other world
leaders, have called for an immediate ceasefire and a
cessation of hostilities by all parties to the conflict. The
loss of innocent life must stop. We believe it is a
fundamental responsibility of the Security Council, as
well as of major Powers and regional actors, to ensure
that violence is halted, hostilities cease and peace is
established.
We thank the Secretary-General for dispatching
his team to the region to bring the current mayhem to

44

an immediate end. We appreciate the briefing by the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser this morning,
which clearly brought out the magnitude of the
problem before us.
The current situation is alarming, as the number
of dead, injured and displaced persons is rising by the
hour. The Government of Lebanon, with which we
reiterate our solidarity, is facing a critical situation.
The present situation is a direct result of actions
against the principle, widely recognized in the Middle
East, that there is no military solution to the conflict.
The warring parties must therefore cease hostilities and
give diplomacy and peace a chance.
We call upon the Government of Israel and
Hizbollah to cease all military action forthwith. We
urge the Council to take an objective view of the
situation, to abide by its Charter responsibility to
maintain international peace and security and to
establish a ceasefire and ensure its scrupulous
monitoring and respect by all parties concerned.
The international community, including the
United Nations, should mobilize resources to provide
humanitarian relief to the hundreds of thousands of
displaced and traumatized people. Pakistan has already
sent medical and food assistance to Lebanon.
We must also work assiduously towards longterm peace and stability in the region by ensuring that
the relevant Security Council resolutions and bilateral
and plurilateral agreements are implemented in both
letter and spirit. The Security Council, major Powers
and the Quartet must act immediately and resolutely to
stop the attacks and the violence and to ensure that the
peace process is put back on track.
We should not allow the current situation to push
the region back into a spiral of violence. The Security
Council’s urgent intercession in that context is
imperative. It must live up to its Charter obligations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Nguyen Duy Chien (Viet Nam): Viet Nam
aligns itself with the statement delivered by
Ambassador Hamidon of Malaysia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the
escalation of violence in the Middle East. It has caused
hundreds of deaths and injuries, severely damaged

06-43915

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

infrastructure and forced hundreds of thousands of
people to flee from their homes. In fact, while we meet
here, violence is continuing to escalate and the number
of victims is increasing by the hour, if not the minute.
We are gravely worried about the dire
humanitarian situation of the Lebanese people and
about the possible humanitarian catastrophe now
looming over the Middle East. We are also worried
about the fact that United Nations agencies and their
humanitarian partners are unable to reach southern
Lebanon to assess the situation or to deliver
humanitarian aid. Civilians, and children in particular,
must be protected.
Viet Nam condemns all acts of terror and
violence, all attacks against civilians and their property
and the destruction of infrastructure. We condemn the
abduction and detention of Government officials and
other individuals and demand their immediate and
unconditional release.
Viet Nam calls on the international community
and donor countries to provide assistance and
humanitarian aid to Lebanon. All air, sea and land
blockades imposed on Lebanon recently should be
lifted so that humanitarian activities can take place.
The safety of the personnel of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon should also be ensured, to
help them fulfil their mandate and provide
humanitarian assistance to people in need.
Viet Nam calls on the parties concerned to stop
the indiscriminate and excessive use of force and to
exercise restraint and take practical steps to save the
Middle East peace process, create favourable
conditions to stabilize the situation and resolve the
dispute through negotiations.
In the face of the grave situation prevailing in the
Middle East, the international community should act
urgently and decisively to stop violence and killing in
the region. We call upon the Security Council to take
prompt action in order to achieve an immediate
cessation of hostilities and bring the parties concerned
to the negotiating table, with a view to finding a longlasting solution to the conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Mexico has already made a statement
on the conflict between Lebanon and Israel. However,

06-43915

we would like to once again state our condemnation of
the provocation by Lebanese irregular forces that
precipitated this crisis and of the disproportionate use
of force that has caused destruction of fundamental
civilian infrastructure and more than 500 civilian
casualties in Lebanon and the Gaza Strip.
As the Secretary-General has said, the actions of
Hizbollah, although put forward as a defence of
Palestinian and Lebanese interests, in fact serve neither
of the two. Quite the contrary, it makes a whole nation
a hostage.
However, we think that the most urgent thing at
this moment is to move from the stage of recrimination
to that of action, in the Security Council as well as on
behalf of the international community. Yesterday, the
Secretary-General presented the elements for a draft
resolution of this organ. The immediate actions that are
necessary are evident: the creation of humanitarian
corridors, such as those approved this morning by
Israel, which should be broad enough to reach the
north of Lebanon, and freeing of Israeli hostages.
But this situation cannot be resolved with a
simple ceasefire or intermediate steps such as those I
have mentioned. Since the unilateral withdrawal by
Israel in 2000, in compliance with Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), it has not been possible to
stabilize the situation along the Blue Line. The efficacy
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), as the Secretary-General himself has said,
has been questioned on repeated occasions.
In this context, the just and lasting solution to this
conflict means guaranteeing the full sovereignty of the
Government and the legitimate military forces of
Lebanon in the south of its territory, along the Blue
Line. This demand of the international community is
already in resolution 1559 (2004). However, the
Lebanese Government has not had the means necessary
to implement it.
In this context, the proposal to create an
international force, preferably under the auspices of the
United Nations, is particularly relevant. In cooperation
with Lebanese authorities, it would guarantee security
and stability in the south of the country. This
international force should have a broad mandate and, if
necessary, should gradually replace the UNIFIL.
We also support the Secretary-General’s proposal
for implementing resolution 1680 (2006) with regard to

45

S/PV.5493 (Resumption 1)

a definitive delimitation of international borders
between Lebanon and its neighbours, Syria and Israel,
including the question of the Shaba’a farms.
Once these urgent issues are resolved, the
international
community
should
monitor
the
compliance with resolution 1559 (2004) with regard to
the disarmament of irregular forces operating in
Lebanon. The United Nations should have a plan and a
calendar for the definitive disarming of those forces,
and, if necessary, the Security Council should provide
the means to guarantee complying with this process.
Without a definitive disarming of the irregular
forces that operate in Lebanon, there can be no
guarantee of peace and stability, either within Lebanon
or outside. Mexico reiterates its support for resolution

46

1559 (2004) as the best formula to guarantee the
sovereignty and full independence of a stable and
prosperous Lebanon that can live in peace with its
neighbours.
Mexico also expresses its very deep concern at
the very serious humanitarian situation of the
population in Gaza. We make an urgent appeal to start
implementing the measures proposed yesterday by the
Secretary-General.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
other speakers on my list. The Security Council has
therefore come to the end of its consideration of the
item.
The meeting rose at 8 p.m.

06-43915
