S/2016/366

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 April 2016
Original: English

Twenty-third semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
I. Background
1.
The present report is my twenty-third semi-annual report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a review
and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since my previous report
on the subject, which was issued on 7 October 2015 ( S/2015/764). I note the
continued lack of progress on key provisions of the resolution and highlight
continued concerns about increasing pressure on the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Lebanon.
2.
The presidency of Lebanon has remained vacant for almost two years, despite
renewed attempts at agreeing on a resolution to the situation. The vacuu m and its
impact on other Lebanese institutions are a cause of deep concern, as stated by the
Security Council in its press statement issued on 17 March (SC/12287).
Notwithstanding the momentum that followed proposals for presidential candidates,
the Free Patriotic Movement and Hizbullah continued to boycott parliamentary
sessions, making the parliament inquorate for the thirty -seventh time. The Council
expressed concern at the inability of the parliament to elect a president following
the lack of quorum. It reaffirmed its call upon all Lebanese leaders to act
responsibly and with leadership and flexibility to urgently convene a parliamentary
session and proceed to the election of a president.
3.
Despite the increasing rhetoric by both parties, the dialogue between the
Future Movement and Hizbullah continued, as did the parliamentary dialogue, both
under the auspices of the Speaker of the parliament, Nabih Berri. On 14 January, the
Cabinet resumed its sessions for the first time since July 2015.
4.
The war in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to have a significant impact on
Lebanese security and stability. In a vivid reminder of the vulnerability of Lebanon
to the threat of terrorism, on 12 November, Beirut suffered a double suicide attack,
in which 43 persons were killed and more than 200 injured, the deadliest incident
since the end of the Lebanese civil war, claimed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). I condemned the attack, reiterated the need for all parties to continue
to work to preserve Lebanese stability and security and called for those responsible
for that terrorist act to be brought to justice swiftly. On 13 November, the Security
Council also condemned it in the strongest terms (see SC/12120).
16-06655 (E)

290416

*1606655*

S/2016/366

5.
As reflected in my report on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006) (S/2016/189), on 20 December, United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) radar recorded three rockets that had been launched from the
Force’s area of operations towards Israel and, on 4 January, the Israel Defense
Forces informed UNIFIL that three improvised explosive devices had been
detonated against two Israel Defense Forces vehicles south of the Blue Line, in the
Shab’a Farms area. On both occasions, the Israel Defense Forces responded with
artillery and mortar fire north of the Blue Line. There were no fatalities. Both
incidents are serious violations of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). I
condemned both the attack on 4 January and the firing o f rockets on 20 December.
In addition, I noted that retaliatory fire by Israel into Lebanon also was a violation
of resolution 1701 (2006). I called upon the parties to fully respect the cessation of
hostilities and urged all concerned to exercise maximum restraint and cooperate
with UNIFIL in order to prevent an escalation.
6.
On 19 February, Saudi Arabia announced the suspension of its $3 billion
contribution of support for the Lebanese Armed Forces and its planned $1 billion of
assistance to the Lebanese security services. On 2 March, the Gulf Cooperation
Council declared Hizbullah a terrorist organization, as did the League of Arab States
on 11 March.
7.
The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to respond to multiple security threats
to Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity. The security forces remained
engaged in combat against armed elements from the Syrian Arab Republic in the
eastern border area, in particular around the town of Aarsal. On 1 December 2015,
the Nusrah Front released the servicemen from the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Internal Security Forces whom it had detained since August 2014, while Lebanese
security personnel abducted by ISIL remain detained.
8.
Lebanon continued to host the largest number of registered refugees per capita
in the world, at 1,069,111. The number of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab
Republic was at 41,000. On 4 February, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Germany, Kuwait, Norway and the United Nations co -hosted a
conference in London to raise funds to meet the immediate and longer-term needs of
refugees and Lebanese host communities, with a particular focus on education and
job creation. In a statement of intent at the conference, the Government of Lebanon
presented a five-year programme in which it acknowledged the protracted nature of
the crisis and the need for more cost-effective interventions in the period going
forward.
9.
On 24 and 25 March, I visited Lebanon jointly with the President of the World
Bank and the President of the Islamic Development Bank. The visit was aimed at
promoting the new Concessional Financing Facility to help to alleviate the impact
of the Syrian crisis on the Lebanese economy. The visit included field visits to
Tripoli and the Bekaa valley. It allowed us to see first-hand Syrian refugee sites and
the Palestine refugee camp of Nahr el-Bared. I also visited the UNIFIL headquarters
in southern Lebanon. I addressed political and security issues of concern in my
meetings with the Prime Minister, Tammam Salam, the Speaker and the Patriarch,
Bechara Rai, as well as in a joint meeting with the leadership of the Lebanese
Armed Forces and representatives of the International Support Group for Lebanon.

2/13

16-06655

S/2016/366

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
10. Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) on 2 September 2004, several of
its provisions have been implemented, as I highlighted in my previous reports. The
Syrian Arab Republic withdrew its troops and military assets from Lebanon in April
2005. Presidential and parliamentary elections were conducted freely and fairly in
2008 and 2009. Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic established full diplomatic
relations in 2009.
11. During the reporting period, the Prime Minister continued to affirm his
country’s respect for all United Nations resolutions. The conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic and its corresponding impact on Lebanon, however, continued to limit
progress in the implementation of the outstanding provisions of resolution 1559
(2004) and other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.
12. The delineation of the Syrian-Lebanese border, which was strongly
encouraged by the Security Council in its resolution 1680 (2006), remains pending.
Moreover, the existence and activities of Lebanese and non -Lebanese militias along
the border continue to pose a threat to the stability of the country and the region.
The Lebanese Armed Forces continue to deploy three regiments on the eastern
border, maintaining the most extended presence yet of State authority in that
vulnerable area. It remains essential that the State achieve a full monopoly on the
possession of weapons and the use of force throughout Lebanon. Continued support
from the international community in that regard remains a priority.
13. My representatives and I remained in regular contact with all parties in
Lebanon during the reporting period, including through my visit to Lebanon, as well
as with relevant regional and international leaders.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
14. With the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council aimed at
strengthening the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the country, in line with the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective has remained
the highest priority of my efforts to facilitate the implementation of all resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon.
15. The persistent vacuum at the helm of the country is a cause for serious
concern. In December, the Future Movement leader, Saad Hariri, endorsed the
leader of the Marada Movement, Suleiman Franjieh, as presidential candidate.
Subsequently, the leader of the Lebanese Forces, Samir Geagea, endorsed the leader
of the Free Patriotic Movement, Michel Aoun, as candidate. Notwithstanding the
endorsement by two leaders of the 14 March Movement of two 8 March Alliance
figures as candidates, the Free Patriotic Movement and Hizbullah continued to
boycott the parliamentary vote.
16. It is noteworthy that the parliament met in an extraordinary session on 12 and
13 November and passed a number of economic and financial bills, demonstrating
the important legislative and budgetary role that this institution should be allowed to

16-06655

3/13

S/2016/366

play. The Speaker continued his efforts with the Prime Minister to bring key
Lebanese institutions back to functionality. Yet, the boycott of parliamentary
sessions by the Free Patriotic Movement and Hizbullah continued to render it
inquorate, preventing the election of a president.
17. The dialogue between the Future Movement and Hizbullah continued, under
the leadership of the Speaker. A twenty-seventh session of the dialogue was held on
13 April, in which the participants highlighted the importance of bolstering the role
of the State and that of institutions in disclosing and combating corruption.
18. The Prime Minister continued to demonstrate strong leadership in guiding
Lebanon as it faced security, economic and humanitarian challenges. It is critical
that his efforts be complemented by those of a functioning cabinet and parliament.
The Cabinet met on 28 January 2016 in the first full session since July 2015. The
unity of the Cabinet remains fragile and, in a context in which other Lebanese
institutions are already paralyzed, it is critical that it unite around the Prime
Minister in the national interest of Lebanon. In a session on 2 February, the Cabinet
authorized the budget for municipal elections, which now are scheduled to be held
beginning on 8 May.
19. Following the decision by Saudi Arabia, on 19 February, to suspend its support
to the security forces, the Cabinet held an emergency meeting on 22 February and
issued a unanimous statement in which it reaffirmed its support for Arab consensus.
The Prime Minister reiterated the Government’s condemnation of the attack of
2 January against the Saudi Arabian embassy in Tehran. A number of Gulf countries
urged their nationals not to travel to Lebanon and, on 14 March, Bahrain announced
the expulsion of several Lebanese nationals from its territory over their alleged links
to Hizbullah. There were unconfirmed reports of further measures taken by some
States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council against Lebanese citizens for their
alleged links to Hizbullah.
20. The impact of regional events on Lebanon continued to increase the risk of
tensions in the country. The Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, and
the Future Movement leader emphasized the importance of avoiding sectarian
tensions nationally. They also reiterated their commitment to their bilateral
dialogue. On 7 March, the Prime Minister called upon Hassan Nasrallah to stop
verbal attacks on Saudi Arabia and other Gulf States and called for respect of the
Baabda Declaration and the policy of disassociation.
21. Protests were held on 27 and 28 February, during which Hizbullah supporters
blocked roads south of Beirut and in east Lebanon in response to a televise d media
show that purported to mock Hassan Nasrallah. The protests prompted concerns of
further escalation. In response, the Speaker and the Future Movement leader issued
a joint statement on 1 March in which they called for responsible leadership against
attempts to incite sectarian strife. Hassan Nasrallah called upon his movement’s
supporters to refrain from taking action in the streets and dismissed any suggestions
that the party planned to repeat the events of May 2008, when armed elements from
Hizbullah took to the streets and occupied central Beirut.
22. On 8 April, a former minister, Michel Samaha, was sentenced to 13 years’
imprisonment with hard labour for smuggling explosives from the Syrian Arab
Republic with a view to perpetrating terrorist acts in Lebanon, as part of a plot
against targets there, with the aim of provoking confessional strife after he had been

4/13

16-06655

S/2016/366

freed on bail on 14 January. On 21 February, the Minister of Justice and a key figure
in the 14 March Movement, Achraf Rifi, resigned fro m his position, partly in protest
over the release of Michel Samaha on bail and what he termed “Hizbullah’s
domination” over the Cabinet.
23. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request of the
Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. I continue to call upon
the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon to achieve the full delineation of their
common border. Since the beginning of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
however, progress has been even more difficult to achieve and no tangible steps
were taken by either side in that regard during the reporting period.
24. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain
elements essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
They also remain critical to facilitating proper border control. The complex security
situation along the Syrian-Lebanese border in the current circumstances, including
continuing reports of cross-border fighting and movements of arms and people,
further underlines the urgency of demarcating the border. While acknowledg ing the
bilateral nature of border delineation, progress on the matter remains an obligation
of the two countries, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1680 (2006)
and 1559 (2004).
25. Cross-border violations of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity have
continued on the eastern and northern borders as a direct result of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic. During the reporting period, there were a number of security
incidents across the Lebanese-Syrian border and in Lebanese territory close to the
border. There were reports of at least 55 cross-border shooting incidents, three air
strikes, 40 incidents of shelling, seven rocket attacks from the Syrian side of the
border and two attempted incursions by militants, reportedly resulting in 28 casualties
overall. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has continued to conduct air
raids in Lebanon, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity.
26. The continued occupation by Israel of the northern part of the village of
Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line stands in violation of the
sovereignty of Lebanon and resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). My
representatives and I continue to engage closely with both parties, with a view to
facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the area, pursuant to
resolution 1701 (2006).
27. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab’a Farms area during
the reporting period. Furthermore, neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has
responded with regard to the provisional definition of the area contained in my
report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), issued on 30 October 2007
(S/2007/641).
28. Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace, mostly with unmanned aerial vehicles
and fixed-wing aircraft, continued almost daily during the reporting period, in
violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
The Government of Lebanon has regularly protested against the violations. The
Israeli authorities claim that the overflights are carried out for security reasons. I
have deplored them and demanded that they should cease immediately.

16-06655

5/13

S/2016/366

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
29. The Government of Lebanon has reiterated to the United Nations its intention
to extend State authority over all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif
Accords and in resolution 1559 (2004). The Lebanese Armed Forces and the internal
security forces have played a crucial role in implementing that commitment under
difficult circumstances, but the ability of the Lebanese State to exercise fully its
authority over all its territory continues to be challenged.
30. Concern remains at the involvement of Lebanese fighters in the Syrian
conflict. Hizbullah has continued to publicly acknowledge its participation in the
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic, contrary to its commitment to the Baabda
Declaration and the Lebanese policy of disassociation. Funerals of its members
killed in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to be held in Lebanon
during the reporting period. Other Lebanese nationals have participated in the
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic alongside Syrian opposition forces, the Nusrah
Front and ISIL. The involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements in the
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic seriously jeopardizes the stability and security
of Lebanon.
31. The suicide attacks claimed by ISIL that struck the B urj al-Barajnah
neighbourhood of southern Beirut on 12 November killed 43 people and injured
more than 200. The attack was the deadliest since the end of the Lebanese civil war.
The bombing targeted a mostly Shiite area, which risked triggering violence
between communities in Lebanon. Lebanese political and religious leaders
condemned the bombing and called for solidarity in its aftermath. In a televised
speech two days later, Hassan Nasrallah warned against sectarian divisions and
praised the internal security forces for their work.
32. The Lebanese security forces continued to engage in combat against Syrian
armed elements in the eastern border area, in particular around the town of Aarsal.
On 6 November, a bomb exploded in Aarsal, causing four fatalities and a number of
injuries. On 7 November, five soldiers were injured in a blast that hit a tank in
Aarsal. Between 25 and 29 January 2016, clashes erupted between the Nusrah Front
and ISIL as well as between the Lebanese army and those armed elements on th e
outskirts of Aarsal, causing some injuries among the armed elements. On
20 February, the Lebanese Armed Forces intervened to stop clashes between local
individuals in the town of Saadiyat, in which rocket -propelled grenades were used.
The area had witnessed similar confrontations in July 2015, resulting in several
injuries. On 10 March, a Lebanese soldier was killed in clashes with armed
elements, five of whom died, in the vicinity of Baalbek. On 24 March, a Lebanese
soldier was killed and three others were injured in a bomb blast in the vicinity of
Aarsal. The Lebanese Armed Forces also continued to arrest individuals suspected
of belonging to terrorist networks, including suspects believed to be connected to
the planning of the attack of 19 November 2013 against the Iranian embassy in
Beirut and the recent bombing in Burj al-Barajnah. The political consensus that
supported the implementation of the security plans by the national and security
forces in Aarsal, Tripoli, the Bekaa area and the southern subur bs of Beirut was
maintained. The 16 members of the security forces who had been detained by the
Nusrah Front since August 2014 were released on 1 December 2015, as stated in
paragraph 7 above. Nine personnel are still being detained by ISIL.

6/13

16-06655

S/2016/366

33. The international community continued to support the capacity-building of the
Lebanese Armed Forces. On 12 November, the parliament approved the allocation
of $800 million for the Lebanese Armed Forces. On 17 March, the Security Council
called for the continuation of international support to the Lebanese Armed Forces,
including in counter-terrorism and border protection (see SC/12287). Several
Member States continued their efforts in support of the Lebanese Armed Forces, as
demonstrated by the recent memorandum of understanding signed between
Lebanon, the United Kingdom and Canada extending support to the country’s land
border regiments. Reports of arms smuggling and cross-border incidents continued,
highlighting the continued importance of improving the capacity of the security
forces to manage and control the border effectively. In my meeting in Beirut with
the Lebanese Armed Forces Command and the representatives of the International
Support Group for Lebanon on 24 March, there was unanimity about the critical
need for continued support from international partners for the Lebanese Armed
Forces in their efforts to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
34. On 19 December, a Hizbullah militant, Samir Kuntar, was killed, in what
Hizbullah alleged was an Israeli air strike in Damascus. Hizbullah claimed
responsibility for an attack, on 4 January, against two Israel Defense Forces vehicles
south of the Blue Line. It attributed the attack, in reference to the alleged Israeli air
strike, to a “martyr Samir al-Kuntar group”. The Israel Defense Forces immediately
fired high explosive and smoke shells across the Blue Line. These incidents and
their aftermath were described in detail in my report on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2016/189).

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
35. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disarming
and disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has not yet been implemented. It reflects and reaffirms a decision to
which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords, which led at the time
to Lebanese militias, with the exception of Hizbullah, relinquishing their weapons.
Given the current national context and the impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon, it
is critical that the Accords be preserved and implemented by all, to avoid the spectre
of renewed confrontation in Lebanon and strengthen the institutions of the State.
36. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continue to operate
outside the control of the Government, in serious violation of resolution 1559
(2004). While several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess
weapons outside government control, the armed component of Hizbullah is the most
significant and most heavily armed Lebanese militia in the country. The
maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups poses a serious challenge to the
State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In
addition, several Palestinian armed groups continue to operate in the country inside
and outside the refugee camps. The presence of extremist armed groups in Lebanon,
in particular around Aarsal and the Bekaa area, is also deeply worrisome. In a video
released on 14 March, ISIL warned the Lebanese authorities that they could not
prevent the coming to Lebanon of ISIL.
37. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution 1559

16-06655

7/13

S/2016/366

(2004). Since the adoption of the resolution, no specific steps have been taken to
tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. Several Lebanese groups and individuals continue to
speak against the maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal, which they
consider to be a destabilizing factor in the country and a factor that undermines
democracy. Many Lebanese see the continued existence of such arms as an implicit
threat for use within Lebanon for political reasons.
38. I have repeatedly expressed my deep concern to Lebanese leaders about the
serious risks that armed groups pose to the stability of the country and the region. I
have urged them to tackle the matter without further delay, given that it is their
obligation under Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). In a democratic State, it
is a fundamental anomaly that a political party maintains its own militia.
Nonetheless, Hizbullah has continued to claim openly that its military capacity is
separate from that of the Lebanese State and that its arms serve as a deterrent
against potential aggression from Israel.
39. The claim of responsibility by Hizbullah for the attack on 4 January
underlined the maintenance of unauthorized weapons by Hizbullah, outside the
control of the State, and the willingness of Hizbullah to use such wea pons against
Israel and the risks that that poses to Lebanese stability and security. In a speech on
16 February, Hassan Nasrallah again asserted that Hizbullah maintained a rocket
arsenal that he threatened to use to attack Israeli storage installations, which would
lead to the deaths of tens of thousands of Israeli citizens. In a televised interview on
20 March, he also stated that Hizbullah knew the location of chemical plants,
reactors and warehouses in Israel, some of which were located in or near citi es, and
warned that it had the capacity to strike such targets in response to any potential
attack by Israel against Lebanon. In a letter addressed to the Secretary -General and
the President of the Security Council dated 23 March ( S/2016/277), the Permanent
Representative of Israel called anew upon the Security Council to respond firmly
against the threats made by Hizbullah and called upon the international community
to act to disarm Hizbullah. Furthermore, on 11 April, the Prime Minister of Israel,
Benjamin Netanyahu, publicly acknowledged that Israel had carried out strikes in
the Syrian Arab Republic “meant to prevent Hizbullah from obtaining game changing weaponry”.
40. Besides the engagement of Hizbullah in the Syrian Arab Republic, Hassan
Nasrallah stated in a speech on 6 March that Hizbullah personnel from Lebanon and
the Syrian Arab Republic had been sent to Iraq to fight ISIL there. It is of serious
concern, especially so in the context of the current tensions in the region, that
Hizbullah would become involved in regional conflicts at the risk of threatening
Lebanese stability and security. It is important that all Lebanese parties adhere to
the dissociation policy and the Baabda Declaration of 2012.
41. I have emphasized in past reports to the Security Council the key role that the
National Dialogue has played previously to address the disarmament of armed
groups. The absence of the National Dialogue is a reminder of the need to elect a
president in order to resume the discussion of a national defence strategy.
42. The situation in the Palestine refugee camps has been tense in recent months,
following the announcement on 14 December that adjustments to the hospitalization
policy of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) would be implemented from January 2016, whereby the

8/13

16-06655

S/2016/366

Agency increased the percentage of tertiary health-care coverage and introduced
cost-sharing for some of the expenses previously borne fully by the organization.
The Agency has also set up a complementary fund for those in abject poverty. The
amendments to the health policy have resulted in repeated, widespread forced
closures of UNRWA installations by various political and militant factio ns, threats
to staff and the prevention of movement of goods and personnel. On 21 March, the
Agency temporarily suspended the policy for a month to allow for its review.
Separately, a Palestine refugee was killed in the Mieh Mieh refugee camp on
13 October. On 28 January, a member of Fatah al-Intifada was shot dead by a
Palestinian individual in a personal dispute in the Shatila camp. On 28 March, an
armed confrontation between Fatah and extremist elements took place in Ein
el-Hillweh, leaving three fighters dead and seven families displaced. The Palestinian
joint security force launched investigations into the incidents and continued to
contribute to maintaining security in the camps, including by deploying heavily in
the camp further to the incident of 28 March and calling for calm in its aftermath.
On 12 April, a senior Fatah official in the Mieh Mieh camp was killed in a car bomb
near Ein el-Hillweh.
43. Humanitarian conditions for Palestine refugees in Lebanon increasingly are
dire, with some 41,000 refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic currently in
Lebanon. This places tremendous additional pressure on the overall situation in the
camps and gatherings and on the efforts of UNRWA to assist them. UNRWA has
taken measures to reduce some of the tensions bet ween the Palestine refugees who
have been residing in Lebanon and those arriving from the Syrian Arab Republic by,
for example, including refugee children in regular classes in UNRWA schools.
During my visit to the Nahr el-Bared camp on 25 March, I welcomed the
Government’s commitment to completing its reconstruction and urged the
international community to provide funding to that end. I continued to urge the
Lebanese authorities to improve the living conditions of the refugees. Those efforts
should continue without prejudice to the eventual resolution of the Palestine refugee
question in the context of a comprehensive peace agreement in the region.
44. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps continues to
challenge the ability of Lebanon to exercise full sovereignty over its territory.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 by the National Dialogue and confirmed
in subsequent sessions, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country. All but one of the
bases are located along the Syrian-Lebanese border. Their presence continues to
undermine Lebanese sovereignty and governmental authority and makes delineation
of the border more difficult. It poses a serious challenge to the effective control of
the eastern border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. I have reiterated
my calls upon the Lebanese authorities for the implementation o f earlier decisions
of the National Dialogue, specifically those relating to the dismantling of the above mentioned military bases, and upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
cooperate with those efforts in good faith.

III. Observations
45. I continue to be disappointed at the lack of further tangible progress made
towards the implementation of the remaining provisions of resolution 1559 (2004).

16-06655

9/13

S/2016/366

Lebanon continues to face challenges to its stability and security, both internally and
along its borders with the Syrian Arab Republic, including from terrorist and
extremist groups and arms smuggling. I am concerned that the continued stagnation
in the implementation of the resolution could lead to the erosion of provisions
already implemented and contribute to a further deterioration in the stability of
Lebanon. I reiterate my firm conviction that it is in the best interest of Lebanon and
the Lebanese to make progress towards the full implementation of resolution 1559
(2004) for the long-term stability of the country and the region.
46. I am increasingly concerned at the continuing vacancy in the presidential seat;
it will soon be two years that the office has been vacant. Lebanon needs a Head of
State to address adequately the security, economic, social and humanitarian
challenges that it faces. I commend the leadership of the Prime Minister in
maintaining unity in the Cabinet and guiding the country in an increasingly tense
regional context. Against that backdrop, the recent statements by some Leb anese
parties that risk importing regional tensions on to the Lebanese national scene is
worrying. The adverse effect that it could have on Lebanese sectarian dynamics,
especially at a time when important Lebanese institutions are unable to exercise
their regulatory function, should not be underestimated.
47. I note the initiatives aimed at gathering consensus around possible candidates
for the presidency and that the parliament and the Cabinet both resumed their work
by holding some sessions. This demonstrates that Lebanese leaders can put aside
their political differences and unite to allow the functioning of Lebanese
institutions. I call upon them to draw on that spirit of unity and responsibility to
urgently convene a parliamentary session to elect a pr esident. In this regard, I call
upon those who have boycotted such sessions to exercise flexibility and act in the
national interest. It is critical that all Lebanese institutions be allowed to function
fully so that the country can confront the challenges to its unity and stability.
48. I welcome the decision by the Cabinet to organize and finance municipal
elections as an opportunity for the democratic process to resume. It is important that
these elections be held on time. I reiterate my call upon Leban ese leaders to
strengthen the participation and effective representation of women in the elections.
49. I welcome the continuation of the dialogue between the Future Movement and
Hizbullah, as well as the Speaker’s role in that connection. In a tense regi onal
context, it is encouraging that all parties have maintained their commitment to the
dialogue, which has contributed to upholding the political consensus on the
importance of ensuring security and stability in the country. I hope that, in addition
to defusing tensions, the continuing dialogue processes will help to end the
presidential vacancy.
50. With regard to the serious breaches of the cessation of hostilities between
Israel and Lebanon, in December and January, and as stated in my report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2016/189), I have repeatedly warned
that Hizbullah’s maintenance of and demonstrated readiness to use its weapons
could increase the risks of conflict, the consequences of which would be gravely
damaging for Lebanon. I condemn the threatening statement made by Hassan
Nasrallah in his interview of 20 March, following his statement of 16 February.
During my visit to Beirut, I stressed the need for both Lebanon and Israel to act
responsibly and in accordance with obligations under relevant resolutions and the
expectations of the international community in this regard. My Lebanese

10/13

16-06655

S/2016/366

interlocutors confirmed their commitment to maintain stability in Lebanon,
including along the Blue Line.
51. The continued violations committed by Israel in respect of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, including the violations of Lebanese airspace by
Israel Defense Forces aircraft, remain of serious concern. I reiterate my call u pon
Israel to adhere to its obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions, to
withdraw its forces from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and to cease its
overflights of Lebanese territory.
52. I welcome the resumption of calm since the serious breaches of December and
January, as well as the recommitment by both Lebanon and Israel to the cessation of
hostilities. Furthermore, I call upon all parties to refrain from provocative rhetoric
and to abide by their respective obligations. The full implementation of all
provisions of the relevant resolutions remains the best prevention against the risk of
miscalculation or tensions.
53. The widespread presence of weapons outside the control of the State,
combined with the existence of heavily armed militias, undermines the security of
Lebanese citizens. The maintenance by Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated
military capabilities outside the control of the Government of Lebanon remains a
matter of grave concern. It creates an atmosphere of intimidation and represents a
key challenge to the safety of Lebanese civilians and to the government monopoly
on the legitimate use of force. I reiterate my call upon Hizbullah and all other
groups concerned not to engage in any militant activity inside an d outside Lebanon,
consistent with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004).
54. I regret that the absence of a president prevented the convening of the National
Dialogue during the reporting period and that no progress therefore was made in
implementing existing decisions made therein or further addressing the issue of
disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese groups. It will be important that the
president, once elected, consider ways to take these decisions forward as a priority.
55. I have repeatedly condemned the continued violations of the sovereignty of
Lebanon, including cross-border incidents in which civilians and members of the
national armed forces have been killed or injured on the Lebanese side of the border
because of the actions of warring parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The cross border shelling and rocket attacks by various groups in the Syrian Arab Republic
and the air raids by the Syrian air force on Lebanese territory must cease. Those
incidents are a clear violation of Lebanese sovereignty. I continue to call upon all
parties, including the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004).
56. The participation of Lebanese citizens in the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic is a breach of the policy of disassociation and the principles of the Baabda
Declaration, which was agreed upon by all Lebanese parties in June 2012. The
involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements in the fighting in the Syrian
Arab Republic seriously jeopardizes the security and stability of Lebanon. I remain
deeply concerned about the ongoing threat to Lebanon posed by terrorism and
extremism, including from groups such as ISIL and the Nusrah Front. I deplore and
condemn the terrorist attack of 12 November and commend the response of
Lebanese leaders who came together in solidarity and contributed to preventing
further violence, in a context in which risks of sectarian violence did exist. I am
concerned by reports of the involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements

16-06655

11/13

S/2016/366

in fighting elsewhere in the region, including in Iraq, which risks exposing Lebanon
to even greater security threats.
57. The support provided by the international community to the national armed
forces and the security forces remains essential to building their capacity to address
the multiple security challenges that the country faces. Not doing so could send the
wrong signal to those groups or elements intent on destabilizing Lebanon. It is also
important that the Lebanese security forces continue to maintain their neutrality in
national political disputes and protect their independence as a national defence force
and, on this basis, that they be equipped adequately to prevent security threats. I
welcome the memorandum of understanding signed by the United Kingdom and
Canada in support of the armed forces border regiment, as well as the further
delivery of assistance by the United States of America during the reporting period.
As Lebanese security forces continue to face threats to the country’s security and
stability, their ability to confront these will continue to depend on international
support and I call upon international partners to increase their support accordingly.
58. I commend the continued efforts of the Lebanese Armed Forces in protecting
the country’s borders, as well as its security and territorial integrity, against repeated
attempts at jeopardizing national stability. The positive impact of the deployment of
border regiments continued to be felt across the country, in particular by
communities that are located near the border and are vulnerable to attempts by
extremist groups, such as ISIL and the Nusrah Front, to infiltrate the cou ntry.
59. I was deeply relieved by the release of the soldiers who had been detained by
the Nusrah Front for more than a year. I condemn the continued detention of the
remaining soldiers and security forces personnel held captive by ISIL and call for
their immediate release.
60. I welcome the continuing cooperation between the various State security
agencies and the national armed forces, which has led to progress in countering
terrorism in the country, including through the detention and arrest of a numbe r of
extremists, some of whom in connection with the attack in Burj al -Barajnah. I
encourage the political consensus that allowed the security plans to be maintained,
given that it is essential to ensuring the necessary support to the security forces as
they contribute to preserving Lebanese security and stability. Broad political support
for the security operations, including subsequent judicial processes, remains
necessary to clearly signal that violence with impunity will not be tolerated.
61. I continue to urge the Government of Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed Forces
to take all measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from
acquiring weapons and building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the
State, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). The discussion paper on a national
defence strategy, developed in the context of the National Dialogue, remains a
valuable starting point in that regard. I also call upon countries in the region that
maintain close ties with Hizbullah to encourage the transformation of the armed
group into a solely political party and its disarmament, in accordance with the
requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004), which is in the best
interests of Lebanon and regional peace and security.
62. The situation of Palestine refugees in Lebanon and the limited resources
available to UNRWA to assist them remains a matter of concern, especially in the
light of the continued presence of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic
who have fled the violence there. Continuing closures by political and militant
groups jeopardize the Agency’s ability to meet its obligations to both the refugees

12/13

16-06655

S/2016/366

and the international community. I count on the Government of Lebanon to continue
to support and protect UNRWA services and staff so that the Agency remains able to
assist the Palestine refugee community in Lebanon. Financial support to UNRWA
remains crucial in allowing it to deliver vital services to Palestine refugees in
Lebanon. I call upon donors to increase their support to the Agency. I note the work
of the Palestinian joint security force in preventing an escalation of conflict on
several occasions in the Ein el-Hillweh camp and welcome the renewed
commitment of Palestinian leaders to disassociating the camps in Lebanon from the
violence in the Syrian Arab Republic and the region more broadly.
63. I regret the absence of any progress on the delineation and demarcation of the
border with the Syrian Arab Republic, which has a significant impact on borde r
control. I reiterate my view that integrated border management will, in the longer
term, contribute significantly to better control of the borders of Lebanon and help to
prevent the illegal transfer of weapons and fighters in both directions, which has
become even more pressing in the context of events in the Syrian Arab Republic.
64. Recent security developments, especially in the eastern border region of
Lebanon, have put even greater pressure on the refugees, the host communities that
receive them and the country as a whole, necessitating further support from the
international community. I again commend the unique contribution of Lebanon as a
provider of public good in hosting refugees, and welcome the Government’s efforts
at developing sustainable approaches to address the crisis, reflecting its protracted
nature and the need to consider more sustainable solutions pending the eventual
return of the refugees in accordance with international law. I encourage further close
coordination between the Government and the United Nations in their efforts to
host, assist and protect refugees in accordance with human rights and humanitarian
principles. The Syrian crisis constitutes not only a major humanitarian and
socioeconomic challenge for Lebanon but also a challenge to the country’s stability
and must be addressed as such.
65. I strongly encourage Member States, including regional donors, to fulfil their
burden-sharing responsibilities by expeditiously implementing the disbursement of
pledges made at the conference held in London on 4 February 2016 and earlier
commitments made at the Kuwait donor conference held on 31 March 2015. I
welcome the opportunity presented by the new Concessional Financing Facility
developed jointly by the United Nations, the World Bank and the Islamic
Development Bank, and urge Lebanon and the donor community to be forthcoming
in facilitating the implementation of this important source of support for Lebanese
stability. I look forward to specific follow-up efforts to the conference held in
London and to my recent joint visit to Lebanon, including under the auspices of the
International Support Group for Lebanon.
66. The security, stability and unity of Lebanon are under continuous pressure as
the country faces a tense regional environment and needs to preserve itself from the
impact on its domestic situation. I remain firmly committed to the implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004). I therefore count on the continued commitment of the
Government to its international obligations and call upon all parties and actors to
fully abide by resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). I also call upon
Member States to renew efforts to support Lebanon in ensuring respect for its
obligations under those resolutions as the best way to advance the country’s longterm prosperity and stability as a democratic State. I will continue my efforts towards
the full implementation of those and all other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.

16-06655

13/13
