A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/86 B
12 April 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 38
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.67 and Add.1)]
50/86.

The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
B 1/

The General Assembly,
Having considered further the item entitled "The situation of democracy
and human rights in Haiti",
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, as well as those adopted on the
question by the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions adopted on the question by the
Organization of American States,
Reaffirming that the goal of the international community remains the
full observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms and the promotion of
social and economic development in Haiti,
Welcoming the presidential elections, which were held in a peaceful
environment and observed by the Organization of American States in close
coordination with the United Nations, and the peaceful transfer of power from
one democratically elected President to another,
Strongly supportive of the continuing leadership of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the Organization of

1/
50/86 A.
96-77149

Consequently resolution 50/86 of 15 December 1995 becomes resolution

/...

A/RES/50/86 B
Page 2

American States in the efforts of the international community in furthering
political progress in Haiti,
Welcoming also the success of the United Nations Mission in Haiti and
the contributions of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and his staff to that success,
Welcoming further the continued efforts by States to provide
humanitarian assistance and technical cooperation to the people of Haiti,
Supporting fully the contribution of the International Civilian Mission
to Haiti and the United Nations Mission in Haiti in the establishment of a
climate of freedom and tolerance propitious to the full observance of human
rights and the full restoration of the constitutional democracy of Haiti, and
encouraging the International Civilian Mission to continue to cooperate with
the United Nations Mission and others participating in institution-building,
including police training activities,
Paying tribute to the members and staff of the International Civilian
Mission to Haiti for their contribution in accompanying the Haitian people in
their efforts to return to constitutional order and democracy,
Welcoming the continuous improvement in the situation of human rights in
Haiti,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 2/ and the addendum
thereto 3/ on the situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti,
1.
Welcomes the recommendation of the Secretary-General contained in
his report to renew the mandate of the joint participation of the United
Nations with the Organization of American States in the International Civilian
Mission to Haiti, with the task of verifying full observance by Haiti of human
rights and fundamental freedoms and providing technical assistance at the
request of the Government of Haiti, in the field of institution-building, such
as the training of the police or the establishment of an impartial judiciary
and support for the development of a programme for the promotion and
protection of human rights, in order to further the establishment of a climate
of freedom and tolerance propitious to the consolidation of long-term
constitutional democracy in Haiti and to contribute to the strengthening of
democratic institutions;
2.
Decides to authorize, within existing resources and on the basis
of the recommendations of the Secretary-General, the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations component of the International Civilian Mission to Haiti
until 31 August 1996, according to the terms of reference and modalities under
which the Mission is operating;
3.
Expresses its full support for the International Civilian Mission
to Haiti and welcomes the continued effective, timely and complete cooperation
between the Mission and the Government of Haiti;

2/

A/50/861.

3/

A/50/861/Add.1.
/...

A/RES/50/86 B
Page 3

4.
Commends the Haitian authorities on the progress accomplished in
the advance of democracy, respect for human rights and the reconstruction of
Haiti;
5.
Pays tribute to the Haitian people in their ongoing quest for
strong and lasting democracy, justice and economic prosperity;
6.
Expresses its appreciation to those States participating in the
United Nations Mission in Haiti and those that have accompanied the Haitian
people in their efforts to return to constitutional order and democracy;
7.
Expresses its confidence that the democratic election of a new
President and the peaceful transfer of power from one democratically elected
President to another will further strengthen democracy in Haiti;
8.
Reaffirms once again the commitment of the international community
to continue its technical, economic and financial cooperation with Haiti in
support of its economic and social development efforts and in order to
strengthen Haitian institutions responsible for dispensing justice and
guaranteeing democracy, respect for human rights, political stability and
economic development;
9.
Commends the cooperation between the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary-General of the Organization of American
States in their efforts to promote respect for the rights of all Haitians and
to contribute to the strengthening of democratic institutions, including
through the promotion and protection of human rights and institution-building;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to support the
Government of Haiti as it works towards the national reconstruction and
development of Haiti, in order to consolidate a climate propitious to the
establishment of a lasting democracy and full respect for human rights;
11.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to coordinate the
efforts of the United Nations system to help provide humanitarian aid and meet
the development requirements of Haiti;
12.
Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly regular reports on the work of the International Civilian Mission to
Haiti;
13.
Decides to keep the item entitled "The situation of democracy and
human rights in Haiti" under review at its fiftieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
3 April 1996
