UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/38
29 July 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3410th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 July 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"For the last few months, the Security Council has been following
closely the tense and volatile situation in Burundi, based on briefings by
the Secretariat. The Council appreciates the efforts made in Burundi to
maintain peace in the country under very difficult circumstances and, in
this context, commends the civilian and military authorities concerned.
"The Security Council welcomes the ongoing cooperation between the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations to assist in
maintaining peace in Burundi. In this connection, the Security Council
encourages the Secretary-General to continue using his good offices through
his Special Representative.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the humanitarian problems
created as a result of the arrival of tens of thousands of refugees in the
northern Burundi provinces.
"The Security Council supports the ongoing political dialogue in
Burundi aimed at reaching an early agreement on Presidential succession.
It calls on all parties to reach rapidly a settlement based on democratic
principles.
"The Council condemns those extremist elements who continue to reject
the ongoing negotiations and seek to block progress towards a peaceful
settlement. In this context, the Council is alarmed by the recent violence
in Bujumbura and reiterates the terms of its statements of 25 October 1993
(S/26631) and 16 November 1993 (S/26757). The Council demands that all
parties cease immediately any incitement to violence or ethnic hatred.
"The Council encourages all those who support a peaceful solution to
persist in their efforts. It further calls upon all Burundians, especially
political, military and religious leaders, to do their utmost for the
success of the ongoing political dialogue.

94-31011 (E)

290794

/...

S/PRST/1994/38
English
Page 2

"The Security Council looks forward to reports on Burundi from the
Secretary-General and will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
