S/PV.8948

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8948th meeting

Monday, 17 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Heimerback. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Fodda
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mathur
Mr. Flynn
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-23145 (E)
*2223145*

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the fact that every life matters. They have struggled
and shown perseverance in relation to crimes that have
unfortunately characterized a generation, at least, of
men, women and children.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Khan.
Mr. Khan: First, may I congratulate Norway on its
presidency of the Security Council this month. It is a
real honour to have the opportunity in this new year
to present the thirty-fourth report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in relation
to the Darfur situation in the Sudan, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005), which the Council adopted in
2005. Despite the strictures of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the wearing of masks, it is wonderful to
be here in person.
I would like to begin by recalling what I said when
I met with Darfur survivors and victims when I was in
Khartoum on 17 August last year. I convened a meeting
with Darfur civil society. Many individuals have been
struggling for almost two decades for something that
should be simple but seems extremely complex, namely,
justice — a modicum of accountability that underlines
2/16

17/01/2022

It was that suffering that led the Council to use
if powers under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in 2005 and refer the situation to the
ICC. I share the frustrations, impatience and hopes of
those survivors that that singular moment — the first
referral by the Council to the International Criminal
Court — will yield dividends. Expectations are not
unreasonable; it is simply that there should be some
justice. The victims, the survivors and the people of
Darfur have shown that persistence. But it is important,
as I said in my interactions with Sudanese Government
members, that the referral is not a never-ending story.
We are approaching middle age — 34 reports. We need
to do better collectively — my Office, of course, but
also the Council — to make sure that the promise and
purpose of the referral are wedded with concrete action.
There are signs of hope, and there has progress
notwithstanding difficulties that remain. In July 2021,
all 31 charges related to a notorious Janjaweed leader,
Ali Kushayb, were confirmed. The trial is set to start on
5 April. The charges include war crimes, crimes against
humanity, murder, rape, torture and attacks against the
civilian population in Wadi Salih and Mukjar. That is an
important moment this year: in just three months’ time,
the promise of the Council will start being demonstrated
in action by the allegations that the Office has proffered
being placed before independent and impartial judges.
At the same time, outreach is important. I hope to
work with the Court’s Registry to make sure that there
is an organized and effective outreach programme so
that Sudanese people — in the Sudan, in Darfur and
outside — can follow the proceedings, because they
have the right to know what happened and a right to
see the truth.
But the Ali Kushayb case is but one case. There
are, of course, four warrants outstanding: the case
against former President Omer Al-Bashir; the case
against the former Minister of the Interior, Abdel
Raheem Muhammad Hussein; the former governor of
South Kordofan, Ahmad Harun; and the former Justice
and Equality Movement rebel commander, Abdallah
Banda. In relation to the latter, I recused myself from
that case, which is being supervised directly by the
Deputy Prosecutor.
22-23145

17/01/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It is important, as I said in relation to my Libya
briefing in December (see S/PV.8911), that during my
term I wish to prioritize cases that have been referred
by the Council. I started that in the Sudan situation
by conducting a review of the evidence to look at
the strength of those cases, and I also ensured that
additional resources are brought into that case so that
we can, hopefully, be more effective.
But the reality is this: that for a variety of reasons,
over the last 17 years, including the non-cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan by the previous
administrations, there were no field investigations
in the country, and my predecessor hibernated this
situation for a long period so that investigations did
not mature. As a result, I realized that the evidence,
particularly against Omer Al-Bashir and Mr. Hussein,
needed strengthening.
I am satisfied with the strength of the evidence
regarding Ali Kushayb, but in relation to the two
cases I mentioned, we need to make sure we do
better. That requires cooperation from the Sudan. It
requires assistance from the Sudan, and it also requires
cooperation and collaboration from members of the
Council and from States Members of the United Nations.
Realizing that evidential landscape, I have given
more resources to the team, put more investigators on
the case, including people with Arabic-language skills,
and immediately, in August, two months after my
term commenced, I went to the Sudan to speak to the
Government, realizing the importance of cooperation.
That brought tangible results, because for the first time
we concluded a memorandum of understanding not
only in relation to Ali Kushayb but in relation to all four
of the cases for which judges of the ICC have issued
warrants. I also appointed a pro bono Special Adviser
to focus exclusively on the Darfur situation so that we
can move together, get cooperation to a greater extent,
and that is Ms. Amal Clooney. Again, this is evidence of
my intent not just to say that I am prioritizing Security
Council referrals but to make sure that the resources
that are needed are put into that case.
During my trip to Khartoum, in August, we had
some constructive meetings. I met with General
Al-Burhan, of the Sovereignty Council, then Prime
Minister Hamdok and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and the Minister of Justice. We also met United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in Sudan UNITAMS Special Representative of the

S/PV. 8948

Secretary-General Volker Perthes and members of the
international community.
In this I also underlined a new approach. That is
the beautiful thing about the law — there are many
different solutions to one fundamental problem. It is not
the location of a trial or even the forum of adjudication
that is critical. What is critical are independent and
impartial investigations, independent and impartial
adjudications, and then the rule of law, which should
triumph so that victims can move forward, realizing
that everything has been done to try to ensure justice.
I emphasized to the members of the Government
that I would be willing to use the full panoply of options
that are entwined in the Rome Statute to try to make
sure that we could work together and forge better bonds
so that this chapter could be closed.
The simple issue is this: if we do not accelerate
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
my Office, investigations will continue. If we are to
carve out a road map for the completion of this situation
in the way that I believe the Council and the victims
want, the way to do it is to accelerate the process, to
inject more cooperation and assistance within the
Office, and if that is done, I think that we can move
forward in an effective way.
On 25 October, of course, the landscape changed,
and that has not been particularly helpful. In my
meetings in August, not only had the memorandum of
understanding been signed; there had been commitments
by the Government to sign the Rome Statute and to
work more closely with my Office, and there had
been the agreement to help ensure a permanent field
presence of the Office of the Prosecutor in Khartoum.
But the hiatus from 25 October has meant that we have
lost focal points. We are trying to catch up. We had
to, for a couple of months, in fact, until now, suspend
active investigations, so that was a very troublesome,
concerning turn of events. The upside is that just before
Christmas, my team went to Khartoum again; they
spoke to General Al-Burhan, who reassured members
of my Office that the memorandum of understanding
was still valid, that he was looking at cooperation, and
he said on more than one occasion to me directly and
to the team in December that it was essential to have
justice for the victims in Darfur.
The challenge now collectively for all of us is to
make sure that those assurances are translated into
concrete, tangible partnerships and accountability. This

22-231453/16

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

is a delicate stage, of course, in the transition in the
Sudan, but I would underline again that the only option
for us to move forward and close this situation or find
a pathway towards closure is accelerating cooperation.
I mentioned this on Friday to the representative of
the Sudan, Ambassador Elbahi, and I also emphasized
that these cases are not against the Sudan. The Sudan is
a partner, not an adversary, They are against individuals
for whom the evidence discloses their responsibility in
relation to crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court.
We need safe and secure access to the Sudan and
to the archives. We need to be able to look at where
the mass graves are, and we need to be able to go to
all parts of the Sudan and work independently. That is
required not just by the memorandum of understanding
signed in August of last year; it is required not only
by resolution 1593 (2005); it also required by the
Juba Peace Agreement, so these are tripartite tiers
of responsibilities and commitments that I hope very
much the Sudan will honour, and also work with us
more closely.
Cooperation from outside the Sudan is also
critically important, and we have had fantastic support
from the European Union, the African States, Norway,
the United Kingdom, the United States of America and
the People’s Republic of China. This is an area, if we
are to close this chapter and allow the Sudan to move
forward, in which there can be no passive spectators.
We have to help the Sudanese people get what they
deserve, which is justice and closure.
I hope to go again to the Sudan in the next few
months, perhaps, hopefully, in April. It has been
promised that such a trip, including going to Darfur
to speak with some of the survivors, victims and
displaced persons there, would be facilitated so that we
can undertake an acceleration in the work on the cases
before the Court.
With your leave, Madam President, I want to speak
directly to those victims to underline that during my
term we will have an unwavering commitment to
ensuring that the landmark Security Council decision
of 2005 is honoured and respected so that there can be
a proper and rigorous investigation enabling us to put
before judges what the truth of the matter is. It is my
view that — and I will be quite candid about the state
of evidence, but I will also be candid about a simple
truth — unless and until we get justice, the Sudan runs
the risk of always being defined by the past conduct and
4/16

17/01/2022

the past events that compelled the Security Council to
act in 2005.
If we — the Office of the Prosecutor, the
Government of the Sudan, the Security Council and
Member States — work together in partnership, we
can close this chapter, and if we do so, I believe that
the Sudan, unencumbered and relieved by some of the
burdens of the past, will, by ensuring justice, have
every possibility to do something that every Council
member wants, namely, to write a new chapter so
that the country can march forward to a better, more
prosperous and safer future.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Khan for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Prosecutor Karim Khan for his
report, presented pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), on
the situation in Darfur, as well as for the presence of the
representative of the Sudan at today’s meeting.
Mexico welcomes the confirmation of charges in
the Ali Kushayb case. This is a concrete step forward
by the International Criminal Court in relation to the
situation in the Sudan. We also applaud the visit of the
Prosecutor to the Sudan last year, which culminated in
the signing of a memorandum of understanding.
However, the impact of last October’s coup d’état
on cooperation with the Court is of great concern. It is
essential for the team from the Office of the Prosecutor
to have focal points in the Government of the Sudan
to continue working, have access to documentation and
evidence, be able to enter the territory and continue
its investigations and have the possibility to meet
with witnesses, with team members’ safety ensured at
all times.
It should also be emphasized that witnesses cannot
and should be fully protected and not be subject to
reprisals. Any tendency to undermine their cooperation
is an affront to victims and negatively affects
accountability and the strengthening of the rule of law.
We therefore reiterate the obligation to comply with the
arrest warrants of the International Criminal Court.
Mexico reiterates its support for the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Court in general, with
special emphasis on the cases referred by the Security
22-23145

17/01/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Council, which should facilitate United Nations support
for the expenses incurred by the Court resulting from
such referrals.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Karim
Khan, for his valuable briefing on the thirty-fourth
report on the situation in Darfur. I also welcome the
representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.
At the outset, allow me to reiterate Brazil’s support
for the International Criminal Court. As one of its
founders, Brazil recognizes the value of a permanent,
treaty-based tribunal in fighting impunity and bringing
justice to victims. Brazil was presiding over the Security
Council when resolution 1593 (2005) was adopted
(see S/PV.5158). We have favoured the referral of the
situation in Darfur to the ICC, while cautioning that
referrals should not be approved lightly. Resolutions
referring situations to the Court must strengthen the
integrity of the Rome Statute and promote international
criminal justice in a non-selective manner.
In his first briefing to the Council as ICC
Prosecutor, Mr. Khan has recalled that the United
Nations can provide funds to the Court in relation to
situations referred by the Security Council. I commend
Mr. Khan for raising this issue and express Brazil’s full
support for this proposal. The current situation, where
only States parties cover the cost of Security Council
referrals, is neither fair nor sustainable.
I will focus Brazil’s comments on three issues:
complementarity, cooperation and completion.
First, complementarity is one of the cornerstones
of the Rome Statute system. Brazil welcomes the
Prosecutor’s willingness to explore options to expedite
accountability for the crimes committed in Darfur. We
welcome attempts to bring procedures not only closer
to the victims, but also to where the evidence is located.
Complementarity efforts should provide an opportunity
to strengthen local institutions so that States can
fulfil their primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute crimes committed in their territories. We
take this opportunity to encourage the Sudan to ratify
the Rome Statute.
Secondly, cooperation is among the main tools
to ensure successful outcomes by the ICC. Brazil
welcomes the Prosecutor’s visit to the Sudan last
August, including the signing of a memorandum
of understanding, which is an important step to

S/PV. 8948

strengthen cooperation. Another positive initiative is
the proposal to deploy a full-time investigation team in
the Sudan. When conditions on the ground allow it, a
field presence of the ICC, with the consent of the host
State, can facilitate investigations and contribute to
the development of a fruitful relationship between the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Sudanese authorities.
Brazil underscores the importance of ensuring that the
Court has access to documents and other evidence in the
Sudan and that witnesses receive adequate protection.
Thirdly, completion strategies should be an integral
part of the Rome Statute system. We welcome the
confirmation of charges in the Ali Kushayb case and
stress the importance of delivering justice to victims
before completion of the situation. Brazil appreciates
the Prosecutor’s intention to provide a road map for
completion of Security Council referrals, including
in Darfur. International criminal justice is a temporary
solution when States with jurisdiction are unwilling or
unable to investigate and prosecute the most serious
crimes. In the long run, it is imperative to build a
culture of accountability at the national level, with
strong institutions that are able to fight impunity.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its support to the
resumption of the transitional process in the Sudan
and to the United Nations-facilitated intra-Sudanese
political dialogue announced recently by Special
Representative Volker Perthes. That process, led by
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan, should not only address paralysis
and polarization in Khartoum, which have given
rise to violent protests and popular frustration, but
also stimulate the Sudanese people to seize further
ownership of its own democratic institutions.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mr. Karim Khan, for his comprehensive briefing, and
I welcome him in his first briefing on the Sudan in the
Security Council. I would like to note in that regard that
we closely follow the work of the Court and the efforts
made by the Prosecutor and his team. I also welcome
the Representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.
Despite the recent developments in the Sudan,
the country has made important gains over the past
two years, which we believe must be preserved and
built upon. At this critical juncture, it is therefore
imperative for the Security Council to play a positive

22-231455/16

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

role and encourage the Sudanese parties to continue
engaging in dialogue in order to reach a consensus
on how to advance the transitional process, in line
with the Constitutional Document and the Juba Peace
Agreement. We also welcome the launching of the
United Nations-facilitated and Sudanese-led dialogue
initiative aimed at supporting the Sudanese parties to
overcome the current situation.
As my country remains a supporter of the right of
our brotherly Sudanese people to live in a secure, stable
and prosperous country, we stress our firm support to
implement the Sudanese-led transition process that lays
the groundwork for a just, lasting and inclusive peace
in the country.
Turning to today’s discussion, we are of the view
that the Sudan’s cooperation with the ICC is part of the
Sudan’s multifaceted approach to accountability. We
note in that context the memorandum of understanding
on the cooperation between the Sudan and the Court,
which was signed in August 2021, as well as the
subsequent visits hosted by the Sudan for a team from
the Office of the Prosecutor, including in December
2021. We hope that those efforts reflect genuine and
honest dialogue between the Court and the Sudan based
on the principle of complementarity noted in the Court’s
Statute and in line with the national laws of the Sudan.
Furthermore, we recognize the steps that the Sudan
has taken to implement transitional justice mechanisms,
consistent with the terms of the Juba Peace Agreement,
including the work under way to establish a transitional
justice commission and the activation of the Sudan’s
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. We hope
that those efforts will bring justice for the victims
of Darfur and create the conditions conducive to
establishing sustainable peace in the Sudan. We stress
that the international community needs to provide the
necessary support to the Sudan, at its request, in order
to build its capacity as it pursues to implement justice
and accountability mechanisms.
In conclusion, my country emphasizes its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of our brotherly Sudan.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Karim Khan. We
have taken note of his information. The position of the
Russian Federation on the activities of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has not changed. The authority of
any judicial body is based on its openness, impartiality,
6/16

17/01/2022

apolitical nature and the legal validity of its judgments.
Unfortunately, the ICC is still far from such standards.
We would like to comment separately on the
recent decisions of the ICC. Those decisions indicate
that the ICC maintains the unacceptable practice of
at-will interpretation of the norms of international
law and Security Council documents. The ICC
Appeals Chamber, in considering the legal objections
of defendant Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman
regarding jurisdiction, assumed that it had the authority
to interpret the provisions of resolution 1593 (2005).
In that regard, we would like to recall that the ICC is
an organ created on the basis of an agreement between
a limited number of States. Indeed, the authors of the
Rome Statute provided for the possibility of the Security
Council referring situations to the ICC. However, that
does not mean that the Security Council has given
the ICC the right to interpret the will of the Council.
Interpreting the resolutions of the Security Council is
a competency that falls only to the Council itself or to
a body that the Council specifically endows with such
authority. That is not the case with the ICC. It would be
simply absurd if an external body with a limited number
of participants could impose on the States Members of
the United Nations its own reading of the content of
United Nations documents, including those that can
impact the entire international community.
Resolution 1593 (2005) expressly states that States
that are not parties to the Rome Statute do not have any
obligation thereunder. The approach of the ICC is also
confusing given that a diametrically opposite position
was taken by the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. That
Tribunal, acting on the basis of resolution 1757 (2007),
did so under the logical presumption that it lacked the
authority to interpret Council documents.
The persistent attempts of the ICC, which has not
achieved much success in areas of investigative and
judicial activities thus far, to prove its worth through
creative interpretation — essentially rewriting — of
norms international law cannot but cause concern.
In conclusion, I would like to offer a few words about
the situation in the Sudan. The Russian Federation has
consistently called for the normalization of the political
situation in the country. We are convinced that, against
the backdrop of ongoing political instability, the main
objective is national reconciliation. The ICC has done
nothing to that end in all of its 15 years of work on the
Darfur dossier. With regard to the provision of justice,
22-23145

17/01/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8948

the Sudanese — I am confident — will be able to deal
with that on their own.

members and the focus on ensuring that the team has
the adequate skills.

Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to thank
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing and report. I also
welcome the representative of the Sudan.

We welcome the significant progress in
Mr.
Abd-Al-Rahman’s
prosecution,
the
first
confirmation of charges in a Security Council referral.
His trial commences 17 years after the adoption of
resolution 1593 (2005), demonstrating the importance
of the Council’s and the Court’s continued focus on
accountability in the Sudan.

Since we last heard from Mr. Khan’s predecessor on
the situation in the Sudan (see S/PV.8791), the democratic
transition has suffered a significant setback following
the military coup of 25 October. It is regrettable that
this has interrupted the significant progress made up to
that point in the Prosecutor’s investigations.
We remain deeply concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in Darfur and have noted reports from
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of attacks
against civilians in West and North Darfur. Reports
of civilian deaths, the rape of women and girls, forced
displacement of thousands and the destruction of
property are deeply worrisome and include acts that
may fall within the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
We deplore reports since the coup of alleged serious
violations of international humanitarian law and the
use of sexual violence and attacks on medical personnel
and facilities as tools to intimidate and punish women
and men for exercising their civil and political rights.
We call on the Sudanese authorities to protect civilians,
bring this violence to an end and ensure accountability
for such incidents.
We welcome the new consultative initiative intended
to address the constitutional crisis and hope it will lead
to a road map for a reset of the democratic transition.
It is imperative that we do not lose the hard-won
gains achieved since 2019, including as they relate to
accountability and justice.
We urge a return to the progress we saw in the
Court’s work prior to the events of October. That
progress was exemplified by Prosecutor Khan’s visit
to Khartoum, the conclusion of a further memorandum
of understanding with the civilian-led transitional
Government and plans to deploy an investigative
team based full-time in the Sudan. The allocation of
additional resources to the Office’s Darfur team is
also positive, including increasing the number of team

However, we note that four ICC arrest warrants
remain outstanding. We urge Mr. Banda to surrender
to the Court and reiterate our call on the Sudanese
authorities to cooperate fully with the ICC and surrender
the three additional fugitives in Sudanese custody, in
line with their obligations.
Cooperation remains key to the Court’s continued
work in the Sudan. In that regard, we note that there
is ongoing engagement by the Sudanese authorities.
However, we also support the Prosecutor’s request for
access to evidence and witnesses in the Sudan, as well
as full and safe access to the Sudanese territory. We
urge the Sudan to nominate focal points to facilitate
continued work with the Court and to ensure the safety
of witnesses and their ability to testify.
As the Prosecutor pointed out in his report, the
violence we are witnessing in Darfur today reminds us
why we need to break the cycle of impunity. It is for
that reason that Ireland remains a strong advocate for
the work of the Court and the Prosecutor’s Office in the
Sudan. As the Juba Peace Agreement acknowledged,
justice and accountability are crucial for building
peace in the Sudan. The Prosecutor can count on our
continued support for his work and that of his Office.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
Prosecutor for his report today and his briefing to us
on the investigation of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) into the situation in Darfur. The United States
has welcomed his leadership since his tenure began.
As the United States affirmed at the recent meeting
of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute,
where we participated as an observer State, the United
States stands ready to engage with the ICC to advance
our shared objective of ensuring accountability for the
most serious international crimes. We also welcome the
recent election of two Deputy Prosecutors and ongoing
review and reform efforts, which aim to strengthen

22-231457/16

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

17/01/2022

the Court as an institution and enhance the delivery
of justice.

forced to flee to Chad. We reiterate our call for a full
investigation and for perpetrators to be held to account.

The United States certainly welcomes the
Prosecutor’s position that situations referred by
the Council must be given greater prioritization in
his Office’s work. We are pleased that he made it a
priority to visit the Sudan so early in his tenure, and
we appreciate the efforts of his team to reinvigorate
investigations and engage victims and witnesses,
including through follow-up visits to Khartoum. We
also welcome his appointment of a Special Adviser
focused specifically on the situation in Darfur, and we
look forward to continuing to work with him on his
Office’s investigation into this situation.

The Sudanese authorities must do more to address
the security vacuum, ensure the protection of civilians
and, most fundamentally, address the root causes of
violence in those regions. Justice and accountability are
a vital part of the Juba Peace Agreement, which creates
a framework to address the crimes of the past and the
foundation for a future in which the rights of all persons
in the Sudan are respected. Just as the Security Council
recognized in referring this situation to the ICC over
15 years ago, the Juba Peace Agreement recognizes that
the ICC — together with domestic judicial institutions
and broader transitional justice mechanisms — has a
central role in delivering justice to victims.

When we convened on the ICC’s Darfur
investigation in June last year (see S/PV.8791), the
prospect for justice, so long awaited by victims, as the
Prosecutor said this morning, seemed within reach.
The past few months, though, have brought into greater
relief the daunting challenges facing the Sudan. The
United States remains committed to accountability for
the situation in Darfur — it is imperative for durable
peace and stability in the Sudan.
The Sudan cannot wait to resolve its current
political crisis, which has impacts far beyond the
capital. A restored transition must immediately
get to work to deliver on the commitments of the
Constitutional Declaration and to implement the Juba
Peace Agreement. As described in the Sudan Panel
of Experts’ recent report, armed militias and their
supporters have continued to attack, kill and loot with
impunity in Darfur. Intercommunal violence — with
continuing cycles of attacks and counter-attacks rather
than any genuine resolution — threatens social cohesion,
diminishes the likelihood of peaceful cohabitation and
the sustainability of the peace process. Women and girls
face the persistent threat of rape while carrying out
basic livelihood activities. That is yet another horrific
reminder of the prevalence of sexual violence in Darfur
and beyond and makes the Prosecutor’s recent initiative
to advance accountability for gender persecution all the
more important.
The United States also notes and condemns the
December attacks on the World Food Programme
warehouses and other storage facilities that may be
depriving nearly 2 million people in need of assistance
of life-saving aid. Thousands of people have been
8/16

As detailed in the Prosecutor’s report, the Sudanese
authorities have welcomed visits by the current and
former Prosecutor and their staff and have enabled
them to revitalize their investigations in Darfur. That
cooperation must continue. The memorandum of
understanding signed in August, which we just heard
about, was a positive step, and we are encouraged by
the Prosecutor’s signal that it remains in effect.
As Sudanese stakeholders work to find a way
forward to address the current crisis, the United
States strongly urges authorities to continue to comply
with their international legal obligations pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005) and to cooperate with the ICC.
The Sudanese authorities must continue to permit
ICC teams to travel within the country and cooperate
with requests for evidence and other information and
assistance, including through the nomination of focal
points for the Office of the Prosecutor. Those who are
subject to arrest warrants by the ICC must face justice
and be transferred to face trial.
In conclusion, the fact that the trial of former
Janjaweed
commander
Ali
Muhammad
Ali
Abd-Al-Rahman is scheduled to begin in April, 15
years after the arrest warrant was issued, is a testament
to what can happen when demands for justice never
falter. The United States will continue to stand by
the Sudanese people in support of the ICC’s efforts to
advance accountability.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I welcome and thank
Prosecutor Karim Khan for today’s briefing, for his
thirty-fourth report and for the work that he is doing.
22-23145

17/01/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As a party to the Rome Statute, Albania supports the
work of the Prosecutor and the International Criminal
Court (ICC). In our view, it plays a crucial role towards
ending impunity and bringing justice to the victims
of the heinous crimes against humanity, including for
women and children, everywhere it operates, including
in Darfur. We echo and fully reiterate Prosecutor
Khan — there must be justice. And, yes, he should use
the whole panoply of tools of the ICC, as he highlighted.
Beyond being a cornerstone principle of
international law, accountability is a powerful deterrent
against current and future abuses. It helps those who
have suffered to heal their wounds and understand
that their suffering will not be ignored, forgotten or
left unnoticed or unaddressed. It also reminds the
perpetrators that, sooner or later, justice will knock on
their door. Without accountability, human rights will
be denied, crimes will be perpetuated and impunity
for past conflict-related crimes will persist, thereby
undermining legitimacy and prospects for peace and
conciliation. In our view, a lack of accountability equals
a license to kill.
Albania remains very concerned by the precarious
security situation prevailing in the Sudan and the
ongoing violations of human rights by the military
authorities. We expect the security services, the
military and other armed groups to refrain from
using further violence against peaceful protesters and
civilians across the country, including and especially
in Darfur. The killing of civilians, sexual violence and
the injuring of hundreds more by the security services
and other armed groups since the 25 October military
takeover are unacceptable.
Albania welcomes the confirmation of charges in
the Ali Kushayb case. That is a tangible outcome from
resolution 1593 (2005), and we are happy to hear that the
case is solid. We call upon the Sudanese Government
to fully and meaningfully cooperate with the Office
of the Prosecutor in the four cases to grant access to
the territory, the archives, witnesses, crime scenes and,
based on the memorandum of understanding signed
on 12 August 2021, to fully investigate the crimes
committed and bring the perpetrators to justice. We
expect General Al-Burhan to honour his promise and
keep his word regarding full cooperation with the ICC.
Albania supports the 2019 Constitutional
Declaration and considers it the only road map to
overcoming the nation’s current political crisis.

S/PV. 8948

The legitimate wish of the Sudanese people to
build their future in freedom and dignity inevitably
requires a return to civilian leadership through an
honest and inclusive dialogue with representatives of a
wide political spectrum and civilian society, including
women and youth.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank Mr. Karim Khan,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for briefing the Council on the report on the activities
of the Court’s file on the Sudan. As a new member of
the Council, Ghana would like to take this opportunity
to assure the Prosecutor of its full cooperation in
the implementation of his mandate, especially as it
relates to cooperation with the Council. We wish him
every success in his new role with the Court and note
that this is his second briefing to the Council in his
present capacity.
Ghana believes that the Court plays an important
role within the global justice and security architecture
in helping to maintain international peace. As the
sixth State party to join the Rome Statute, we remain
committed to the objectives of the Court and to the
development of a complementary international criminal
justice system that holds accountable the perpetrators
of the most serious crimes of international concern,
seeks justice for victims of atrocity crimes and, above
all, acts as a deterrent to perpetrators of the four classes
of egregious crimes that the Court has jurisdiction over.
Ghana therefore welcomes the Prosecutor’s report
on the activities of the Court with regard to the Sudan
file and wishes to focus on the following three points.
First, we reiterate the shared conviction that
impunity cannot and must not be allowed to stand
wherever it occurs and for whomsoever.
It is in that respect that in the case of the former
Sudanese President, Omer Al-Bashir, and the other
individuals facing ICC arrest warrants for the alleged
crimes they committed in Darfur, including genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, we reaffirm
the position that accused persons should be made to
face the course of justice and given an opportunity
to account for their actions or inaction in connection
with the very serious crimes with which they have
been charged.
We recall the Council’s resolution 1593 (2005), by
which it decided, in operative paragraph 2, that

22-231459/16

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

17/01/2022

“the Government of the Sudan and all other parties
to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court”.

giving them the needed protection before, during and
after the trials. We believe that this will give victims
the confidence required to testify during trials.

In that regard, Ghana calls on the Sudan to assist
the Office of the Prosecutor with access to documents,
archives and other evidence in the Sudan. The Office
of the Prosecutor should also have access to witnesses,
including those in custody in the Sudan, and, finally,
full and safe access to the territory of the Sudan,
including crime scenes in Darfur.

In concluding, I would like to urge the Prosecutor to
be encouraged by Lady Justice, who, being blindfolded
and holding suspended scales, looks neither east nor
west but towards the evidence in order to deliver fair,
impartial and equitable justice for victims. Ghana
therefore hopes for a balanced and global approach to
the investigation of crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Court, devoid of the perceived region-centric approach.

While taking note of the efforts made by the
transitional Government of the Sudan towards the
ratification of key human rights treaties, Ghana
encourages the transitional Government to fully
translate into reality its commitment to the rules-based
international order and to ending decades of impunity
by transferring the ICC’s outstanding fugitives
without delay.
Ghana welcomes the confirmation of charges in the
Ali Kushayb case, since that is the first confirmation of
charges in a Security Council referral. The voices of the
victims continue to cry out for justice; they should not
be made to wait any longer.
Secondly, while calling on all States that have
indicted persons to cooperate with the Court, Ghana
believes that the efficiency of the Court lies in effectively
implementing the principle of complementarity, which
is a core principle of the Rome Statute. In that regard,
Ghana reaffirms its call on States parties to consider
the issue of complementarity as a key tool in trying
the crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court and one
of the options in reducing the workload of the Court.
After all, it is primarily the responsibility of States to
protect their citizens. We therefore encourage the Court
to work with national judicial systems that may require
capacity-building, including those on the African
continent, to take ownership of some of those trials.
Certainly, the independence of those national courts
should be paramount in capacity-building efforts.
The third issue of importance to our delegation
is witness protection before, during and after the trial
process. As the Court proceeds with investigations into
the cases in Darfur and other areas of interest, it has
been observed that in some instances witnesses have
been recanting, which adversely impacts the case for
the prosecution and invariably casts a slur on the Court.
In that connection, Ghana calls on the Court to do more
in getting the victims involved in the whole process and
10/16

Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): I
should like to start by thanking the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for his briefing
to the Council and for the thirty-fourth report on the
situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005)
First, the United Kingdom would like to
welcome the confirmation of charges in the case of
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman more than 16 years after the
Security Council referred the situation in Darfur
to the Office of the Prosecutor. That is a positive
development and a sign of the patient and tireless work
that is required to deliver justice. We also welcome the
continued attention and priority placed on the situation
in Darfur, as demonstrated by the Prosecutor’s first
official visit to the Sudan in August. The signing
of a memorandum of understanding, as well as the
Government’s commitment to facilitating a full-time
presence of the Office in the country, were potentially
indicative of wider positive gains on justice and human
rights since the 2019 revolution.
It is, however, regrettable that the military coup
on 25 October has placed such progress at risk. The
interruption of investigative activities in the Sudan has
been a significant setback to the Court’s effort to deliver
justice for the people of Darfur. We therefore urge the
Sudanese authorities to build on the previous positive
engagement with the Court and the commitments made
by various parties, including in the memorandum of
understanding and in the Sudan’s obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005).
The United Kingdom echoes the Court’s request
for access to evidence, archives and witnesses and
unfettered access to the territory of the Sudan,
including crime scenes in Darfur. As detailed by
the Prosecutor in his report, the situation in Darfur
continues to be characterized by increasing violence,
resulting in deaths and the large-scale displacement of
22-23145

17/01/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

civilians. The already fragile situation has been further
exacerbated by the ongoing political crisis following
the October coup.
Accountability for past human rights violations
has a vital contribution to make in ending the cycle of
violence and addressing the root causes of conflict. In
that regard, we urge the Sudanese authorities to fully
cooperate with the Court.
Finally, I would like to commend the efforts of the
Prosecutor and his team to help deliver justice to the
people of Darfur. The United Kingdom stands ready to
assist the ICC in facilitating the four ICC warrants that
remain outstanding in the Darfur situation and calls
for the surrender of Mr. Banda, who remains a fugitive
from the Court.
Mr. Fodda (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
Prosecutor Khan for his report and briefing. His visit to
Khartoum in August 2021, just a few weeks after taking
office, demonstrates the importance that the Prosecutor
attaches to the situations that have been referred by
the Security Council to the International Criminal
Court. France welcomes the new memorandum of
understanding concluded during this visit. This
instrument completes the framework of cooperation
with the Sudanese Government and extends it to each
of the four suspects who have not yet been surrendered
to the Court. It is now time for implementation.
France is indeed convinced that the mission
entrusted by the Security Council to the International
Criminal Court is all the more essential in this period of
transition in the Sudan. Building a lasting and inclusive
peace in the region will not be possible without justice.
The fight against impunity for the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes is part of restoring democratic life
and reconciliation in the country.
In this respect, recent events in the Sudan have
had very worrying consequences on the conduct of
investigative activities. Cooperation has suffered
significant setbacks since October. We urge the
Sudanese authorities to fully implement their
commitments under resolution 1593 (2005), the Juba
Peace Agreement, and the memorandums signed with
the Office of the Prosecutor. Not only does this mean
re-establishing channels of communication with the
Court without delay, but also providing all necessary
assistance to investigators. The investigators must have
secure access to Sudanese territory, and in particular
to crime scenes in Darfur, to archives and evidence, as

S/PV. 8948

well as to witnesses, including those who are held in
detention centres.
France welcomes the concrete progress that has
been made in the case against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman,
also known as Ali Kushayb. We have taken note of the
confirmation by Pre-Trial Chamber II on 9 July 2021 of
the 31 charges that had been brought. It is now essential
that the witnesses in this case be able to testify safely
and without hindrance, particularly in the context of
the trial scheduled to begin next April. Beyond that,
while complementarity remains a cardinal principle,
the execution of outstanding arrest warrants is crucial.
We call on the Sudan to promptly surrender Mr. Harun
to the Court. We again urge Mr. Banda to surrender
immediately to the Court so that he can be tried.
France’s commitment to the Sudan is inextricably
linked to the continuity of the democratic transition.
The current political impasse calls into question the
many achievements of the past two years. We support
the facilitation efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Volker Perthes, in favour of
dialogue between the Sudanese parties.
The situation remains very worrying, with a climate
of repression and intimidation against demonstrators
and the media being maintained by the authorities,
and characterized by arrests, detentions, searches and
recurrent Internet blackouts. France condemns the
violence that has resulted in the deaths of at least 60
people since 25 October, and the sexual violence, the
perpetrators of which must be prosecuted.
Political instability is having a particular impact on
the security situation in Darfur, as evidenced by the
continuing intercommunal violence and the looting
of United Nations compounds, particularly those of
the World Food Programme. It is important that the
perpetrators of these crimes not enjoy impunity. We
also reiterate our call for the authorities to accelerate the
deployment of the joint protection force provided for in
the Juba Peace Agreement. The protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, and the
guarantee of full, safe, and unhindered humanitarian
access are now the sole responsibility of the Sudanese
authorities and must remain priorities for them.
Alongside its partners, particularly its European
partners, France will remain engaged in favour of the
political transition in the Sudan.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Today’s debate in the Security Council on the thirty-

22-2314511/16

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

fourth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005) is particularly timely, as it comes at a time
when that country is going through a pivotal period
in its history. I would like to take the opportunity of
this first statement by Gabon on the work of the Court
to congratulate Mr. Khan on his election as Procureur
of the International Criminal Court and to commend
the dynamism he has shown since taking office. His
briefing this morning has once again demonstrated this
dynamism. I also welcome the representative of the
Sudan at today’s meeting.
It is important to ensure the full implementation
of resolution 1593 (2005) and bring justice to the
victims and survivors of the conflict in Darfur. The
International Criminal Court has a key role to play in
ensuring that the commitments made in the context of
strengthening international criminal justice are not just
wishful thinking. I take this opportunity to reaffirm
my country’s commitment to the integrity of the Rome
Statute and the promotion of the rule of law, as well as
our determination to fight impunity.
Gabon takes note of the judicial activities carried
out by the ICC during the reporting period. We
welcome the commitment of the Sudanese authorities
to fully cooperating with the Court in support of its
work, including by allowing a permanent presence
of the Office of the Prosecutor in the Sudan as soon
as possible. The fact that the Sudanese authorities
agreed, on 12 August 2021, to sign a memorandum
of understanding that sets out the modalities of the
necessary cooperation between the Sudan and the
Office of the Prosecutor is a significant step forward.
We note with interest the Prosecutor’s attention to
civil society representing victims and survivors of
the conflict in Darfur and encourage him to continue
his efforts aimed at strengthening the efficiency and
effectiveness of his office.
However, the efficiency of the measures taken or
to be taken remains dependent on the improvement
of the political and security situation in the Sudan. In
this regard, we deplore in particular the interruption
of investigation activities as a result of the persistent
insecurity in the country in general and in Darfur
in particular. Similarly, we regret that while the
Court is struggling to bring justice to the victims of
past conflicts, the continuing tensions in Darfur are
causing new victims. We call on the relevant Sudanese
12/16

17/01/2022

authorities to ensure that this climate of violence ceases
and that justice is done for all victims.
In its efforts to bring justice for the crimes alleged
to have been committed in 2003, we trust that the
Office of the Prosecutor will bear in mind not only the
protection and assistance owed to the victims, but also
the fragile political situation in which the Sudan finds
itself and the prospect of stabilizing the country. It goes
without saying that a rapid return to constitutional order
would be conducive to greater cooperation between the
Court and the Sudanese authorities.
We hope that the Sudanese authorities will respond
favourably and expeditiously to the designation of
the focal points and that the judiciary will respond
to requests for cooperation in the application of
international criminal justice without hindering them.
These are indispensable links in the continuation of
fruitful cooperation in the fight against impunity.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for the efforts of the Prosecutor and his Office
and welcome the willingness expressed by the Sudanese
authorities to cooperate fully with that Office. This
partnership is vital for the effective implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005).
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Prosecutor Karim Khan for his briefing and
welcome the presence of the representative of the Sudan
at today’s meeting.
With the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement,
Darfur entered into a new stage of peacebuilding.
China encourages all signatories to continue the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and calls upon
Darfuri factions that have yet to sign the Agreement to
join the peace process as soon as possible.
The recent intercommunal violence in Darfur
underscores the fact that the security situation in the
region remains daunting. The international community
should support the Sudan in security capacity-building
to enable it to shoulder the primary responsibility of
protecting civilians in Darfur. However, long-term
stability and security in Darfur can be achieved only by
way of a reconciliation. The Juba Peace Agreement has
made clear provisions for that, which include achieving
legal justice, fighting impunity and establishing a truth
and reconciliation commission. Since the country is
currently facing multiple challenges, it should come as
no surprise that the implementation of the Agreement
22-23145

17/01/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

is encountering difficulties. The international
community should therefore remain patient while it
provides constructive assistance to the Sudan in order
to implement the Agreement.
China has been watching closely as the ICC
addresses the Sudan dossier and takes note of the
Prosecutor’s thirty-fourth report and the work done by
Prosecutor Khan since he took office. The ICC should
abide strictly by the principle of complementarity and
effectively respect the judicial sovereignty of the Sudan.
China hopes that the Court’s actions, on the basis of
Council resolutions, will be conducive to achieving
long-term stability and security in Darfur.
Mr. Mathur (India): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mr. Karim Khan, for presenting the thirty-fourth report
on the situation in the Sudan, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 8 of resolution 1593 (2005), and for updating
the Council on his first visit to the Sudan in August 2021.
We also welcome the presence of the representative of
the Sudan in today’s meeting.
At the outset, I would like to place on record that
India is not a signatory to the Rome Statute and is not a
member of the ICC.
The resignation of Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok
reflects the inherent challenges to the transition process.
The United Nations-facilitated intra-Sudanese political
process, which is aimed at salvaging the situation and
keeping the transition process on track, needs to be
Sudanese-led and guided by a constructive approach.
The Constitutional Declaration, signed in August 2019,
should drive that process, and all stakeholders need to
display flexibility, mutual trust and understanding. It
is crucial for the military and the civilian leadership to
reach an amicable solution in order to take the transition
process forward. The transition process should continue
to address issues related to justice and accountability.
The transitional Government of the Sudan
had shown readiness to address issues relating to
transitional justice, including accountability for human
rights violations, through a truth and reconciliation
process. The parties to the Juba Peace Agreement have
also agreed to establish a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in relation to Darfur and the Special Court
for Darfur Crimes. The jurisdiction of the Special
Court, which will include matters relating to genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes since 2002,
is a step in the right direction. We also hope that the

S/PV. 8948

Prosecutor will be able to keep up his engagement with
Darfur during his next visit to the Sudan in April.
That pursuit of justice for victims of atrocity crimes
in Darfur is also reflected in the cooperation shown by
the Sudanese authorities. It is important that all sides
continue to engage on outstanding issues in order to
find mutually acceptable solutions.
As the Sudan transitions to a peaceful, stable and
prosperous future, there is a need to provide it with
all the assistance it needs to redress the issues of the
past, promote intercommunal harmony and protect the
fundamental rights of all its citizens. In that context, it
will be important to build the capacities of the national
judicial institutions of the Sudan.
Lastly, as we look forward to the Sudan’s successful
completion of the current transition phase, we remain
confident that the Sudanese people will overcome the
current challenges and strive further on their road to
peace and development.
Ms. Nyakoe (Kenya): I thank Mr. Karim Khan,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for his
briefing and report, and I welcome the presence of the
representative of the Sudan in this meeting.
The people of the Sudan are having a promising yet
volatile national dialogue on the nature of Government,
democracy, justice and accountability. They seek to
weld those elements together so that their totality can
support peace and the development of shared prosperity.
That is clearly reflected in the Juba Peace
Agreement, which includes a particular focus on
transitional justice and national reconciliation and was
advanced by the operationalization of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in relation to Darfur and
the Special Court for Darfur Crimes.
We believe that the International Criminal Court,
in its engagement with the Sudan, should embrace
the aspirations of the Sudanese people, as reflected in
their established and desired justice and accountability
processes. The Court can do more to support the
principle of subsidiarity by investing in strengthening
the national judicial and legal capacity of the Sudan.
As the Sudan works to strengthen its national
institutional and legal frameworks, it should be
benefit from international support, as provided for
under resolution 1593 (2005). Ideally, such support
would be in keeping with the African Union’s call for

22-2314513/16

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

African Union member States to share with the Sudan
their lessons and best practices in transitional justice,
including accountability for human rights violations,
through a truth and reconciliation process. In addition,
we strongly recommend that this transfer of knowledge
be undertaken parallel to investment in national
dialogue and reconciliation.
Finally, Kenya recalls that resolution 1593 (2005)
invited the Court and the African Union to discuss
practical arrangements to facilitate the Court’s work,
including the possibility of conducting proceedings in
the region. We would like to hear from the Prosecutor the
progress of such arrangements with the African Union.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
But before I do, I want to briefly recall that 76 years
ago on this day, 17 January, the Security Council met
for the first time at Church House in London. There,
Mr. Norman Makin, Australia’s Ambassador and the
first President of the Security Council, opened the
meeting with the hope that “the Security Council will
be a great power for good in the world” (S/PV.1, p. 6).
He also reflected that our fellow Members of the United
Nations have placed in our hands the primary, but not
sole, responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and underlined that they have given
us the authority to act on their behalf. Let us keep those
sentiments in mind as we continue our work — they are
just as true today.
I will now proceed with my national remarks.
There is a serious political crisis in the Sudan. The
security forces’ continued use of lethal force against
peaceful protesters is unacceptable. We strongly
condemn all breaches of human rights, including
sexual violence, attacks on media, ambulances and
hospitals and restricted access to medical services
and free communication. The violence must stop.
Against that backdrop, we continue to hear the clear
aspirations of the Sudanese people and their demand
for a civilian-led transition. Furthermore, we continue
to hold the military leadership primarily responsible for
the current constitutional and political crisis, as well
as for the fragile security, economic and humanitarian
situation in the country.
I turn now to the work of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which is so crucial to securing justice for
victims and survivors of the most serious crimes in
14/16

17/01/2022

Darfur. Norway would like to thank the Prosecutor for
his first report on the situation in Darfur. We commend
Prosecutor Khan’s leadership and his commitment to
prioritizing situations referred by the Security Council.
However, that must also be complimented by consistent
follow-up and support from the Council. We applaud his
visit to the Sudan before the coup, a visit that resulted in
the memorandum of understanding that the Prosecutor
referred to in his briefing. We are encouraged to hear
that the memorandum of understanding seems to
remain in effect, and we call for its implementation. It
took almost two decades, since the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC, to achieve
cooperation from the Sudanese authorities.
Finally, we had been making progress in the
endeavour for justice for the victims of atrocities in
Darfur. Therefore, even during the current crisis, we
must continue to press for progress. The upcoming trial
against former militia leader Abd-Al-Rahman, or Ali
Kushayb, and promises during the Prosecutor’s visit in
favour of transferring suspects currently detained in the
Sudan to the ICC represent milestones in that direction.
Proper access to evidence remains crucial. We urge the
military to abide by the commitments of the Sudan to the
ICC, and we call for its full cooperation with the Court.
We recall and underline the importance of fulfilling the
obligations imposed by the Security Council.
Let me end by urging everyone to cooperate with
the ICC so it can complete its vital mandate and so
justice can finally be brought to victims and survivors.
Prosecutor Khan has Norway’s full support.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to again remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country’s presidency of the Security Council
during the month of January. I thank Mr. Karim Khan,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for his briefing on the Darfur issue.
Achieving justice in Darfur is an important pillar
of the efforts undertaken by the Sudanese authorities
to establish security and stability in the region. Justice
is one of the three pillars on which the December
22-23145

17/01/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

revolution in the Sudan was based. Therefore, the
Sudan has been, and will continue to be, committed to
accountability, particularly in relation to international
crimes. There is no doubt that combating impunity,
ensuring accountability, achieving justice and healing
wounds for the victims form the backbone of that justice.
The Sudan’s commitment to achieving justice in
Darfur does not flow solely from our commitment
to fulfilling our international obligations but is also
a response to popular calls for justice pursuant to
the slogans heard during the revolution. As such, the
Sudan will continue to seek justice in Darfur, with the
conviction that peace and justice are inseparable. In
doing so, our authorities are adopting a comprehensive
approach aimed at improving the living conditions of
our citizens in Darfur, and to that end the Juba Peace
Agreement was signed. Our authorities are closely
cooperating with all parties to the Agreement to ensure
its implementation in a manner that achieves stability
as well as comprehensive and sustainable peace.

S/PV. 8948

Thirdly, the authorities are working to change
the reality of life in Darfur, which is witnessing a
fundamental transition from war and conflict to
building peace, through the formation of the Transitional
Justice Commission, as a means to achieve justice in
cases where it is difficult to use ordinary means of
justice, by revealing the truth, justice, reparation and
reconciliation. Upon announcing the establishment of
the Commission, it will work to conduct an expanded
dialogue so that its work meets the aspirations of the
victims and is able to achieve the essence of justice.
In conclusion, we stress that the issue of combating
impunity represents a noble goal of achieving justice
and it is not a disputable issue. It represents, as we
mentioned, one of the most important priorities of the
transitional authorities and one of the most important
elements of achieving peace throughout the country.
Based on that, we affirm once again that we are firmly
convinced of the need for and committed to combating
impunity, particularly in Darfur-related crimes.

It is important to note that the issue of justice is
one of the most important main issues addressed in the
Agreement, by stressing cooperation with the ICC and
establishing transitional justice arrangements, including
a special commission. We note that a transitional
justice law has been adopted and is being finalized
in accordance with legislative arrangements for the
transitional period. In that context, the authorities are
also working to implement their National Plan for the
Protection of Civilians, with the participation of the
parties to the Juba Peace Agreement.

The President: I give the floor to Prosecutor Khan
for any concluding remarks he might have.

Against that backdrop, I would like to stress the
following points.

There can be no reconciliation without justice.
This is not an incantation; it is a statement of fact.
And in this quest we can look at a number of different
options. The representative of Kenya asked about the
engagement with the African Union. Resolution 1593
(2005), of course, talks about trials in the region. Last
year, I met the former Chair of the African Union,
President Tshisekedi Tshilombo, and then I went to
Dakar and met the current Chair of the African Union,
President Macky Sall. The States of the African Union
have shown themselves to be leaders — world leaders,
in the Hissène Habré case — of ensuring different
solutions for accountability. I therefore think we can
look at new partnerships.

First, since achieving justice for the crimes
committed in Darfur is a priority for the transitional
authorities, those authorities have opened the door
for cooperation with the ICC, as a memorandum of
understanding was signed between the Sudan and the
Court in August 2021 to frame that cooperation and
facilitate the tasks of the delegations of the court and
its investigators who visit the country.
Secondly, the Sudanese authorities facilitated a visit
by the new Prosecutor of the Court to Khartoum about
five months ago, during which he met with officials and
discussed how to enhance cooperation relations with
the Court. The Sudan also received delegations from
the Court, the last of which was in December 2021. We
will continue on this cooperative path.

Mr. Khan: I thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to say a few words once again.
One thing that I think is clear to everybody is
that the demand for justice is not going to go away,
and the Office of the Prosecutor, which I have the
honour to lead, will demonstrate and show the stamina
and perseverance that the Darfuri people themselves
have shown.

As I said in my remarks, there is no magic in
the forums of adjudication. The principle has to be
to give life to the promise that every life matters and

22-2314515/16

S/PV.8948

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that people who have lost everything have a right to
have those facts properly investigated and put before
an appropriate tribunal, whether it be the International
Criminal Court or in the Sudan or a hybrid option,
including support from the African Union. I hope that
engagement will go further.
I say to the representative of Kenya that I hope that
I will be attending the African Union Summit of Heads
of State and Government next month, if it takes place.

16/16

17/01/2022

We will discuss a variety of matters, including better
engagement between the Office of the Prosecutor and
the States of the African Union.
The President: I thank Mr. Khan for the
clarifications he has provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

22-23145
