United Nations

S/PV.6719

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6719th meeting
Wednesday, 22 February 2012, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ohin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Eick
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Karev
Mr. Tladi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia
and other States in the region (S/2012/50)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-23794 (E)

*1223794*

S/PV.6719

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other States
in the region (S/2012/50)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Patricia
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and Legal Counsel of the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/50, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on specialized anti-piracy courts
in Somalia and other States in the region.
I now give the floor to Ms. O’Brien.
Ms. O’Brien: I am pleased, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, to have this opportunity to present
his report on specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia
and other States in the region (S/2012/50), alongside
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The SecretaryGeneral has consistently pressed the United Nations
and other international organizations to do more to
contribute to a solution to the complex problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. He has been concerned
also by the spread of this scourge to other regions and
the consequent human and economic costs.
The United Nations continues to stand ready to
assist the international community to respond in the
most effective way possible to counter piracy. Council

2

members will recall that, as far back as March 2009,
the Secretary-General dispatched me on a mission to
Kenya to discuss the issue with the Kenyan authorities
and the United Nations offices active on the ground. In
April last year, he dispatched me again to represent
him at the conference organized and hosted by the
Government of the United Arab Emirates on “Global
Challenge, Regional Responses: Forging a Common
Approach to Maritime Piracy”.
The Secretary-General himself will attend the
London conference on Somalia, to be attended by
Heads of State and Government and other senior
representatives. Today’s meeting of the Security
Council to consider the Secretary-General’s report
marks the beginning of a busy schedule in which the
international community is focusing its attention on the
need to counter piracy effectively and to bring the
terrible human suffering and economic costs to an end.
The London conference will provide an important
opportunity for the international community to discuss
piracy in the context of the wider issues facing
Somalia. The hope and expectation are to drive forward
the progress that has been made in a number of areas.
It will be followed in March by meetings of the
working groups of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, which will be able to follow up and
implement the elements agreed at the political level.
The priority and importance that my Office gives
to piracy reflect the Security Council’s close attention
to that serious issue. The human cost of piracy off the
coast of Somalia is incalculable, with killings and
widespread hostage-taking. Although the numbers of
incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia declined
during 2011, as did the success rate of such attacks,
there were nevertheless 265 hostages being held at the
end of 2011. Increasing levels of violence and the
expanding geographical scope of the attacks are all
extremely worrying.
As I said when presenting the previous report
(S/2011/360) on behalf of the Secretary-General in
June last year (S/PV.6560), the problem of piracy
clearly demonstrates the increasing interdependence of
States and people in a globalized world. The human,
commercial and security interests under threat engage a
large number of States and international and regional
organizations that all have a stake in finding a solution.
Against that background, the Secretary-General’s
report on specialized anti-piracy courts is the third in a

12-23794

S/PV.6719

series of such reports requested by the Security
Council that I believe will assist the Council’s
deliberations. As with the previous reports, it has been
prepared by my Office in close consultation with
Mr. Fedotov’s Office and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). We have, of course,
been working very closely throughout the entire
process with our colleagues in UNODC, both in Vienna
and in Nairobi.
The report has also had input from the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia and the International
Maritime Organization. Consultations have been held
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Safety and Security, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and INTERPOL. In responding to the Security
Council’s request in resolution 2015 (2011), UNDP and
UNODC have conducted detailed consultations with
the relevant police, prosecution, judicial and prison
authorities in the concerned regional States. Senior
members of the Office of Legal Affairs have followed
up with consultations with the Governments concerned
through their Permanent Missions in New York.
The Security Council’s request to the SecretaryGeneral in resolution 2015 (2011) focuses on further
consultations with Somalia and other States in the
region willing to establish specialized anti-piracy
courts. At the outset, it is important to recognize that a
great deal is already being done to ensure the
prosecution of piracy suspects. A total of 20 States
worldwide have been prosecuting, or have prosecuted,
a total of 1,063 piracy suspects since 2006. Of that
total, more than 900 of the suspects have been
prosecuted in 11 States in the region.

that the States in the region that are conducting piracy
prosecutions have taken on a heavy responsibility that
entails a commitment of national resources, as well as
security risks. It is key that the international community
both acknowledge the important prosecution role that
they are playing and match their commitment with
strong international support and assistance. They each
underlined the continuing need for contributions by
States, international organizations and the shipping
industry to the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of
States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
Before outlining the substance of the report, I would
like to mention three initial points as to its scope.
The first point is that the Security Council’s
request in resolution 2015 (2011) concerns national
courts in Somalia and other States in the region. It does
so by requesting the Secretary-General, UNODC and
UNDP to conduct consultations with Somalia and other
States in the region that are willing to establish
specialized anti-piracy courts, and that the
consultations concern the kind of international
assistance, including the provision of international
personnel, required to make such courts operational.
The courts that are the subject of the Security
Council’s request, therefore, are courts established by
the regional States themselves — their own domestic
courts. The request does not concern the range of other
options for special domestic chambers, possibly with
international components, a regional tribunal or an
international tribunal. Those were all the subject of the
Security Council’s first request to the SecretaryGeneral in resolution 1918 (2010), and were dealt with
in the Secretary-General’s report dated 26 July 2010
(S/2010/394).

Of those 11 States in the region, five are
prosecuting piracy suspects with the assistance of the
United Nations, or are seriously considering doing so.
They are Somalia, Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and
Tanzania. I am most grateful to those States for their
cooperation in the preparation of the report and for
their dedication in combating piracy. In respect of
Somalia, the report deals with Puntland and
Somaliland, as those are the regions where the security
situation, although not ideal, allows for international
assistance for prosecutions to be delivered.

Secondly, the Security Council’s request in
resolution 2015 (2011) does not expressly mention the
possibility of a Somali specialized anti-piracy court
sitting extraterritorially in the territory of another State
in the region, as proposed by the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jack Lang. That was the subject
of the Secretary-General’s second report, dated 15 June
2011. However, as Mr. Lang’s proposal concerns a
national Somali court, not any form of international
court, we have briefly reviewed it again in the context of
the current report. That can be found in paragraphs 37
and 38 of the current report.

A point made firmly to us in the course of the
consultations, which has been reflected in the report, is

The third point that I would like to make
concerns the words “specialized anti-piracy courts” in

12-23794

3

S/PV.6719

the Security Council’s request. Consultations with the
national authorities of the five States concerned
indicate that they would not favour establishing new
special courts with jurisdiction exclusive to piracy
offences. They consider that that would constrain
scarce prosecution and judicial resources to piracy
cases in the absence of any certainty that they would be
consistently and fully occupied. The term “specialized
anti-piracy court” is therefore used in the report to
refer to a court operating under national law, with
international assistance, with a focus on the
prosecution of piracy cases.
Turning to the substance of the report, the
Security Council’s request asks, in particular, about the
kinds of international assistance needed for specialized
anti-piracy courts, including the provision of
international personnel, the projected case capacities of
such courts, and the timeline and costs for their
establishment. We have addressed each of those aspects
of the request through detailed consultations with the
relevant police, prosecution, judicial and prison
authorities of the five regional States.
In respect of each of Puntland, Somaliland,
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania, the report
analyses, first, the current capacity to investigate and
conduct piracy prosecutions and to imprison those
convicted. In doing so, it sets out the international
assistance that has been provided to date. Secondly, the
report analyses the potential case-load capacity that
each of those jurisdictions could achieve through the
provision of further international assistance. In other
words, it sets out the number of cases that could be
prosecuted per year in accordance with international
standards if capacity were maximized through the
provision of further international assistance.
On that basis, the conclusion of the report is that
those jurisdictions collectively could achieve a total of
around 125 piracy prosecutions per year, with up to 10
suspects in each case. Therefore, if international
assistance were maximized, up to 1,250 piracy suspects
could be prosecuted each year in accordance with
international standards. That increase in capacity could
be achieved within two years in Puntland and
Somaliland, with an additional year of mentoring and
monitoring, and within one year in each of the other
jurisdictions, although the assistance should be
maintained beyond one year in order to sustain the
results.

4

The cost of the assistance for prosecutions set out
in the report over a three-year period in Puntland and
Somaliland would total a little more than $7 million,
and over a two-year period in the four remaining
regional States around $9.5 million. The potential is
therefore for more suspects to be prosecuted per year in
those five regional States than the total number of
piracy suspects prosecuted globally since 2006, and at
a cost that is modest, I suggest, compared to that of any
of the existing international or hybrid tribunals.
However, the maximum caseload capacity that I have
just described is not necessarily a recommended target.
I will outline the reasons for this.
First, the size and resources of the various
jurisdictions considered in the report vary
considerably. The projected maximum capacities for
each are based on the best estimates of UNDP and
UNODC. They are not necessarily guaranteed.
Secondly, the report outlines a possible
discrepancy between the maximum achievable
caseload capacity and the actual demand for
prosecutions being generated by the capture of piracy
suspects at sea by naval forces off the coast of Somalia.
The three naval coalitions engaged in anti-piracy
operations off the coast of Somalia made only three
requests to regional States — Kenya and Seychelles —
for the transfer of piracy suspects in 2011, involving a
total of 42 suspects. The transfer of all of these
suspects was accepted. Only one incident was reported
by the naval coalitions in which the suspects were
released in circumstances where there may have been
sufficient evidence to pursue prosecution.
We do not know the reasons underlying this low
number of requests for transfer to regional States. It
may be, therefore, that some further research and
analysis would be needed before any decisions are
finalized regarding the caseload capacities that should
be aimed for in the courts of the regional States. The
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Jack
Lang, reported in January 2011 that around 90 per cent
of those apprehended at sea are released. If such a large
number of suspects are being released at sea, it would
be key to the effectiveness of the international
community’s efforts to combat piracy to determine why
this is the case.
Working Groups 1 and 2 of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia might wish to take up
this question. These are the Working Groups dealing

12-23794

S/PV.6719

with operational coordination matters and legal issues,
respectively.
A further important development that I would like
to draw to the attention of the Council is the
willingness of the Government of Seychelles to host a
regional prosecution centre. UNODC is already
providing assistance to this end. Consistent with the
principles identified by Mr. Jack Lang, the purpose of
the centre is to act as a focal point for regional and
international support for the prosecution of piracy
suspects, and to provide a location offering relative
logistical ease for their transfer by naval forces.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the Government of Seychelles for this initiative. The
willingness of the Government to host a regional
prosecution centre is, understandably, contingent upon
there being an effective post-trial transfer framework in
place so that those convicted can serve their sentences
in Somalia. This is a further important consideration
that has been prominent in each of the three reports of
the Secretary-General. Prosecutions in the region will
meet a bottleneck unless there is international
assistance to ensure sufficient prison spaces to
accommodate those convicted, ideally in Somalia.
Seychelles will also open, in the course of this
year, the Regional Anti-Piracy Prosecution and
Intelligence Coordination Centre. The Centre will
develop the regional expertise to track piracy finances
and develop cases for the prosecution of those who
plan, organize and finance piracy attacks. This is a
most important development that accords with the
emphasis of the Security Council in its resolution 2015
(2011) on the need to prosecute not only suspects
captured at sea, but also the key figures of the criminal
networks who organize and profit from piracy attacks.
In this regard, I would also like to draw attention
to the newly established Working Group 5 of the
Contact Group, chaired by Italy, focusing on the illicit
financial flows associated with piracy, with a view to
disrupting the financing and planning of piracy attacks.
Finally, I would like to draw attention to the
detailed implementation proposals for specialized
anti-piracy courts set out in the report, as requested by
the Security Council in resolution 2015 (2011).
These are divided into measures of a more
general nature, including a number that may be
considered by the Council itself, and specific measures

12-23794

of assistance to be taken by UNDP and UNODC.
Again, I should underline that these specific
implementation measures are included on the basis of
maximizing the caseload capacities of the courts in
Puntland, Somaliland, Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius
and Tanzania. Before such measures are taken, it may
be necessary for further research and analysis to be
carried out to consider the actual demand for
prosecutions in these States, which is likely to be
generated by requests for the transfer of suspects
apprehended at sea by naval forces.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. O’Brien for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Resolution 2036 (2012), which was
just adopted, stresses the need to investigate,
prosecute, imprison when duly convicted pirates and
those who illicitly finance, plan, organize and
unlawfully profit from piracy attacks.
It is an honour for the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to update the Council on
what UNODC is doing to address this challenge. Since
I briefed the Council on this issue last year, the piracy
threat has continued to grow. Based on our data, in
2011 pirates received about $170 million in ransom for
hijacked vessels and crews. The figure has risen since
the previous year, 2010, when ransoms paid amounted
to over $110 million. The average payment made to
pirates last year was about $5 million, instead of $4 or
$3 million in previous years. Also, as much as
$10 million was paid for the release of a tanker.
The ransom money from piracy is flowing into
the legal financial system at an increasing rate. The
laundering of piracy proceeds is causing steep price
rises in the Horn of Africa and the surrounding areas,
and the money is also being reinvested in criminal
activities that are not limited to piracy. Drug, weapon
and alcohol smuggling, as well as human trafficking,
also benefit from the proceeds of piracy.
Although UNODC is unaware of an ideological
link between Al-Shabaab, which has joined Al-Qaida,
and pirates, there is strong evidence of cooperation in
furtherance of the two groups’ aims. Therefore, piracy
is creating a clear threat to the stability of the region.
I listened very carefully to the statement of my
colleague, Ms. O’Brien, and she facilitated my task. I
can speak in lesser detail, although I will quote some

5

S/PV.6719

figures. I hope that our figures will ultimately coincide.
UNODC Global Programme against MoneyLaundering (GPML) is engaged in cooperation with
other United Nations agencies and Member States
within Working Group 5 of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The Programme is
helping to increase awareness of illicit money flows
linked to piracy. Central to GPML activities is its
support for financial intelligence units and law
enforcement agencies in East Africa. We organized two
international conferences on illicit financial flows last
year — one in Nairobi and another in Djibouti. We are
now working, under a programme with the World Bank
and INTERPOL, on a report on illicit financial flows
linked to piracy, which will be published at the end of
this year.
To make our efforts more effective, we need
broader international support beyond this region. That
is the most efficient way to sever the arteries that
sustain piracy. At the same time, of course, we are
continuing to address the crime of piracy. UNODC’s
counter-piracy programme is providing support to
regional countries that agree to take piracy suspects.
We are working in particular through extensive
training programmes for police, prosecutors, judges
and prison personnel in Kenya, Seychelles and
Mauritius, as well as within Somalia itself, where
security conditions allow. The programme started in
2009 with a budget of $500,000, which this year has
expanded to $40 million. This year we will be
allocating some $16 million to cover a range of
technical assistance to the countries of the region.
Our piracy prisoner transfer programme supports
the transfer of convicted pirates back to Somalia to
serve their sentences, while building capacities to
ensure that prison conditions meet international
standards. UNODC has built a model prison in
Hargaisa, Somaliland. Construction of a prison
academy has begun in Garowe, Puntland. Construction
of a court, a farm and a 500-man prison will soon
follow. Under the programme, we are also training
prison staff, mentoring staff and prisoners, and
monitoring prisons on a full-time basis. In Kenya and
Seychelles, UNODC has refurbished prisons, built
courtrooms and provided transport.
The assistance provided is strengthening the
overall criminal justice system in those countries and

6

helping it to become fair, efficient and consistent with
human rights standards.
Based on our review and the latest data, which I
received just yesterday, 1,116 Somali men are being, or
have been, prosecuted for piracy in a total of
20 countries around the world, and 688 in the region. In
Kenya, 168 pirates are being, or have been, prosecuted;
50 have been convicted, and 10 have completed their
sentence; 17 have been acquitted; and the remainder
are awaiting trial.
In the Seychelles, 88 pirates are being, or have
been, prosecuted; 63 have been convicted; and the
remainder are awaiting trial.
Mauritius has signed a transfer agreement with
the European Union (EU) and will accept the transfer
of piracy suspects for prosecution. A joint EU/UNODC
programme is now being implemented that will support
the Government of Mauritius in prosecuting pirates.
UNODC’s
counter-piracy
programme
is
contributing to criminal justice systems in the region.
However, the presence of child pirates within those
systems represents a complex issue, on which I must
from time to time answer questions from Member
States. In the absence of birth certificates or any other
forms of identification, courts in Kenya and Seychelles
rely on medical advice in determining the age of pirate
suspects; as a result, they have determined that seven
of the 252 pirate suspects are under 18 — one in
Seychelles and six in Kenya.
The counter-piracy programme is currently
developing an advocacy programme to reach out to
Somali youth. It will liaise with key stakeholders,
including community leaders, politicians and religious
leaders. Television, radio and print media will be used
in the programme. Our advocacy programme
complements United Nations Development Programme
activities on alternative livelihoods that will use
microfinance projects, among others, to show Somali
youth that there are sustainable choices other than
piracy.
Overall, the issue of piracy requires a strong
inter-agency approach that addresses not only the
law-enforcement and judiciary aspects of the problem,
but its root causes in Somalia itself, as well as in the
world’s financial centres.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to the members of the Council.

12-23794

S/PV.6719

Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting to discuss this most important
issue.
This is the second day that the Council has been
seized of the issue of threats to international peace and
security emanating from transnational organized crime.
Yesterday we spoke of West Africa and neighbouring
countries. Today, we are talking about East Africa and
the issue of piracy. This underscores once again the
need for the Council to devote increasing attention to
those growing threats.
We thank Ms. O’Brien and Mr. Fedotov for their
briefings on key components of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/50), distributed to the
Council in accordance with resolution 2015 (2011).
The report makes clear that many issues remain in
connection with the process of establishing effective
legal mechanisms, with international participation,
specialized primarily in the prosecution of pirates
operating off the Somali coast. The report underscores
the fact that in spite of the scaled-up efforts made by
the international community, the business of piracy is
flourishing and expanding. The most recent data
provided by the International Maritime Organization
indicates that the ransoms paid to pirates and aggregate
economic losses from piracy total $12 billion per year.
Those figures speak for themselves.
These developments result first and foremost
from the prevailing political and economic situation in
Somalia. However, it is clear that in the absence of the
appropriate capacities for tackling the issue of pirate
impunity in the general context of counter-piracy, the
situation is unlikely to improve.

guarantee that convicted pirates, once released, will not
once again join the ranks of pirate armies.
We are interested in studying the root causes of
the situation. This is not just an issue involving a lack
of prisons or the limited capacities of local justice
systems. Ambiguity remains in important aspects of the
relevant legal proceedings — detention, transfer,
evidence collection — and thus in terms of prospects
for the prosecution of pirates.
Russia attaches great importance to continuing
efforts to strengthen the judicial and law-enforcement
capacities of the countries of the region. We note the
important contributions made by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). If the
international community continues to support current
mechanisms for prosecution over the next two years,
the situation will turn around. At present, however, we
unfortunately do not see a basis for such optimism. The
resources of national legal systems of coastal States are
obviously limited, and, even with the most intensive
assistance to capacity-building, those States alone
cannot deal with the large number of pirates. The
information contained in the report makes this clearly
evident.
It is encouraging that the Council is essentially of
the view that additional measures are necessary for the
prosecution of pirates, mindful as it is that the
foundation of an effective anti-piracy justice
mechanism consists of the national justice systems of
the States of the region.

Signs of major improvements in the prosecution
of pirates are not yet evident. Indeed, the report
reiterates that the overwhelming majority of suspected
pirates are released. In 2011, there were only four cases
in which detainees were transferred to States of the
region for prosecution by national courts.

In that respect, we thank the Governments of
Seychelles, Tanzania, Kenya and Mauritius for their
demonstrated interest in cooperation with the
international community on this matter. As the report
of the Secretary-General makes clear, these countries
satisfy the necessary conditions for successful joint
work in this field. Following the publication of the
report, the Government of Qatar expressed its readiness
to establish an anti-piracy judicial mechanism on its
territory, for which we are also very grateful.

The recent experiences of our colleagues from the
Danish naval forces are just another example of that
trend. The situation is such that in Somaliland, almost
100 convicted pirates were released. It is easy to
understand why naval personnel in most cases prefer to
avoid detaining alleged pirates. They understand the
difficulties they would face in attempting to transfer
them to regional courts. Moreover, there is no

We continue to attach great importance to the
international component of efforts to bring pirates to
justice. In our view, international participation, which
is already partially under way in the region, is key to
resolving many issues. That would include increasing
the effectiveness of legal proceedings and compliance
with recognized standards of justice. Russia is prepared
to consider different formats of international

12-23794

7

S/PV.6719

cooperation. However, most promising in our view is
the direct participation of highly qualified foreign
specialists and anti-piracy proceedings.
We were also intrigued by the report’s idea of
improving anti-piracy laws, building and equipping
new legal institutions, and selecting international
personnel. Given the limited financial capacities, we
think it would be advisable at this stage to concentrate
efforts on establishing anti-piracy legal mechanisms
with international participation in those countries of
the region that have demonstrated absolute readiness to
implement such measures.
In conclusion, Mr. President, we should like to
assure you that the Russian Federation shall continue
to do its utmost to resolve the issue of piracy off the
Somali coast.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General O’Brien and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for
their valuable statements concerning the specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other States in the
region. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the subject (S/2012/50).
The report presents a grim picture of the piracy
scenario off the coast of Somalia. It notes that, during
2011, there were 286 attacks against ships in the waters
off the coast of Somalia, of which 31 were successful.
As of 20 December 2011, 13 ships were held by
pirates, with a total of 265 hostages. Despite a
reduction in the number of successful attacks, the total
number of pirate attacks continues to be high. We also
note that the geographic spread of pirate activities has
expanded into the Red Sea, the Somali Basin and into
the western Indian Ocean. Pirates now operate in the
high seas at distances of up to 1,750 nautical miles
from the coast of Somalia, covering a geographical
area of roughly 2.8 million square miles. The pirates
have continued to deter action by navies through the
greater use of captured ships and dhows as mother
ships, often retaining the captured crews onboard as
human shields. Violence against seafarers continues to
be reported, and the safety and security of seafarers
remain a matter of very serious concern.
The report notes that consultations with Somalia
have indicated that the Somali authorities continue not
to favour the establishment of a Somali court outside
the territory of Somalia, preferring that any assistance

8

for new courts be implemented within Somalia. At the
same time, Somalia also faces challenges in relation to
the adequacy of the legislative basis for piracy
prosecutions and the level of training and
qualifications of Somali judges, prosecutors and other
legal professionals. These challenges need to be
addressed on a priority basis.
Given the continuation of the Somali authorities
not being favourably disposed towards the
establishment of a Somali court outside the territory of
Somalia, a fresh look at possible solutions is necessary.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia emanates from the
Somali problem, and the solution needs to have
Somalia’s concurrence and the support of its
institutions. The imposition of external solutions will
not work in the long run, especially when the regional
States have a clear preference for the transfer of
convicted offenders to Somalia to enable them to serve
their remaining sentence there.
In this context, it is important to note that in view
of the continuing challenges facing the establishment
of an extraterritorial Somali anti-piracy court at this
stage, Working Group 2 of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia has discussed the
possibility of developing a regional prosecution center,
for example in Seychelles. Its purpose would be to act
as focal point for regional and international support to
the prosecution of piracy suspects and to provide a
location offering relative logistical ease for their
transfer by naval forces. As the regional prosecution
centre would be based in the national legal system of
Seychelles, it would be cost-effective and easy to set
up.
The views of the Somali authorities on this matter
should be obtained in consultation with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
UNODC. We also request the Secretariat to work out
the modalities of establishing such a focal point and its
likely impact on the overall prosecution and
punishment of pirates, as well as those involved in the
financing and laundering of the proceeds of piracy and
armed robbery at sea.
The Secretary-General has also suggested
detailed implementation proposals for the specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia, Tanzania, Seychelles and
Mauritius. Those implementation proposals are
important and need to be considered and further
discussed by the Council, as well as by UNDP and

12-23794

S/PV.6719

UNODC. We fully support the Secretary-General’s
view that, as a first step, an assessment — with the
assistance of the naval coalitions and other States
active in naval operations — is necessary to determine
the number of piracy incidents where the suspects are
apprehended but released and the reasons underlying
the releases. That assessment is a precondition for
assessing the required national and regional capacity
for prosecuting and incarcerating pirates. We also agree
with the Secretary-General’s conclusion that such
information would assist the Security Council in its
consideration of the most effective measures to combat
piracy off the coast of Somalia, and regional States and
the United Nations in determining the likely
anticipated demand for prosecution capacity in the
region for the foreseeable future.
A decision from the budgetary point of view
would also be useful. Before coming to a final view on
the establishment of extraterritorial Somali courts,
there is a need to consider the estimated annual costs of
the establishment of such extraterritorial courts, in
consultation with the interested regional States and
concerned United Nations agencies. The need for
stand-alone premises and to assess associated security
costs; the salaries and other expenses of international
experts, including judges and prosecutors, including
from the Somali diaspora; and the sources of such
funding on a sustained long-term basis are important.
In conclusion, the Secretary-General’s report
raises important issues and made valuable suggestions
that need to be further considered and developed. The
solution to the problem of piracy in Somalia lies not at
sea, but on land. It is important that the Transitional
Federal Institutions in Somalia follow the road map
with sincerity and commitment. We also support the
strengthening of national and regional capacities in the
drafting of national anti-piracy legislation and the
investigation, prosecution and sentencing of suspected
pirates. The prosecution of those involved in the
financing of pirate activities, and the cooperation of
States in the sharing of information and evidence
concerning such persons and activities, including in the
release of hostages, are equally important.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank the Togolese
presidency for scheduling today’s important meeting,
and I thank you personally, Mr. Minister, for your
presence today in the Council. It testifies to your
country’s commitment to important African causes, and

12-23794

we thank you most sincerely. Our thanks go as well to
Ms. Patricia O’Brien and to Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their
comprehensive and lucid briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General before us
today (S/2012/50) presents a series of measures that
could have a positive effect in the fight against and
repression of piracy off the Somali coast. Despite the
reduction in acts of piracy during 2011, that scourge is
still a major cause for concern because of its human
cost, with the taking of hostages and its destabilizing
effects on the society and economy of Somalia, but
also, more importantly, the threat it poses to the
stability of the region as a whole.
To fight piracy effectively and to put an end to
impunity require, as the Secretary-General’s report
amply shows, comprehensive arrangements of measures
and actions. Those arrangements should include
strengthening investigation capacities, setting up an
effective,
adapted
legislative
framework
and
establishing jurisdiction, with the necessary human and
material means.
The States of the region have not lagged in
deploying considerable efforts to bring to justice and to
imprison those guilty of piracy, and they have devoted
considerable resources to that end. However,
establishing a juridical framework to address piracy
will not have much impact without adequate laws and
sufficient prison capacity. A legislative framework in
keeping with international law in the matter,
particularly the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and international norms of human rights, is
one of the necessary conditions for effectively fighting
piracy.
To ensure the effectiveness of the various
anti-piracy jurisdictions, better training is necessary,
especially for judges, prosecutors, defence attorneys
and other legal professionals. Moreover, it is necessary
to increase prison capacity in Somalia and other
countries in the region to hold those found guilty in
accordance with requisite international norms, in order
to ensure the effectiveness of the entire legal system to
be established for the fight against piracy.
I take this opportunity to commend the support of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in helping
Somalia and other countries of the region in the legal,
juridical and penal fields, with an eye to fighting
impunity for piracy. I also commend the work of the

9

S/PV.6719

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
whose contribution is significant in promoting an
effective global response to the problem.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
call to the international community to offer significant
aid to Somalia and other countries of the region to
implement the measures necessary to fight the scourge
of piracy. In that regard, we commend the London
Conference on Somalia, which, among other things,
may spur a coordinated international response to fight
piracy off the coast of Somalia.
As for the judicial responses envisaged,
particularly the establishment of an extraterritorial
Somali court, it is important that the views of the
concerned countries in the region be taken into account
to ensure their ownership of and engagement in the
implementation of those solutions. Moreover, it is
important, given the urgency of the situation and the
threats posed by piracy, that decisions in this matter be
made as soon as possible.
Actions against piracy should also include
pursuing those people suspected of financing, planning
and organizing this type of act. In that context, my
delegation notes with appreciation the initiative to
establish a regional centre in Seychelles to coordinate
prosecution and intelligence, in order to improve
tracking the piracy financing trail.
Finally, I want to underline that while bringing to
justice and imprisoning pirates is necessary to fight
piracy — and especially to fight o impunity — it is no
less important to address the root causes of the problem
through political stabilization in Somalia.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
thank the Secretary-General for producing his
informative report (S/2012/50), and Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings today. We believe that the report,
prepared in conjunction with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), provides and
excellent blueprint for moving forward on the piracy
prosecution front. Among other things, the report
provides a most useful and very comprehensive needs
assessment with respect to ongoing efforts in various
regional States, laying out clearly what the current
state of play is in each venue and pinpointing specific
measures that need to be taken in order to move to the
operational phase.

10

Even as piracy continues to present challenges off
the coast of Somalia, we are cautiously optimistic
about some of the findings in the Secretary-General’s
report, including that the success rate of attacks
decreased in 2011. As more nations implement the
guidance provided by the International Maritime
Organization — the industry-developed bestmanagement practices for protection against Somaliabased piracy — and employ the use of privately
contracted armed security personnel, we are hopeful
that the numbers will continue to decrease. However,
we remain extremely concerned by reports that the
geographical expanse of pirate operations is intruding
into the southern Red Sea and extending as far as the
eastern Indian Ocean.
In addition to the human toll associated with
piracy, the economic costs of dealing with the piracy
threat are staggering. The grim statistics reinforce the
need, as one part of the solution to the piracy problem,
to establish specialized anti-piracy courts and increase
the capacity to conduct prosecutions. We note that an
ultimate goal in this regard is enhancing Somali
responsibility and active involvement in efforts to
prosecute and incarcerate suspected pirates. As one
aspect of that, we stress the importance of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia enacting
anti-piracy legislation by 18 May, as called for in the
road map to end the transition, and the Transitional
Federal Parliament passing appropriate counter-piracy
legislation before the end of the transitional period in
August.
We applaud the tremendous amount of work
already under way by the UNODC, UNDP and others
to assist Somalia and regional States in conducting
piracy prosecutions. We are very encouraged by the
projection that, with assistance, States in the region
could collectively increase the number of piracy
prosecutions per year by 125, involving up to 1,250
suspects, in accordance with international standards.
That includes, as appropriate, prosecution of planners,
facilitators and financers of piracy attacks.
We thank, among others, the Government of the
Seychelles for its indication of willingness to host a
regional prosecution centre, contingent on the
establishment of an effective post-trial transfer
framework, and we look forward to the opening this
year of its Regional Anti-Piracy Prosecution and
Intelligence
Coordination
Centre.
We
also
acknowledge Council resolution 2020 (2011) and its

12-23794

S/PV.6719

commendation of INTERPOL for the creation of a
global piracy database designed to consolidate
information about piracy off the coast of Somalia and
facilitate the development of actionable analysis for
law enforcement. We urge all States to share such
information with INTERPOL for use in the database
through appropriate channels.
We recognize that any increase in prosecution
capacity in the region necessarily will require an
increase in prison capacity. In that regard, we support
the continuing efforts of Somali authorities, UNODC,
UNDP and other international partners in supporting
the construction and responsible operation of suitable
and sufficient prisons in Somalia and elsewhere in the
region. For its part, the United States will continue to
aggressively prosecute suspected pirates in cases with a
United States nexus. We have in custody a total of 28
Somalis at various stages of prosecution or
incarceration, in five cases of attacks on American
citizens or interests.
We believe that the report (S/2012/50) of the
Secretary-General demonstrates that the experts of
UNODC, UNDP, the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia and other stakeholders understand
clearly the problems and needs with respect to piracy
prosecutions and how best to address those needs. That
is why contributions to the Trust Fund to Support
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia are so vitally important to permit timely
implementation by UNODC, UNDP and others of as
many of the specific steps called for in the SecretaryGeneral’s report as possible. The United States
contributes regularly to the Trust Fund and is confident
that projects it funds are making a real difference in
building capacity related to the rule of law in the
region, and specifically to countering piracy.
We also recognize the importance to Seychelles
and other States of the region of international
assistance efforts in the form of the provision of
personnel, as called for in the report. We are studying
ways in which we can contribute materially to the joint
United
Kingdom-Seychelles
proposed
regional
anti-piracy prosecution intelligence and information
centre to be located in Victoria, and believe that the
centre will make a material contribution to the
international efforts to disrupt the piracy enterprise
ashore.

12-23794

Finally, we endorse the report’s suggestion that,
as a logical next step, an assessment be conducted,
with the assistance of States active in naval operations,
to help to determine the number of piracy incidents
where suspects are apprehended and released, as well
as the reasons underlying those releases. As the report
notes, that will assist both in sharpening the counterpiracy strategy and determining the likely anticipated
demand for prosecution capacity in the region for the
foreseeable future.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
have taken careful note of the report (S/2012/50) of the
Secretary-General on the establishment of specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other States in the
region. We are grateful for the important remarks made
by Ms. Patricia O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, as well as by Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
In spite of the reduction in the number of attacks
along Somali coasts in the past year, the total number
of pirate attacks continues to be high. The broadening
geographic scope and increasing sophistication of
pirate operations are a source of concern, as are the
high number of hostages still being held and incidents
of violence against crews, including their use as human
shields.
Piracy is yet another consequence of the
institutional fragility and precarious economic
conditions in Somalia. Although international
cooperation in providing security for navigation,
prevent attacks and capture pirates has yielded some
positive results, we believe that security along
Somalia’s coasts will be built on land. As both the main
source and victim of that crime, Somalia must
therefore participate comprehensively in resolving this
problem.
In order to respond effectively and sustainably to
the problem of piracy, it is necessary to restore peace
in Somalia and to foment its social and economic
development. To that end, it is necessary to strengthen
institutions in a manner that the economic, security,
judicial and penal and components can be acted on
simultaneously. Such an approach must in turn be
focused on preventing and punishing acts of piracy, so
as to continue to strengthen every link in the chain of
measures against that crime. In that regard, it is
crucially important that the Somali people see piracy as

11

S/PV.6719

an activity that diminishes their development options,
and that there is therefore reason to oppose it.
Similarly, we Somalia’s sovereignty over its land
and maritime resources should be restored. To that end,
it is essential to resolve the legal issue of the
delimitation of the marine space, so as to bring it into
line with international law and thereby clearly establish
the marine territory, the exclusive economic zone and
the maritime borders with Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen.
With a view to improving security, the
international community should continue to support the
forces of the Transitional Federal Government to
enable them to carry out their activities on both land
and in its coastal waters. To that end, there is a need to
improve monitoring and identification with regard to
the arms embargo, as well as to consider the possibility
of imposing sanctions.
Somalia should assume responsibility for legal
proceedings to suppress acts of piracy and put an end
to the impunity enjoyed by pirates. There is also a need
to make progress in establishing Somali legal
instruments that make it possible to try suspected
pirates, strengthen Somalia’s legal capacity and
provide penal facilities where those found guilty can
serve their sentences in Somalia.
Without ignoring the importance of an ongoing
commitment by the international community to provide
assistance and capacity-building in strengthening the
legislative, judicial and penal system, the primary
responsibility in combating piracy and armed robbery
along Somalia’s coasts falls on the Transitional Federal
Government. Before the transition period comes to an
end, it is essential that the legal, penal and procedural
framework be reformed in order to adopt appropriate
laws on piracy in conformity with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
With regard to the jurisdiction of specialized
tribunals in Somalia and other States of the region, the
goal should be to have courts that have broad
jurisdiction that can exercise that jurisdiction both in
cases involving common pirates and those having to do
with the financing, planning and organizing acts of
piracy. While courts to deal with the latter are more
complicated and require greater specialization and
more time to become fully operational, they can have a
greater impact on preventing and eradicating this
crime.

12

My delegation believes that the establishing a
specialized extraterritorial Somali court should include
the agreement of the Transitional Federal Government
and be considered as an interim step whose ultimate
goal is to try those suspected of committing acts of
piracy within Somalia.
We appreciate the efforts made by Seychelles to
set up a regional anti-piracy prosecution intelligence
and information coordination centre that would act as a
forum for coordinating regional and international
support for prosecuting suspected pirates. Such a
centre could serve as a logistical facility for the
transfer of suspected pirates by naval forces, and could
also help to strengthen the rule of law in Somalia.
The agreements reached in the context of the
second Constitutional Conference, held in Garowe, to
bring the transition period to an end and move ahead
with the establishment of a new federal Government in
Somalia serve as an important basis for launching a
strategy to combat piracy in which each of the regions
sees itself as a part of the same country and
understands the need to increase cooperation among
themselves in order to ensure the success of the
initiatives.
We believe that a lasting and stable solution to
the problem should be part of the efforts carried out to
resolve the Somali crisis and strengthen the rule of law
in the country. Any viable option will require adopting
a comprehensive approach that includes an institutional
structure that ensures governance and makes it possible
to pursue Somalia’s economic and social development.
Prosecutions may prove pointless if they are not
accompanied by the establishment of alternatives to
piracy for the Somali people based on investments in
communities that produce domestic revenues that
contribute to the development of a formal economy.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. O’Brien, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov, for
their briefings.
The root cause of the Somali piracy issue is on
land, and therefore it should be treated in terms of both
symptoms and root causes. The key is to achieve peace
and stability in Somalia and to promote its economic
and social development. Therefore, the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia and the international

12-23794

S/PV.6719

community should adopt an integrated strategy and
promote works in various fields in a balanced manner.
We welcome the important consensus reached by
the parties concerned in Somalia with regard to the key
transition task of drafting a constitution and deciding
the country’s future political system. We call on the
international community to continue its efforts to assist
Somalia to achieve peace and development.
With regard to the establishment of Somali
specialized anti-piracy courts, I wish to emphasize the
following.
First, we believe that prosecuting and imprisoning
Somali pirates and ending their impunity is an important
aspect of combating Somali pirates. We are open to the
choice of means to achieve that objective and are
willing to explore all possibilities, including the
establishment of specialized anti-piracy courts in
Somalia and other countries of the region.
Secondly, we have taken note of the problems
involved in establishing such courts in or outside
Somalia and that the parties concerned have not
reached an agreement. As reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/50), this idea still faces
various political, legal and security challenges. We
support the international community continuing its
efforts to find the most feasible and effective solution
while giving due respect to the views of Somalia and
the other countries concerned in the region.
Thirdly, irrespective of whether the anti-piracy
courts in Somalia can be established in the short term,
strengthening the capacity of Somalia and other
countries of the region has always been key to the
successful prosecution and incarceration of Somali
pirates. We have noticed that with assistance from such
agencies as the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), judicial capacity-building
in Somalia and other countries in the region — such as
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania — is
making good progress. We appreciate the efforts by
UNDP and UNODC and the other countries concerned,
and we call on the international community to continue
this assistance to Somalia and other countries of the
region to further enhance their capacity.
Mr. Vaz Patto (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I welcome your presence among us
today.

12-23794

(spoke in English)
I would like to start by thanking the presidency of
Togo for having organized this briefing and the Legal
Counsel, Ms. Patricia O’Brien, for her very
comprehensive presentation of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/50). I also wish to thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), Ambassador Yuri Fedotov, for his
participation in this briefing, bearing in mind the
important role UNODC is called to play in helping
build a solution to the problem of piracy off the coast
of Somalia. The report of the Secretary-General is both
comprehensive and action-oriented. We would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretariat and the
Office of Legal Affairs for the good work done.
The phenomenon of piracy off the coast of
Somalia has its roots in Somalia. It feeds on
lawlessness and overall impunity and benefits from
conditions on the ground that are deficient for fighting
this scourge through Somali institutions, an efficient
judiciary and an appropriate system for the rule of law.
The dimension of the problem is such that it
transcends the territory of Somalia. It spills over its
borders, with a serious negative impact on the
neighbouring countries, on the region and on the
commercial flux of international navigation that runs
through the region. Moreover, the phenomenon
continues to spread like an epidemic to other countries
in the region, which must now also resort to prompt,
appropriate measures to fight this scourge if they want
to avoid becoming themselves easy prey of the strong
networks of pirates with known links to other types of
transnational organized crime through financing of
criminal activities, including terrorism.
The complexity of these activities and the way
they may interlink and potentiate dangerous
transnational effects make it advisable that the
international community remain vigilant and prepared
to act whenever the situation so requires.
There is indeed a role for the Security Council in
monitoring these new threats, which have the potential
to seriously endanger peace and security. This is why
we continue to encourage the Council not to disregard
its preventive role in closely monitoring such
situations. Last November, under our presidency of the
Council, we organized a meeting on new challenges to
peace and security (see S/PV.6668), having in mind
precisely the importance of the Council closely

13

S/PV.6719

following these and other potential threats from the
perspective of prevention.

detention and trial of piracy leaders as a vital approach
to disrupt the organized networks that support piracy.

We are therefore very pleased with the fact that
the report dedicates a significant part of its focus and
recommendations to the need to strengthen the legal
and judiciary capacity in the neighbouring countries
and the regions of Somalia, including, in particular,
Puntland and Somaliland. We fully support those
efforts, and we think that reinforcing those capacities
has now become part and parcel of the overall solution
to piracy in the region.

We look forward to the next opportunity to
discuss these issues and trust that implementation of
the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report,
together with the contribution of the international
community and the Security Council, will make a
positive and definitive impact in the fight against
impunity for acts of piracy in the region.

It is an undeniable fact: the dimension of the
problem requires an ensemble of measures and efforts
by many actors. We encourage those that can be
undertaken by the countries in the region, such as
Seychelles, Kenya, Tanzania and Mauritius, to help in
this regard, with the support of the United Nations
Development Programme and UNODC. Therefore, we
support the recommendations in the report that aim at
increasing programmes of assistance and capacitybuilding in these countries and regions, to help them to
fight impunity for acts of piracy.
We find, however, that more has to be done to
involve Somalia in all those efforts. In our view, no
solution can be sustained unless Somalia, as a whole, is
able to cope with this problem, with appropriate
Somali law and with Somali courts and judiciary — in
all, a Somali solution to a problem that has its roots in
Somalia. The important report by Mr. Jack Lang
(S/2011/30, annex) already pointed clearly to that
reality. We cannot avoid it, and the international
community has to address it comprehensively by
helping build the needed capacity in Somalia, helping
it to regain economic and social development and
security levels that may enable it to overcome the
present difficult situation and avoid becoming an
increasingly easy target and prey of organized crime
and terrorism networks.
In this sense, we encourage further efforts by the
United Nations to assist Somalia to adopt the necessary
anti-piracy legislation and to establish the necessary
judiciary structures, with participation of international
assistance and relevant expertise, as necessary.
Extraterritorial Somali courts, as suggested in
Mr. Lang’s report, could also be useful tools, in our
view, to be used as a transitory measure while the
necessary security conditions on the ground are not yet
met. That is particularly important with regard to the

14

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Legal Affairs, Patricia O’Brien, for her detailed
presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/50). We would also like to express our thanks
for the briefing that was given by Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. We commend the efforts that have
been undertaken to date by the Secretary-General,
together with the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Special Adviser on Legal Issues
Related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Those
measures have allowed a considerable enhancement of
the capacities to enforce the rule of law and to find a
solution to such a complex issue.
We note that the percentage of recorded pirate
attacks decreased in 2011 thanks to the combination of
effective measures including, among others, naval
operations and the institution of improved anti-piracy
management practices on the part of the shipping
industry itself to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia.
We believe that the report provides a basis for
moving forward towards establishing an effective
system for trying and imprisoning pirates. It is
important to analyse in detail the constitutional and
legal framework for establishing new anti-piracy
tribunals and for defining their potential material and
procedural bases, taking into account the multiple
problems that the issue poses.
On the other hand, we believe that this debate is
linked to resolution 2036 (2012), which was adopted
this morning, and to the consultations that we have
been holding with regard to the future operations of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Any
initiative that supports stabilization in Somalia will
have an impact on the illegal activities that are taking
place off its coasts.

12-23794

S/PV.6719

We are aware of the fact that Somalia cannot
address piracy in isolation and that, over the past few
years, the phenomenon has taken on a regional
dimension. In that regard, Guatemala can contribute its
own experience. For, although they are different
phenomena, we have been able address the fight
against impunity with United Nations support by
establishing the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala. That joint initiative between
the Government of Guatemala and the United Nations
strengthened the entire judicial and prosecutorial
system in our country and gave rise to a culture of
combating impunity.
In order to avoid impunity and to discourage new
attacks, it is essential to achieve appropriate and
speedy trials of those suspected of acts of piracy and to
ensure their post-trial imprisonment. We fully support
increased assistance from the United Nations to the
States of the region to build the necessary capacities to
bring pirates to trial and, in the event, to imprison
them. The United Nations should focus its efforts on
the following key elements, namely, legislative
reforms, capacity-building for judging and bringing to
trial cases of piracy, effective implementation of the
law and improvements to the prison infrastructure in
Somalia and in the States of the region. In that respect,
Guatemala supports the establishment of specialized
courts for piracy committed off the coast of Somalia.
Finally, we believe it is important to take into
account the position of the Transitional Federal
Government and of the Somali people. At the same
time, as part of its programme of institutional
enhancement, Somalia must update its legal framework
and should adopt a package of anti-piracy laws before
the end of the transition period.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. O’Brien and Mr. Fedotov for their
presentations. I would also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2012/50).
For several years now, the Council has regularly
discussed the scourge of piracy along the Somali coast.
When Mr. Jack Lang presented his report on the legal
issues related to piracy in early 2011, there was a
general sense of urgency. Today, on the eve of the
major conference that will be held tomorrow in
London, the diagnosis remains the same. According to
statistics, the number of attacks against ships along the
Somali coast reached record levels in 2011. It is true

12-23794

that the number and success rate of such attacks have
decreased over the past few months, but at what price?
We cannot continue indefinitely to support the
immense security efforts that our naval forces provide
in the waters of the region. The pirates are shifting
their base of action by virtue of our presence, while
crews taken hostage are used as human shields and are
increasingly led to land. In other terms, there has yet to
be a structural improvement. Moreover, there is no
credible solution for enticing young Somalis towards
other activities. Nor — and this is the subject of
today’s discussion — has there been a consistent,
effective judicial response.
Why do we still lack an operational legal
strategy? Today’s two briefings gave us the answer.
The first obstacle, which is enormous, is the absence of
Somali legislation. It is not possible to construct an
entire, efficient anti-piracy system in the region and to
organize legal cooperation without adequate Somali
legislation. The road map called upon the Federal
Transitional Government to adopt such legislation
before 18 May 2012. Today we are told that the
prospects for new legislation will be better after the
end of the transition period, when a new Parliament
will have been seated. We find that information
troubling, as it represents a new delay in drafting
legislation. Our message to the Somali authorities on
this issue is therefore be clear: progress must be made.
The legal framework in Puntland and Somaliland
are no longer operational, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report. One need not read between the lines
to understand that the legislative effort needed to
address the scope of the problem has not been made.
The second obstacle concerns Somali legal
capacities. We all rightly advocate a Somali solution,
but the Secretary-General’s report is unambiguous. The
shortage and poor training of legal professionals, and
the security situation, including in Puntland and
Somaliland, limits the possibilities for such capacitybuilding.
Given such challenges, Mr. Jack Lang proposed a
bold solution that involved creating a specialized
Somali court that would be temporarily located
elsewhere, either in Arusha, as Tanzania has agreed, or
somewhere else. I understand that there is a proposal
from Qatar on the table. There is a need to at last take a
practical decision. In the absence of a Somali court
abroad, we are in effect forcing the countries of the

15

S/PV.6719

region to bear the lion’s share of the legal work.
Kenya, Tanzania, Seychelles and Mauritius should be
commended for their contribution. We will carefully
consider the Secretariat’s proposals for capacitybuilding in those countries and for creating specialized
courts where none exist. However, it is unreasonable to
think that the countries of the regions can alone
address the full breadth of the problem. Let us not lose
sight of the Somalian solution. It continues to be
relevant.
We estimate that 75 per cent of the pirates
captured are released without prosecution. Others have
estimated the rate is 40 per cent. The Secretariat, in its
report, has proposed a study on the scope and root
causes of this phenomenon, but to us it seems
sufficient to read the report, which explains the legal
uncertainties, to understand the reason for this
phenomenon.
The adoption of effective Somali legislation must
be a priority. All relevant actors, including the United
Nations Office of Legal Affairs, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Office for Drugs and Crime, must follow up on
that issue and, if necessary, call on the Council in the
event that new obstacles appear. Again, without the
necessary legislation, we can build nothing sustainable.
Our efforts must also focus on strengthening
judicial and prison capacities, not just on the latter
aspect. France believes we must sustain a genuine
Somalization of the judicial treatment of piracy, which
cannot be boiled down to building more prison
capacity in Somaliland and Puntland.
Beyond the training of judges and legal
professionals, as is being undertaken by UNDP with
support from France, we believe it may be useful to
provide assistance to prosecutors in building cases. The
centre in Seychelles must maintain direct contact with
the Somali authorities. Without engaging international
judges or prosecutors, it is still possible to dispatch
advisors to work with Somali magistrates, while taking
due account of security issues. These advisors may not
reside permanently in Somalia. We are ready to work
with members of the Council and the Secretariat to
make rapid and concrete progress.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): The Pakistani delegation
thanks the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs
and the Executive Director of the United Nations

16

Office for Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their
briefings.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia is a serious
problem that threatens maritime traffic in the Horn of
Africa, endangers the lives of the crews on board, and
impacts commerce and trade in the region and beyond.
While a decline in the incidence of piracy was recorded
in 2011 as compared with preceding years, the menace
is far from being eradicated. A recent report by the
International Maritime Organization indicates that in
2011 there were, on average, two pirate attacks every
three days. The threat posed by pirates to the peace and
stability of Somali coastal areas and hinterlands has not
diminished with the declining incidence of piracy.
Pakistan is of the view that the eradication of
piracy would require a concerted long-term strategy
involving a truly integrated approach that encompasses
political, security and governance tracks. Traditional
measures, as stressed in today’s briefing, form an
essential element of the integrated approach that we
have been emphasizing. The effective prosecution and
correction of pirates through judicial means will
supplement the important work done by international
naval forces to interdict pirates.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/50) and
the briefing today have empirically evaluated the
administrative and financial details involved in setting
up regional prosecution mechanisms. In view of its
unique situation, tackling piracy has become a shared
responsibility. We value the support provided by
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania in assisting
with the prosecution of pirates. International assistance
with the capacity-building of the judicial sectors of
countries in the region will be critical. It is also
important to accommodate the views of Somalia in this
arrangement.
In principle, we associate ourselves with the idea
of setting up a regional prosecution centre in Seychelles,
subject to the consent of the host Government. An
effective post-trial transfer framework must be in place
if the regional prosecution centre to be effective. We
hope that the next meeting of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia will also deliberate on
the prosecution capacity of States in the region.
For our part, Pakistan is currently playing a role
in a number of counter-piracy operations. We have
participated in the two naval task force operations,
Combined Task Force 150 for countering piracy in the

12-23794

S/PV.6719

Gulf of Aden, and Combined Task Force 151 for
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia. Pakistan
assumed command of Combined Task Force 151 in
November 2011.
As others have said, no measure to counter piracy
can be effective without taking into account the root
causes related to the political and security situation in
Somalia. Building State capacity in Somalia,
preventing environmental degradation of its coastal
waters and improving employment opportunities would
be imperative to reducing the propensity of local youth
to opt for piracy. An effective way to combat piracy, in
the context of overall efforts for peace and security in
Somalia, is to provide more support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I take this
opportunity to welcome the adoption of resolution
2036 (2012) on strengthening AMISOM. With the
resolution adopted today, AMISOM is closer to the
African Union’s strategic concept paper.
We also welcome the London conference on
Somalia being held tomorrow. We hope that its
deliberations will go a long way in promoting peace
and stability in Somalia and combating the menace of
piracy.
Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General O’Brien and Executive
Director Fedotov for their comprehensive briefings, as
well as the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS), which have all
contributed
to
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2012/50). We greatly appreciate this detailed, handson compilation of issues and requirements relevant to
establishing specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia
and other States of the region.
Germany has a long-standing commitment to
combating piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the
region, including through our participation in
Operation Atalanta and our contribution to the work of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
Germany has provided substantial support to the efforts
of UNODC and UNDP in strengthening the capacities
of Somalia and States in the region in the areas of
prosecution of suspected pirates and imprisonment of
those convicted, both directly and through the Trust
Fund of the Contact Group.

12-23794

But despite these efforts and progress achieved,
there is a long way to go. Piracy off the coast of
Somalia remains an issue of utmost concern. While we
take note of a declining trend in 2011 both in the
number of attacks and in the numbers of hostages and
ships held, the persistent threat of piracy and of armed
robbery remains as grave as ever. Despite the decrease
in instances of successful attacks, mainly as a result of
the concerted efforts of the international community,
the geographical reach of pirate operations now
extends into the entire western Indian Ocean. This
poses new challenges for those committing resources
to combating piracy in that region.
The Security Council has long recognized the
importance of prosecuting suspected pirates and
imprisoning those convicted as an essential component
of international efforts to combat piracy and to end
impunity. We continue to hold the view that it must
ultimately be in Somalia that pirates are prosecuted and
imprisoned. The urgent establishment of adequate
structures in Somalia, in line with the rule of law of
human rights standards, is crucial to reaching that goal.
The report of the Secretary-General is very useful in
that regard, assessing the legal and administrative
measures, as well as the international assistance
necessary for realizing that objective.
We also join the Secretary-General in welcoming
the joint efforts undertaken by the authorities of the
Transitional Federal Government, Puntland and
Somaliland, with United Nations assistance, to draft
and agree upon legislation relating to piracy, prisons
and prison transfers. We strongly urge the Transitional
Federal Institutions to adopt such legislation before the
end of the transitional period, as foreseen in the road
map.
At the same time, it will be essential to continue
and enhance support for the efforts of States in the
region, in particular Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and
Tanzania, to try and to prosecute pirates. As to the
specific requirements of regional States, including
international assistance, to be able to increase the
caseload capacity of each of the jurisdictions
concerned, we believe that the present report is a solid
national-based needs assessment that provides an
excellent basis for advancing the realization of that
objective.
In that context we would welcome, in principle,
the establishment of a regional prosecution centre to

17

S/PV.6719

act as a focal point for regional and international
support for the prosecution of piracy suspects. We
would support further study on that proposal.
Germany fully supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. In
particular, we encourage all regional States that have
not yet done so to conclude agreements with naval
States and organizations for the transfer of piracy
suspects. We urge States and the shipping industry to
make further donations to the Trust Fund of the
Contact Group, since those contributions are essential
for enabling UNODC and UNDP to go ahead with the
assistance as outlined in the report.
The report of the Secretary-General is an
important step in enhancing international efforts to
prosecute suspected pirates and imprison those
convicted. We strongly call upon UNODC and UNDP
to use the report as a basis for their further work in this
area. In particular, information contained in the report
should be taken into account when presenting projects
to the Board of the Trust Fund of the Contact Group for
funding.
Finally, concerning the idea of an extraterritorial
Somali court in a third country in the region, as
previously proposed by Special Adviser Jack Lang (see
S/2011/30, annex), the Secretary-General’s report again
describes existing challenges with regard to the
establishment of such a court. While we take note of
those challenges, we believe that the option should be
retained among the options at hand, since it could
constitute an important element of support to a nascent
Somali legal and judicial system.
I should like to conclude by reiterating
Germany’s strong commitment to continue constructive
cooperation with partners in the Security Council and
the Contact Group.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Legal Counsel and UnderSecretary-General, Ms. Patricia O’Brien, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for their briefings
and the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
on specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other
States in the region (S/2012/50).
In its resolution 2015 (2011) of 24 October 2011,
the Security Council determined that the incidents of
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of

18

Somalia constitute a threat to international peace and
security in the region. The Council emphasized in that
regard the importance of finding a comprehensive
solution to the problem of piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia and decided to continue its
consideration, as a matter of urgency, of the
establishment of specialized anti-piracy courts in
Somalia and other States in the region with substantial
international participation and/or support.
We take note of the clarification contained in the
report of the Secretary-General that the term
“specialized anti-piracy court” should be understood to
refer to a court operating under national law, with
international assistance and with a focus on the
prosecution of piracy offences.
We note different views of regional States as to
the proposed establishment of an extraterritorial
Somali anti-piracy court or a regional prosecution
centre in a third State. Whatever the advantages offered
by the possibilities mentioned, the consent of all
regional States is an essential prerequisite for
successful and effective anti-piracy cooperation.
It is encouraging that a combination of
measures — including actions by naval forces, improved
implementation of International Maritime Organization
guidance and industry-developed best-management
practices for protection against piracy, and the
imprisonment of more than one thousand suspects or
convicted pirates — contributed to a decline in the
number of attacks and a reduction in successful attacks
throughout 2011.
Apart from the mentioned actions, national
efforts of the Government of Somalia and other
regional countries, their commitment to combating
piracy, their important prosecution roles and the
measures they have adopted to effectively combat the
spread of piracy should be commended. At the same
time, it is important to ensure that national
commitments are matched by strong support and
assistance from the international community, including,
inter alia, through contributions to the Trust Fund to
Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia.
Furthermore, it is clear that a sustainable
response to piracy off the coast of Somalia requires the
re-establishment of peace, security and the rule of law
in Somalia and social and economic development for
the Somali people. International assistance to Somalia

12-23794

S/PV.6719

remains crucial for overall success. Taking this
opportunity, I would like to express Azerbaijan’s
support to the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia in its efforts to overcome difficulties, achieve
reconciliation and build a secure, stable, united,
democratic and prosperous nation.
Mr. Tladi (South Africa): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2012/50) and thank the Legal
Counsel, Ms. Patricia O’Brien, and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for their briefings.
South Africa remains concerned at the continued
incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia. We have
noted the continuing month-to-month decline in the
piracy attacks in 2011 due to, inter alia, the presence of
naval forces and implementation of industry-developed
best management practices and International Maritime
Organization guidance. We are hopeful that the trend
will continue into 2012 and beyond.
The report before the Council raises important
questions about further efforts of the international
community to fight the scourge of piracy off the coast
of Somalia, particularly in relation to the creation of
specialized anti-piracy courts.
The first point that we wish to highlight with
respect to the creation of specialized anti-piracy courts
is the need to ensure national ownership in the
establishment of such courts. The clearest reflection of
national ownership is the adoption of national
legislation, and in that regard we note the intention of
the Somali authorities to exercise their sovereign right
to adopt relevant legislation after the transitional
period, when a newly elected parliament will be in
place.
We have also taken note of the fact that the
authorities of Somalia would prefer not to have Somali
courts operating outside the territory of Somalia. The
creation of specialized Somali courts in Somalia
would, in addition to respecting the wishes of the
Somalis, have the added benefits of capacity-building
and infrastructure development. We are, of course,
cognizant that the security situation in Somalia makes
that a difficult prospect. But that fact should galvanize
us to make a greater effort to address the security
challenges and instability on land.
We also wish to highlight concerns expressed by
a number of national authorities about the creation of

12-23794

new, specialized anti-piracy courts with jurisdiction
limited exclusively to piracy. Like those States, we are
concerned that this may serve to redirect the limited
prosecutorial and judicial resources from other crimes
that are of equal importance to those countries.
Moreover, the wisdom of creating specialized
courts, appointing prosecutors, judges and other staff to
deal only with piracy must be assessed, taking into
account the rate of prosecutions in the countries where
such courts are being considered. The figures presented
in the report of the Secretary-General indicate that
since 2006 there has been a total of only 639
prosecutions in the countries concerned. In that regard,
we concur with the assessment made in the report that
prior to embarking on what could be a costly project,
there should be an assessment of the anticipated
caseload.
The third issue that we wish to highlight is one
that is not addressed in the current report, namely, the
problem of illegal fishing and dumping off the coast of
Somalia. It is an integral part of the problems off the
coast of Somalia. The issue is considered in the
Secretary-General’s report of 25 October 2011
(S/2011/661) and, for that reason, we can be fairly
brief. Given the presence of so many naval vessels in
the area, we find it difficult to understand how there
can be the kind of dearth of information reported in the
Secretary-General’s report of October 2011.
We hope that, in the context of paragraph 24 of
resolution 2020 (2011), those States and organizations
with a naval presence in the area will provide the
Secretary-General with the necessary information to
enable the Council to take the matter further. If we fail
to take decisive action in that regard, we risk creating
the impression that the Council is willing to act to curb
piracy only because the vital economic interests of
some countries are threatened. Conversely, the lethargy
in acting against the plundering of Somali resources
could be construed as undermining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Somalia, which the Council
reaffirms in all its resolutions.
I wish to conclude with, perhaps, the most
important point. Piracy off the coast of Somalia is a
serious problem with huge implications. However, it
remains a symptom of a greater problem, which is the
instability and political challenges on land. The
problem of piracy cannot be resolved until all the main
challenges are confronted. According to available

19

S/PV.6719

information, over $2 billion was spent in 2011 alone on
naval presence — excluding, of course, the other costs
that we have spoken about today — compared with a
measly $300 million that was approved for the support
of the African Union Mission in Somalia in 2011. That
is a picture that is out of balance.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/50)
and both Patricia O’Brien and Yuri Fedotov for their
comprehensive briefing this morning. We are grateful
for the work of the United Nations and its agencies on
counter-piracy programmes, particularly the efforts
being undertaken by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) with States in the
region and in Somalia itself.
The United Kingdom remains strongly committed
to the fight against piracy. We believe that it is vital to
break the piracy business model. We need a
comprehensive approach that tackles piracy directly
and its root causes on land. Piracy will be one of the
main focuses of discussion at the London Conference
on Somalia, which my Prime Minister will host
tomorrow.
Despite the significant reduction in the number of
successful attacks in the past year, the threat of piracy
remains serious. We strongly support efforts to bolster
prosecution and prison capacity in regional States and
in Somalia. Several States already play a vital role in
bringing suspected pirates to justice, supported by the
international community.
The report highlights serious capacity constraints
in Somalia. Prosecution by regional States has
therefore been instrumental in efforts to counter piracy.
We believe that that continues to be the most effective
way to prosecute pirates over the short term. We
support, in principle, the report’s implementation
proposals to increase capacity through specialized
anti-piracy courts in Somalia, but continuing our work
to build the capacity of regional States also remains
essential.
The report reaffirms the preference of regional
States that we should build capacity in a way that does
not prevent facilities and expertise being used to
prosecute in other areas of the law. We agree that that
would help create a more sustainable solution to the
piracy problem.

20

A long-term solution that would enable Somali
pirates to be prosecuted and imprisoned in Somalia is
necessary. The report notes the preference of the
Somali authorities for new courts to be established
within Somalia rather than extraterritorially. That
approach is in line with the existing work of UNODC
and UNDP to build capacity in Puntland and
Somaliland. We fully support that approach.
The report rightly highlights the problem of
limited prison capacity. In that regard, we welcome
recent efforts to ensure that convicted pirates serve out
their sentences in Somalia, in particular the
commitments made by Puntland and Somaliland for
post-trial transfer. We hope that agreement on the legal
and practical framework for transferring pirates to
United Nations-constructed prisons in Somalia is
reached quickly. We are grateful for the commitment of
the Seychelles to transfer convicted pirates to
Somaliland.
We strongly support the work of the UNODC
counter-piracy
programme,
including
on
the
investigation and trial process, and its work to provide
additional prison capacity. We call on all partners in
the international community to work together to create
a sustainable model for regional prosecution. We will
continue to provide bilateral assistance on prosecution
and prison capacity, as requested by regional States.
The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia is undertaking important work to explore the
legal and evidential thresholds for prosecution, with
the aim of increasing the number of successful
prosecutions of suspected pirates. It is important that
we coordinate that work as we move forward.
The threat of piracy, the effects of the famine in
Somalia and terrorism are all symptoms of one central
problem — the breakdown of the Somali State.
Tackling piracy and its causes cannot be separated
from that. We need to tackle the factors on land that
feed piracy at sea, including deterrence, security, the
rule of law and development. It is crucial that the
international community mobilize in an integrated way.
The United Kingdom provided over $15 million in
bilateral support for that agenda last year. Today, we
have announced a further $30 million for the stability
of the Somali regions. We urge others to respond
quickly and generously.

12-23794

S/PV.6719

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Togo.
I thank Ms. O’Brien and Mr. Fedotov for their
very detailed briefings on the issue of piracy, which
remains a significant concern today, in particular in
Somalia and other regions of the world. Furthermore,
for that reason the Security Council decided to urgently
consider the possibility of establishing specialized
courts to investigate and try individuals suspected of
piracy in that region, with the participation and/or
crucial assistance of the international community.
My country, Togo, congratulates the Somali
authorities and other States of the region on efforts to
prosecute or imprison individuals suspected or found
guilty of acts of piracy. My delegation thanks the
various bodies of the United Nations system providing
multifaceted assistance in order to build or strengthen
the capacities of national courts to that end.
Togo also welcomes the fact that the number of
acts of piracy noticeably decreased in 2011, according
to the statistics of the International Maritime
Organization. Such encouraging results stem from a
combination of several factors, including, among
others, the activities of naval forces patrolling the
Somali coasts, better implementation of the guidelines
of the International Maritime Organization, in
particular the presence of armed men aboard merchant
vessels, and the imprisonment of several hundreds of
individuals suspected or found guilty of acts of piracy.
However, the finding that pirates now operate in
the high seas at greater distances is of concern owing
to their increasing frequency. That is why my country
is very concerned about the fate of ship crews who are
taken hostage and serve as human shields for pirates.
Moreover, the fact that the number of trials in the
world against acts of piracy remains low is a source of
concern.
The review of the legal frameworks, the current
capacities of specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia,
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania, and
international assistance to those courts reveals several
shortcomings, which are clearly described in the report
of the Secretary-General under consideration
(S/2012/50). Togo welcomes proposals for the
establishment of anti-piracy jurisdictions in the region.

12-23794

Within this general framework, my country
recognizes the priority need for countries of the region
to conclude agreements for the transfer of alleged
pirates with States having vessels patrolling the zone.
It is also critical for investigations to be undertaken
and for individuals who fund, plan or organize piracy
attacks off the Somali coast to be prosecuted and
extradited. An adequate national legal framework, in
line with relevant international instruments —
including the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea — must be adopted by the Somali
authorities so as to effectively bring to justice those
suspected of committing acts of piracy.
My country encourages States and the maritime
transport sector to continue to contribute to the Trust
Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. Similarly, Togo calls on all
agencies of the United Nations system to provide
multifaceted aid to Somalia and the States of the region
so as to increase the number of trials, bolster penal
capacity, and strengthen capacities to investigate and
prosecute those accused of financing, planning or
organizing acts of piracy.
Turning now to specific measures, Togo believes
that assistance provided to States must depend on the
particular needs of each. The proposals made by the
Secretary-General in his report are relevant in that
regard because they seek to provide the States
concerned with an adequate legal framework and the
material, human and financial resources commensurate
with achieving the desired objectives.
My country calls on the Security Council to
consider establishing anti-piracy courts in the States of
the region and a regional prosecution centre. Togo
remains convinced that such measures would
contribute to deterring perpetrators of piracy in other
regions, in particular the Gulf of Guinea.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further names inscribed on the list
of speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

21
