UNITED NATIONS

OFFIC

RECORDS
YEAR

THIRTY-EIGHTH

MEETING:

24 MARCH

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2421)

I

,,,..,,....,.,...,....,,.............

Adoption of the agenda .,,....,.*..,,......

1

a. ,...,,...*.,,,*,...*.*.*..

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651) . . . . .

1

UPV.2421

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol WI . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2421st MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

24 March

Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

President:

At the inviration of the President, Mr, Moseley (Barbados), Mr. Roa Kourl’(Cuba),
Mr. Al-A&? (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya)
and Mr. de PiniCrs (Spain) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Mexico. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2421)
1.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15651)

1983, at 11 a.m.

4. Mr. MUfiOZ
LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): We wish, Sir, to offer you our cordial con-

of the agenda

gratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. Given the fine traditions of the country you so worthily represent, we are sure that the item
before this body will be dealt with expeditiously and
impartially.

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.

5. We thank the members of the Council for this opportunity to speak of the serious concern of the Government of Mexico regarding the events occurring along
the border between Nicaragua and Honduras and in the
north-eastern area of Nicaragua. These are regrettable
events, and they constitute a new and dangerous stage in
the worsening crisis in Central America and endanger
international
peace and security.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Cquncil (S/15651)

6. Once again we are appearing before the Council in
compliance with our duty as members of the international community and as a country neighbouring on an
area in a great state of upheaval as a result of the social
transformations that have been brought about by peoples fighting to assert their independence and those who
are resisting them-that
is, the forces of immobility and
foreign interference, Mexico is all too familiar with these
processes, resistance and interference, for we have experienced all of this throughout our history.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2420th meeting, I invite the representative
of Honduras to take a place at the Council table, and I
invite the representatives of Mexico and Panama to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras)
took a place at the Council table. Mr. MuiSxz
Ledo (Mexico) and Mr. &ores Typaldos (Panama) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. A few days ago, at the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March, my Government reiterated its decision to contribute to the peaceful settlement
of the crisis in Central America which has now, regrettably, assumed alarming proportions, making it similar to
crises in other regions of the world where instability and
turbulence frequently
attract the, attention of the
Council.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Security Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Barbados, Cuba, Democratic
Yemen, Grenada, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and
Spain in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

8. On that occasion, my country’s Secretary for External Relations stated that the present conflicts in Central
America can be settled only through political negotia1

13. We now note with regret that some of the dangers
we tried to avoid have now materialized. Through direct
action and action of third parties attempts are being
made to undermine the political stability of Nicaragua,
presumably to divert that people from the course it has
chosen for its development. This is a violation of the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States, and the international community has the
duty to react to it resolutely.

tions dialogue and economic and social development.
He aiso said that Mexico will continue to wage a responsible per&tent
and committed struggle to achieve Progress' in the area on stable and popular bases and to bring
about coexistence between different Political r6gimes
with full respect for the sovereignty of each State. He
went on to say that “armed intervention in the region
would be contrary to the principle of self-determination
and would long delay the democratic development of
peoples,
their economic and social development, respect
for human rights and hopes for achieving minimal levels
of well-being".
He also stated that “the crisis in the
region is connected with backwardness, Poverty and ageold exploitation and not, as has been claimed, with the
East-West ideological confrontation”.

14. Yesterday [2#2011t meeting] the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua provided the Council
with a great deal of information indicating that there
were armed bands that had entered Nicaraguan territory
across its border with a neighbouring country which had
permitted their organization and transit, thereby facilitating their incursion. The basic elements of that information and other reliable reports widely circulated in the
international press have not been refuted.

9. A few weeks ago, the Ministers for External Relations of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela met
on Contadora Island and vigorously spoke out in favour
of detente in Central America.’ They appealed to all the
States of the area to reduce tensions through dialogue
and negotiations and to establish the basis for a lasting
climate of peaceful coexistence and mutual respect
among States. On that occasion the four Ministers reaffirmed “the obligation of States not to resort to the
threat or use of force in their international relations” and
urged them to “refrain from actions which might aggravate the situation and pose the danger of a broader conflict extending throughout the region”.

15. Here we should perhaps recall the Declaration on
Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, which was
adopted by the General Assembly,z according to which
“Every State has the duty to refrain from organizing or
encouraging the organization
of irregular forces or
armed bands, including mercenaries, for incursion into
the territory of another State.”
16. Such actions jeopardize good-neighbourly relations
between two States and obstruct the process of dialogue
that had been initiated in order to promote the restoration of concord and general detente in the region. At the
same time, they entail the threat that similar situations
will crop up in other countries and that artificial parallels
might then be drawn in an attempt to mislead international public opinion about what is really happening in
Central America.

10. A year ago-on 26 March-having
considered a
complaint by Nicaragua we made an appeal [2337th
mee?ing] for respect for the basic principles of international coexistence, namely, the right to self-determination, non-interference and the peaceful settlement of disputes. On that occasion we stressed, and we
would repeat now, that those principles must be respected
everywhere, but particularly in areas bordering on the
territory of the super-Powers, which are increasingly
under threat.

17. There is unquestionably a close interrelationship
among events in Central America, but, as the representative of Mexico stated at the New Delhi Conference, these
interrelationships should not make us lose sight of the
identity of each society and its political institutions, nor
should it make us overlook the essential nature of revolutions and their profound economic and social causes,
which cannot whimsically and arbitrarily be transplanted
from one country to another. It is fruitless, then, to promote fictitious insurgencies with armed bands that have
been infiltrated to establish false comparisons which will
only obscure the political horizon in the area and further
complicate the inevitable process of negotiations, which
must lead to respect for the singularity and sovereignty of
each country.

11. With regard to Nicaragua, we stated on that occasion that any threat or use of force against that country
should be removed, and we appealed to States to work
along those lines and work out non-aggression pacts to
contribute to peace in the region and to eliminate the
waste involved in the fruitless arms race. Unfortunately,
that appeal was not heeded, and it is for. that reason that
we find ourselves today once again here in this chamber.
12. For more than two years now, the Government of
Mexico has made constant efforts to promote d&ente
and fruitful and harmonious coexistence in Central
America and the Caribbean. We have held consultations
at the highest level with the parties to the conflict, with
other countries in the area concerned over the crisis and
with many other peace-loving States. In the specific case
of Honduras and Nicaragua, we, together with Venezuela, took the initiative to promote a dialogue
between
those two nations, an initiative recalled yesterday
by
both parties to the dispute,

18. Any attempt to impose ideological or strategic
strait-jackets on what is happening in Central America is
anachronistic. No State can assume the right to judge
and to decide on the internal processes of the countries
of the region. My country’s Government has reiterated
its profound conviction that the principle of self*
2

--m

determination
involves pluralism and therefore respect
for the system that each people freely chooses for itself.
We believe that so-called homogeneous solutions really
smack of hegemony and are inevitably authoritarian in
nature.
19. Mexico once again wishes to appeal urgently for an
end to the causes of confrontation on the basis of direct
negotiations
between the Governments involved and
with the active participation of the international community in search for realistic solutions respectful of the sovereignty of all countries which will avoid a conflict of
grave proportions in Central America.
20. Yesterday we heard in this chamber words which
indicated a willingness to negotiate on the part of the
Governments directly concerned. There was also a willingness on the part of different countries of the area to
promote that understanding, and there is a framework
which could orient negotiations. It is necessary that we
now take advantage of the political density that has been
created to promote a peaceful settlement and to urge the
parties to proceed immediately to a dialogue. No foreign
designs, no desire to manipulate others, should be
allowed to obstruct the beginning of this effort to bring
about peace.

25. Mr, GAUCI (Malta): Our work here is invariably
urgent and our time preciously limited. Therefore, with
the exception justified only in my first statement before
the Security Council, I will break with the established
tradition of extending customary and eloquent eulogies
to each President of the Council each month in rotation.
I will limit myself briefly to saying that I welcome your
assumption of duty, Mr. President, and that I have
already benefited from your wise guidance this month.
The same applies to your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky
of the Soviet Union. You have both set a very high standard, which I myself can never hope to emulate.
26. May I take a moment of the Council’s valuable time
to express the appreciation of my delegation for the good
wishes extended to US by so many of our colleagues here
at the United Nations as we assume the awesome responsibilities of membership of the Council this year. To the
best of our ability we shall endeavour to live up to the
trust and duty which have been bestowed on us.
27. We all know that the situation in Central America
has been tense and fraught with acute problems of an
economic, social and political nature for far too long
already. National and international efforts should be
directed at alleviating these problems, rather than at
accentuating them.

21. Now, should the incursion, which has just begun,
become part of a political and military plan with farreaching implications, and should the escalation continue in spite of our efforts, we would find ourselves in an
extremely delicate situation that would cause many peaples and Governments in every continent to react with
the utmost vigour.
?a
22, Mexico feels that it has a duty to sound an alarm
and to urge all those involved in this operation immediately to suspend their support and sponsorship of such
a dangerous enterprise, The General Assembly has said’
unequivocally that it is necessary to put an end to all
military assistance to El Salvador, and this determination
must be reflected in the Council and made to encompass
the entire Central American region.

28. Nicaragua, one of the countries of that region, has
perhaps had more than its fair share of these problems.
29. The detailed information
provided in the statements made here yesterday and today is therefore all the
more disturbing. The loss of life and damage to property
are assuming alarming proportions. Against the background of conflicting declarations, grave misunderstandings persist. Tension is increasing, and there are alarming signs of troop concentrations along sensitive borders.
30. As a small country geographically far removed
from the Central American region, but nevertheless suffering from the same confrontation-mania
that seems to
be the hallmark of present-day super-Power rivalry, we
can sympathize with and share the evident concerns of
the people and Government of Nicaragua.

23. A question of the utmost urgency has been placed
before this body, one thiit unquestionably falls within its
jurisdiction under the Charter of the United Nations. It is
the Council’s primary responsibility to ensure collective
security whenever that security is threatened anywhere in
the world. This body cannot, without jeopardizing its
prestige and authority, disregard the dangers which quite
obviously are threatening international peace and security in Central America.

31. They have suffered a great deal in the past, and
their main ambition now is to start a new process of
nation-building
and reconciliation,
free from outside
pressures. Nicaragua desires to remain a completely independent, self-respecting and non-aligned nation pursuing
national policies arrived at through the involvement of
its people as they themselves see best in the present circumstances. To that extent, this objective cannot be
faulted, and Malta stands solidly behind them in this
endeavour.

24. The member States of the Council and the international community as a whole must promote a climate of
understanding and propose proper solutions to this conflict, which is constantly spreading, because the interests
involved have thus far taken precedence over the desire
for peace of the immense majority of the peoples of the
world. It is time to change our courbe and to prevent
greater disasters.

32. I have been privileged to see with my own eyes the
need and the potential of Nicaragua for economic and
social development, as well as to sense in the streets the
determination
of its peace-loving people to tackle these
problems as a first priority, without disturbance. More
than anything else, what they need, with help and under3

39. Mr, ROA KOURi
(Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all I should like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you success in the performance of
your important task. At the same time, I wish also to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
having granted my request to be allowed to participate in
these meetings devoted to the consideration of the
serious escalation of acts of aggression against Nicaragua
and the Sandinist People’s Revolution.

standing from neighbours, is a period of peace and tranquillity to devote all their national resources towards
these peaceful objectives. Unfortunately, this period has
so far been denied them.
33. In view of the pressures to which Nicaragua is at
present feeling,subjected, we venture to recall that there
are some cardinal principles in international relations.
Among them is the obligation of States to refrain from
any manifestation of force for the purpose of inducing
other States to renounce the full exercise of their sovereign rights, The sacred right of all peoples to determine in
full freedom, when and as they wish, their internat and
external political status, without external interference,
and to pursue as they wish their political, economic,
social and cultural development stands high among these
inalienable rights.

40. Scarcely more than two weeks ago President Fidel
Castro, speaking at the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at New
Delhi, stated:
“The dangers of war which existed when we met in
1979 very quickly grew when the new President of the
United States decided to impose, as a condition for
peace, acceptance of the military supremacy of his
country and of the alliance it headed. The danger of
war threatens us as citizens of the world, but it also
concerns us as peoples that want to affirm or to win,
as the case may be, our national independence and
develop our battered economies. That self-same policy
based on senseless claims of military supremacy has
given rise in the Middle East, southern Africa and
Central America to situations against which the
Movement has had to raise its voice over the years,
and now I wish to reflect this today at this summit
meeting.”

34. The Central American region, as indeed many
other parts of the world do, cries out for solid and sustained economic and social progress. It is therefore
highly regrettable that extraneous considerations seem to
be stifling this paramount urge and instead aiding and
abetting stagnation,
destabilization
and militarism,
thereby nourishing the sinews and fanning the flames of
potential conflict.
35. As a matter of priority, we therefore urge that a
new spirit of dialogue and good-neighbourly relations
replace the present trend, It is equally urgent to desist
from all manifestations of military force, which are causing so much heightened concern and increasing tension.
The massive but myopic expenditure on, and injection
of, arms in the region should be replaced once afld for all
by a generous investment in economic infrastructure and
development. There must be a calm reappraisat of present policies. That certainly is the wish of the Maltese
Government, and we see tremendous scope, as well as a
most urgent need, for quiet diplomacy and for regional
initiatives, such as those advanced by Colombia, France,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, in a timely response to
a situation which is already alarming.

Comrade Fidel Castro went on to say:
“During the past three years Central America has
become a danger point for world peace and a centre
for death and possible military aggression.
“At the sixth summit meeting we received as brothers the Sandinists who had vanquished Somoza, and
they joyfully joined in our task. But an evil and a
senseless policy of those who have enhanced the universal threat of war wishes to convert Central America
and the Caribbean into a scenario derived from EastWest contradictions. It would have the world believe
that what happened in Nicaragua and what is happening in El Salvador and Guatemala is not the result of
decades of growing protest and uninterrupted struggle
by starving peoples of what are derogatorily known as
banana republics who are tired of so much tyranny,
exploitation and humiliation-the
landless peasants,
the starving and unemployed men and women and the
adolescents without schools who have risen up for
justice-but
that it is the result of some sinister plot by
means of which Moscow, through Cuba, is manipulating these peoples.

36. We should like to be among the very first to express
the hope that even if nothing more can emerge at this
stage from this debate, the Council will at least be able to
alert the international community to the need for positive
change and to generate a new momentum in this direction, so that the countries of the region will be allowed,
unfettered, peacefully to settle their own differences and
promote the co-operation so essential for stability and
development.
37. Positive signals of hope emerged towards the end of
yesterday’s debate 12420th meeting] and were emphasized
in the statement of the representative of Mexico just now.
We trust that they will pave the way for definite improvement and progress.

“In this way, American interference in Central
America, which began and persisted well before the
1917 Soviet revolution and which preceded the Cuban
revolution by a number of decades, collaboration
with
the sinister tyranny of Rios Montt, similar to that which

38. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
4

was always given to the Somoza dynasty, and the
efforts to use Honduras as an outpost for American
intervention
to put down the Nicaraguan revolution-all
seek justification in pretexts drawn from the
arsenal of McCarthyism, which have been repudiated
in official statements from Mexico, Panama, Venezuela
and Colombia.”
41. It is precisely against this background that my delegation wishes to take up the recent increase in acts of
aggression against Nicaragua from neighbouring Honduras, denounced by the Governing Junta of National
Reconstruction
in its message of 21 March [S/15656,
nnnex I] and by the Deputy Minister for External Relations, Mr, Victor Hugo Tinoco, in this forum yesterday
[2#20th meeting].
42. For months the international press, including the
United States mass media, has been reporting in lavish
detail
on preparations
by Nicaraguan
counterrevolutionary
forces, mainly former Somozist guards, in
camps located in the south of the United States and in
Honduras and Costa Rica near their borders with Nicaragua. The press has also reported acts of sabotage, terrorism, infiltration and aggression against the homeland
of Sandino from Honriuras, with the consent and even
the open support of that country’s armed forces; it has
most faithfully reported the threatening statements of the
highest spokesmen of the United States Government,
including that by President Reagan himself of 10 March
of this year and those Uy the Secretaries of State, first
Haig and then Shultz, by the Under-Secretary of State,
Thomas 0. Enders, and the very significant one made on
16 February 1983 by Mr. William J. Casey, the Director
of the shady Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), requesting the United States Congress to continue to provide
funds for covert operations against the Sandinist
Government until 1984.
43. A few hours ago, Commander Humberto Ortega
Saavedra publicly denounced the invasion of Nicaraguan
national territory by groups of former Somozist guards
across the northern frontier and the movement of a
number of these outlaws to the centre of the country, in
the Matagalpa area. In doing so, he warned of the massing of regular Honduran troops near the north-west frontier of Nicaragua and the dangers that could stem from
that for the situation in the region.
44. The day before yesterday, in the afternoon, as an
ominous confirmation of the dangers predicted by the
high-level Sandinist leader, we received the information
that those Honduran forces had opened fire with mortars
on the Nicaraguan frontier village of Santo Tom&.
45. It is worth-while reminding the Council about the
preliminaries to the mercenary invasion launched against
Cuba in 1961, at the Bay of Pigs, on the direct orders of
the then President of the United States. The motive put
forward at the time was the spectre of an alleged SinoSoviet threat to the continent, just as now a CubanSoviet plot is mentioned. The tool for that was former

soldiers of the Batista tyranny, fugitives from justice,
petty politicians of the former regime, nouveaux riches
affected by the revolutionary laws and all kinds of dregs
of society and traitors, just like the henchmen and
companions-in-arms
of Somoza. The organizer, financier, supplier and abetter was, then as now, the imperialist Government of the United States, its Pentagon and its
CIA. Today, as before, in the same way, it acts out of an
identical historical short-sightedness, of a profound disregard for peoples of our stock, of its intractable reactionary vocation and of its mad hatred for the economic
and social progress of mankind.
46. Everyone will surely recall that in the meetings of
the First Committee on the eve of and during the mercenary aggression at the Bay of Pigs, the representative of
the United States, Mr. Adlai Stevenson, invented the lie
that the planes that had bombed Havana airport and
adjoining areas were planes of the regular Cuban air
force, which was alleged to have risen up against the
revolutionary Government.“ The then Foreign Minister,
Ralil Roa, my father, publicly unmasked that lie. I think
it important to recall these facts and the duplicity that the
imperialists and their puppets and followers are capable
of when it comes to adulterating’the
charges made, on
the basis of irrefutable proof, by the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua.
47. It is also worth-while stating in the Council our
deep revolutionary conviction that imperialism
and its
puppets and followers and today’s adventure against the
Sandinist revolution of Nicaragua will meet with the
same ignominious
fate as those who, before and after
1961, dared trample on the homeland of Jose Marti. One
does not need to be very far-seeing in order to notice the
serious responsibility that the United States Government
is once again assuming by promoting its aggressive and
senseless plans against Nicaragua, or the adventurist
nature of the international policy of the present United
States Administration.
48. The Council, which bears primary responsibility
under the Charter for the maintenance and preservation
of international
peace and security, should give very
serious thought to the complaint presented by the representative of Nicaragua and should ensure prevention of
any complication of the conflict due to Honduran intervention or as a result of direct interference by the instigators of the aggression that could lead to a conflict of
incalculable proportions and consequences that would be
very serious for peace in the region and in the world.
49. Cuba once again repeats its conviction-also
attested to in the Political Declaration of the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Nonligned Countries [see S/15675, annex, sect. +-that
the
serious political, social and economic crisis that Central
America is experiencing is, for the most part, the result
of “the traditional repressive power structure and . . , national economic structures that produce poverty, inequality
and misery and are aggravated by the interference and
intervention to which those countries have been sub-

jetted since the end of the last century”; that “the processes of change in Central America could not be attributed to . . . an East-West ideological confrontation”; that
the hostile and aggressive acts against Nicaragua are
“part of a deliberate plan to harass and destabilize that
country, as has been acknowledged by a foreign power”;
and that the true solution of the conflicts in the area can
be found only through political negotiations and by
peaceful means. For these reasons, my delegation hails
the peace initiative’ launched on the Panamanian island
of Contadora by the Governments of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela, which has been accepted by Nicaragua, as a genuine effort, in keeping with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and with the ideals
of Bolivar, Jufirez, Marti and the founding fathers of
independence, at finding a just and lasting solution of
these conflicts.
50. Finally, I wish to reiterate the unswerving support
of the Government and the people of Cuba to our Nicaraguan brothers, to their revolutionary Government and
to their Latin American and progressive ideals of
freedom.
5 1, The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Panama I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
52. Mr. OZORES TYPALDOS
(Panama) (interprelulion from Spanish): At the outset, Sir, I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. We wish
you much success in the performance of your delicate
functions.
53. On 25 March 1982-that is, exactly one year agothe Security Council met [2335th meeting] for the first
time to consider a complaint by Nicaragua regarding the
growing tension in Central America and the increasingly
obvious danger of military action against that country.
The eight meetings [2335th 10 2337f/z, 2339th, 2341st to
2343rd and 2347th meetings] that the Council devoted to
consideration of this question brought out the seriousness of the situation and alerted us to the danger that it
could worsen if political solutions were not negotiated
and agreed upon to put an end to the conflict in the area.
54. In order to express the concern of the international
community, Panama, in the company of Guyana, introduced a draft resolution [S/14941] in which, inter alia, all
Member States were reminded of their obligation to
respect the principles of the Charter and which appealed
to them to refrain from direct, indirect, open or covert
use of force against any country in the Caribbean or
Central America and appealed to all the parties to enter
into dialogue and negotiations as called for by the Charter. That draft resolution was conceived in a constructive
spirit. It received 12 votes in favour and 2 abstentions,
but it was not adopted, owing to the veto of one permanent member of the Council. Can it be that that vote was
a forerunner of the situation that was described in the
Council yesterday by the Deputy Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua?

55. Regrettably, a year later, we,find there has been an
increase in tension and a definite deterioration in the
political climate in the area the seriousness of which
endangers international peace and security.
56, That is precisely why Panama has joined other
Latin American countries, in particular Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela, to contribute to bringing peace to
Central America. Here we should perhaps mention the
meeting held early this year on the Panamanian island of
Contadora, where the Ministers for External Relations of
the four countries made an appeal’ to all the countries of
the Central American area to engage in dialogue and
negotiations so as to reduce tension and lay the foundations for a permanent atmosphere of peaceful coexistence
and mutual respect among States. Through their Ministers on Contadora those four countries also reaffirmed
the obligation of States not to resort to the threat or use
of force in their international relations and called upon
all States to refrain from actions which might aggravate
the situation and pose the danger of broader conflict
extending throughout the region.
57. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which was held
at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March and considered items
relating to Latin America, stated as follows:
“The Conference denounced the new and increasing
threats and acts of intimidation
and the growing
seriousness and increased number of acts of aggression against Nicaragua, particularly the violation of its
airspace and territorial waters, the utilization
of the
territory of foreign countries in and outside the region
as bases. for aggression and the training of counterrevolutionary
forces, the commission of terrorist
actions and sabotage, particularly the attacks of
armed groups of ex-Somoza guards through its northern border, which had resulted in considerable loss of
life and property, as well as measures of economic
pressure at the international level. These were considered part of a deliberate plan to harass and destabilize
that country, as has been acknowledged by a foreign
Power.” [S/25675, annex, sect. I, pura. 136. ]
The events that have occurred in Nicaragua this week
confirm the correctness of the assessment of the situation
offered by that Conference.
58. Panama has exerted its best efforts to restore peace
in Central America, and we wish to affirm the full applicability of the right to self-determination
of peoples,
respect for national sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States, the sovereign equality of States, nonintervention in the internal affairs of States, non-use of
the threat or use of force and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as well as every people’s right to decide and
freely to pursue its political, economic, social and cultural systems.
59. In the light of these principles Panama has been
greatly concerned by information that has been dissemi-

nated in vast quantities by the mass media of the United
States and other countries regarding the training of
counter-revolutionary
Nicaraguan
elements in the
United States to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.
Those reports have also alluded to official funds for the
destabilization of the Government of Nicaragua and the
participation
of the CIA in these destabilization plans.

64. Panama respects and pract’ices those principles, and
we appeal to all States, both in the region and outside it, to
adhere firmly to them and to refrain from interfering or
intervening in the internal affairs of the countries of the
area and to refrain from any act that might contribute to a
further worsening of the already critical situation.
65. In this connection, my delegation believes it appropriate to repeat the words of the Vice-President of the Republic of Panama, Mr. Jorge E. Illueca, who, in the general
debate at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly, said:

60. My country has been very much concerned by the
reports that have been issued by various international
media, including in the United States, about the use of
the territory of countries neighbouring Nicaragua for
launching efforts at sabotage and destabilization against
Nicaragua and the training and transfer of fighting
forces.

“My country cannot be indifferent to the climate of
violence and the warlike acts that have occurred in the
region- either for ethical, political or security reasons.
Internal tension, to which should be added outside interference of one kind or another, in support of one side or
another in conflicts, has already created a structure of
militarization of forces and alliances which could at any
moment lead to a widespread conflict. This would have
uncontrollable
consequences
and could cause
bloodshed and inevitably jeopardize the entire international situation and destroy the region.“5

61. My delegation believes that the present massive
infiltration of armed contingents to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government are not unrelated to this information being offered by the international press. That is why
my delegation would ask where these contingents have
been trained, who has armed them, who is financing
them, where they were stationed before they entered
Nicaraguan territory, and who is supplying them. These
and many other questions will bring us to the conclusion
that this is not an “internal affair” of Nicaragua, as some
would claim, but a clear case of foreign intervention
against Nicaragua.

66. We are confident that good judgement will prevail
and that the course of political negotiations will be followed, for that is the only course that can ensure a future of
peace and justice for the peoples of the region.
67. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

62. In this context, my delegation believes it appropriate to recall that at its twenty-fifth session, on 24 October
1970, the General Assembly adopted resolution 2625
(XXV), containing the Declaration on the Principles of
International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, which states, infer alia, that
every State has the duty to refrain from organizing or
encouraging the organization of irregular forces or
armed bands, including mercenaries, for incursion into
the territory of another State, and that every State has
the duty to refrain from organizing, instigating, assisting
or participating in acts of civil strife or terrorist acts in
another State or acquiescing in organized activities
within its territory directed towards the commission of
such acts. That resolution categorically states that no
State shall organize, assist, foment, finance, incite or tolerate subversive, terrorist or armed activities directed
towards the violent overthrow of the rtgime of another
State, or interfere in civil strife in another State.

68.

Mr. TREIKI

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpret&
I have already had the opportunity to
extend to you, Mr, President, our appreciation and thanks
on the occasion of your assumption of your office for this
month. Today I would express our pleasure at the outstanding manner in which you have been conducting the
business of the Council.
tion from Arabic):

69. A few weeks ago the CounciI discussed the threats by
the United States of America and its aggression against
Libya. The international community, represented by more
than 24 delegations, pronounced itself and condemned the
United States intervention and aggression against Libya.
When I spoke before the Council at that time [2415th
meeting], I stated that Libya would not be the first or the
last to experience aggression by the United States. And
here we are today, discussing a flagrant act of American
intervention and overt aggression against another nonaligned country, Nicaragua. Nor will Nicaragua be the last.
There will be another series of States that will fall victim to
aggression by the United States Administration.

63. Those principles have been reiterated on a number
of occasions by the General Assembly, in particular at its
thirty-sixth session, when in resolution 36/103 it adopted
the Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States, which,
inter da, reaffirms the duty of States to refrain from the
promotion, encouragement or support, direct or indirect,
of rebellious or secessionist activities within other States,
under any pretext whatsoever, or any action which seeks
to disrupt the unity or to undermine or subvert the political order of other States.

70. Yesterday [242Ofh meeting], we heard the representative of Nicaragua speak of acts of aggression and intervention in the internal affairs of his country and of the
attempts made by the United States Administration
from the outset to threaten and overthrow the revolutionary rCgime in Nicaragua. We then heard the representative
7

appropriating $20 million tt eliminate the revolutionary
rCgime and trying to incite Nicaragua’s neighbours against
it, because the Umted States wanted to “preserve” human
rights in Nicaragua, that is, to keep its people in a state of
starvation, homelessness and poverty. These are “human
rights” for the Nicaraguans; they should be starving and
naked. These are “human rights”, according to the United
States criteria.

of the United States, X think that her statement, if viewed
objectively and without any other consideration, is itself
direct intervention in the internal affairs of Nicaragua. It is
as though Nicaragua were a colony of the United States of
America. According to the United States representative,
human rights were respected under Somoza. Somoza
respected the rights of the individual. Now, however, there
has been a change in Nicaragua; according to the criteria
applied by the United States with regard to human rights
there is now a dictatorial r&me which violates such rights.

75. Yesterday the representative of the United States
stated we are living in an extraordinary world, We are truly
living in an extraordinary world when a super-Power, a
permanent member of the Security Council, violates the
Charter and intervenes in the internal affairs of small countries, depriving them of their most rudimentary rights, A
week ago, the United States decided that Libyan students
at American universities majoring in nuclear energy or
aeronautics must change their majors within weeks or face
expulsion from the United States. This is “democracy and
freedom”. Why? Because the United States does not want
the Arab nation to progress in any scientific field. It wants
the Arabs, as portrayed by the American mass media,
riding camels across the desert.

71. By the same token, Nasser in Egypt violated human
rights and had to be overthrown. Egypt was unable to
build the Aswan High Dam, which would bring prosperity
to the Egyptian people, because its construction was
directed against “human rights”, according to the United
States. Batista in Cuba “respected” human rights because
he was a vassal of the United States. Allende, who was
democratically elected, was assassinated by agents of
United States intelligence because he, too, “violated”
human rights, according to the United States criteria applied to human rights. Libya is also an “expansionist” State
occupying “the territories of others”. Again, according to
the United States criteria, it disregards human rights. But
Israel “respects” human rights. It occupies Lebanon; this is
“respect” for human rights. It commits murder in Sabra
and Shatila and, according to the United States criteria,
this is “respect” for human rights. Israel occupies th: West
Bank and the Gaza Strip; it annexes the Golan Heights and
Jerusalem. This, according to the United States Administration, is “respect” for human rights. The black man in
South Africa is despised, but, according to the United
States criteria, he is not a man.

76. On United States orders, Israel bombed an Iraqi
nuclear reactor because the United States was disturbed
over the progress of Iraq in the field of nuclear energy, Iraq
must remain undeveloped and Libya must remain undeveloped. These are “human rights”, according to the United
States criteria, the law of the jungle.
77. The loss of more than a million lives in Viet Nam,
massive devastation and genocide in Viet Nam, the use of
bacteriological
weapons-these are “human rights”,
according to the United States Administration’s criteria.

72. When Manley of Jamaica applied to the World Bank
for a Ioan, the United States said “no”; it vetoed it. But
when South Africa applied for a loan, the United States
Administration
approved it because South Africa
“respects” the rights of blacks, just as the blacks are
“highly respected” in the United States. More than 20
million blacks are persecuted within the United States.
These people represent 10 per cent of the population, but
own only I per cent of the economy. Unemployment
among American blacks exceeds 25 per cent. These are
“human rights”. There are 30,000 homeless people in New
York, mostly blacks and Puerto Ricans. These are “human
rights” also.

78. In Iran Mossadegh nationalized the oil industry.
Therefore, he had to be killed, in accordance with United
States criteria, since he said “no” to the United States
Administration.
The Mossadegh Government was actually overthrown because he wanted to harness Iran’s oil in
the service of the interests of the Iranian people. The Khomeini revolution broke out against United States imperialism. Therefore that revolution must be destroyed because
it prevented the multinationals from exploiting Iran’s
wealth.

73, I visited Nicaragua during the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the NonAligned
Countries,
and with apologies
to the
representative of Nicaragua, a country which has been
independent for about 150 years, I must say that I did not
expect to find such underdevelopment there. There is
nothing in Nicaragua. The monopolistic American corporations, the banana companies, the multinationals, have
taken everything not just from Nicaragua but also from
countries of Latin America and Central America.

‘79. Indeed we are living in an extraordinary world. We
would have believed that power is usually accompanied by
rationality and reason, and not by recklessness, We
expected that there would be respect for the sovereignty of
States. The United States cannot face what it must face.
Therefore, it has to achieve successesthrough the small
countries. President Reagan goes aboard a United States
aircraft and proudly declares that “We shot down two
Libyan airplanes”. This is really a great achievement for
the greatest Power in the world, the United States, to shoot
down two Libyan aeroplanes.

74. I can compare Nicaragua now to the Libya of 1950,
after the war. Why? When the revolution tried to bring
prosperity and to eliminate dictatorship, the United States
was up in arms, intervening in Nicaragua’s internal affairs,

80. The United States has always intervened in the internal affairs of other countries, even in the small countries
like El Salvador, where it tells them they must conduct
elections before the end of the year and must change the
8

laws of their courts. It intervenes even in those countries
which the United States Administration
considers
friendly. The United States has no friends. The word
“Yankee” in Latin America is synonymous with evil and
Satan, A great nation, the American nation, and its great
people are exploited by its Administration in the service of
evil, The name of America in the third world, in Africa, in
Palestine, has been blackened.

peoples and imposing dictatorships all over the world. I
personally believe that a great nation like the American
nation understands history. It supposedly has experts who
tell it that history teaches lessons. Well, what happened to
Somoza? What became of Batista? Batista was 90 miles
away from the American coast, and the United States
could not save him. He was doomed because the Cuban
people decided to liberate themselves. When peoples are
resolved to liberate themselves they do so regardless of
opposition by the big Powers. The Vietnamese people, a
small people that was subjected to the most cruel, vicious
war any people could be subjected to-the bombs that
were dropped on Hanoi and on Viet Nam exceeded in
number those that were dropped during the Second
World War-triumphed
and American imperialism was
defeated. This is reality; this is history.

81. There are more than 2 million Palestinian refugees,
many of whom are daily killed with United States weapons. The Palestinian is not a human being, according to
the United States criteria, and the same is true of the black
man in South Africa and even in the United States. We are
living in a truly extraordinary world.
82, They say that on such-and-such a day in Nicaragua
you arrested a number of people, even though those
people were considered guilty of conspiracy, a major
crime according to American criteria. I do not want to
speak of any country adjacent to Nicaragua, because I
believe that these States, just like the people ofNicaragua,
are victims of the American Administration
and American aggression.

88. I want to ask the representative of the United States
of America if perhaps she can tell us what is a human
being in the view of the American Administration.
Is it
only the American that is a human being? The black man
in South Africa is despised. This is of no concern to the
United States Administration.
The blacks in America are
persecuted. We cannot hear a news bulletin on any American television station that does not contain distortion of
the black image in America. All crimes and murders inside
the United States are attributed to the blacks, which is an
attempt to distort the image of the black man and to instil
a complex in the minds of the citizens. When my own
children look at American television, they are influenced
by this continuous distortion of the black man.

83. This is the established policy of the American
Administration:
intervention, aggression, military bases,
and even neighbouring countries have not been spared
from having conditions imposed upon them. One country
had to provide sites for testing, another had to provide
bases. They now have bases in the Mediterranean and in
neighbouring countries, bases for aggression, bases for
provocation and intervention. This is the American
policy.

89. Are these human rights? As I said, the statement by
the United States representative [2420th meeting] itself is a
condemnation of the United States for its intervention in
the affairs of Nicaragua. We must assume ourresponsibilities; we must not say only to the weak: ‘&You have made a
mistake”; we should say that to the strong also. We had
hoped that power would act as a moral deterrent, but
power with the United States Administration
is a process
of intervention, blackmail and provocation against the
whole world.

84. But when we say “no”, or when a small people says
“no”, that people must be destroyed and annihilated.
85. All of the non-aligned States, more than 100 countries, condemn American policy. If I were in the American
Administration, I would say to the American people that
these countries condemn the United States and that there
is room to change American policy in order to align it with
the interests of peoples and not to put it in the service of
dictatorships.

90. If we the peoples of the third world and the nonaligned countries today fall victim to American aggression, you in Europe will in future fall victim to that
aggression; you will be exposed to such dangers and to
such malignant cancers. Nicaragua today is a victim and
we must stand by it and support it regardless of our
relations with the United States. These relations must not
serve as a pretext not to stand on the side of right and
justice. Let us clearly condemn the United States. It is not
the policeman of the world, as I said the last time I spoke
here [2416th meelirtg’), and it is not the judge of the world.
It is not at all up to the United States to define human
rights criteria. The American Administration
should be
the last to speak of human rights, for it violates them
everywhere, including in the United States itself.

86. The human person is “respected” and his dignity
preserved in El Salvador and Chile now, despite United
Nations resolutions, but human rights are “violated” in
Nicaragua-the
logic of the jungle, the logic of the lamb
and the wolf, the logic of colonialism, the worst kind of
colonialism witnessed in history.
87. I believe this American policy represents a malignant
cancer in the world. Just as the peoples of the world stood
in solidarity against nazism, today they must stand in
solidarity against United States imperialism. We call on
countries which were victims of direct interference in their
‘internal affairs-that
is, Viet Nam, Laos, Afghanistan,
Iran, Libya, Ethiopia, Angola, Mozambique, Nicaragua,
Cuba, Grenada, Chile and Egypt. All are victims of American aggression and American intervention in their internal affairs. It is an American policy aimed at starving

9 1. The daughter of the late Allende of Chile asked for a
visa to visit the United States in order to speak before a
conference, and she was turned down. Is this human rights?
9

Is this democracy? This is an abuse of democracy; this is an
abuse of human rights.
92. I want to emphasize that my country stands firmly
with the people of Nicaragua and with the other friendly
peoples of Latin Amedca which are also victims of American aggression, just as we are. The least we can do under
these circumstances is to stand with them in solidarity.
93. Mr. SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands): Sir, I should like
to start by saying that I am pleased, as is my mission, to see
you presiding over this meeting. I congratulate you and I
congratulate your predecessor for the way in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council.
94. My statement will be brief, and I intend to confine
myself to the subject which is on the agenda of this Council.
95. Once again the Council has to deal with a complaint
by the Government of Nicaragua [242&h meeting], just as
it had to in March and April of last year [2335tk to 2337th,
2339th, 2441st to 2343rd and 2347th meetings]. Although
we have received often contradictory information on the
actual situation in the area, there is no doubt that the
situation has considerably worsened since last year. We
have witnessed an escalation of incidents between Nicaragua and its neighbours, an escalation that has resulted in
increased human suffering, the loss of human lives and the
disruption of societies in that war-torn Central American
region.
96. In view of the serious nature of the events brought to
its attention, it seems only appropriate that the Council has
decided to consider the request by, the Government of
Nicaragua at the earliest possible opportunity. Has not this
Council, under Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations, explicitly been assigned the task
“To maintain international peace and security, and to
that end: to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches
of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and
in conformity with the principles ofjustice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace”?
97. The Government and the people of my country are
gravely concerned about developments in Central America, which risk endangering international peace and security in the area.
98. Members of the Council are aware of the strong
commitment of my country to the promotion of human
rights. It goes without saying that considerations of this
nature affect our relations with the countries of the Central
American region as with those of other regions of the
world. At the time, therefore, the Netherlands welcomed
the downfall of the Somoza rCgime as a major step towards
the establishment of a more democratic and just society in
Nicaragua. In an effort to help the new Government of
Litho in United Nations, New York

Nicaragua overcome the considerable social and economic
problems confronting it, our two countries have initiated
an important programme for development co-operation,
Then, as now, my country fully appreciated how difficult it
was, and always will be, to change a society characterized
by social structures that no longer serve the aspirations of
its people. However, we cannot remain blind to the fact
that developments in Nicaragua since the overthrow of the
Somoza rCgime have sometimes been at variance with the
expectations raised by that event.
99, My delegation wishes to appeal to the parties concerned to seek, as a matter of urgency, a negotiated political solution, a solution based on the principles of
non-interference, non-aggression, sovereign equality and
self-determination. Nations should be free to choose their
own form of government, and there is therefore no justification for imposing revolutions on other peoples. Neither
is there any justification for supporting efforts aimed at the
destabilization of existing Governments through covert
operations in co-operation with internal resistance movements. Moreover, any political solution should provide for
the gradual withdrawal of foreign military advisers from
the region.
100. Given the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of peace and security, and
given the rights of States to live in peace and security, there
is every justification for an involvement of the Council in
these issues. In this respect, I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organisation, in
which he recommends the establishment of a wider and
more systematic capacity for fact-finding in potential areas
of conflictn6 A request to the Secretary-General to report
on the actual situation in the area concerned seems to be
appropriate to my delegation. We should not overlook,
however, the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
providing for the settlement of local disputes through
regional arrangements.
101, We attach special importance to the peace initiatives
proposed by the countries in the region, and it is with
approval that we have noticed that in yesterday’s debate
the representatives of the countries directly involved in the
conflict showed their willingness to resume talks on the
basis of these regional initiatives. Finally, the involvement
of the Organization of American States, in our view, might
be helpful in finding a solution to the conflict.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

NOTES

’ SeeA/38/68, annex.
2 General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV),
’ General Assembly resolution 35/192.

annex.

4 See OfficiatRccords
of the GeneralAssembly,
Fifleenlh Session, First
Commitfee,
1149th meeting.
5 Ibid., Thirty-seventh
Session, Plenary Meetings, 18th meeting, para. 18.
6 Ibid., Thirty-seventh
Session, Supplement No, 1 (A/37/1), p. 3.

00300

6020%July 1990~-2,050

HOW TO OBTAIN WTED
NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMEFT
SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATTONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences ddpositaires
du monde entier. Informer.-vous auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genbve.
KAK

IIOJIYYHTb

~3fWllfR

@XtHH3aLUiH

MJ~AHWI
OPI-‘AHW3AWiM
06’bE&HHEI-?FIbIX
I-IAUMfi
OG%enmembrx fIEU.Ui~ MQXHO Q’llHTb B KHHXHMX
MaraWHax
H~e'eHTCTBaX80BCeXpaftOH~MHpa.H~oAHTeCnp~KH
06~3~tati~xx BBaLUCMKHHXHOM
mra3mie
BJIH nmHTe
no a~pecy:
Opra~~san~n 06%enHHeHHbtx &ttnti, Cekuua no
nponame usnawitl,
HbdiopK
UAH XeHeaa.
COMO CONSEGVrp PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas est.&r en venta en librertas y caaas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Cinebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

oo400

6020%July 1990-2.050
