38/92.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture

The General As.1·e111/,/y,
Recalling article 5 of the llniversal Declaration ol'
Human Rights, 91 which states that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel. inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Recalling a/so the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Trcatment or Punishment, 92
Recallingfurther its resolution 36/151 of 16 Deccmber
1981, in which it noted with deep concern that acts of torture took place in various countries, recognized the need to
provide assistance to the victims of torture in a purel)
humanitarian spirit and established thc Unitcd Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to climinatc torturl' includcs
the provision ofassistance in a humanitarian sp1rit to tlw
victims and their family rnembers.
Taking note of the report of the SecretaJ')-General on
the United Nations Voluntarv Fund for Victirns of Torture, 93
l. Expresses it.1 gralitude and apprnwlton to thosc
Governments and individuals that have already contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture;
2. Calls upon ali Governments. organizations and
individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to
requests for contributions to thc Fund;
3. Expresses its appreciatio11 to the Board of Trustccs
of the Fund for the work it has carried out:
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Secrctary-Gcneral
for the support given to the Board of Trustees;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities to assist the Board of Trustees of the
Fund, inter afia through the preparation. production and
dissemination of information materials. in its elforts to
make the Fund and its humanitarian work bctter known
and in its appeal for contributions.
100th p/enary meeting
/ 6 Dcce111/wr I 983

38/93.

Measures to improve co-ordination and cooperation in the international struggle
against illegal production of drugs, illicit drug
traffic and drug abuse

The General Assemh/y,
Reca/ling its resolutions 361168 of 16 December 1981,
37/168 of 17 Deccmher 1982 and 371198 of 18 Decemher
1982.
Recalling a/so that in paragraph 6 of its resolution 341
177 of 17 December 1979 it urged greater action by thc
specialized agencies and programmes of thc United
Nations system, especially the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization ofthe Unitcd Nations, the International Labour Organisation, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Dcvelopment Programme,
in developing and implementing, within their mandatcs.
programmes aimed at thc rcduction of illicit production of'
and demand for drugs, and ~pcrifirnlly requcsted thosc
91 Resolution 21 7 A (111 J
92 Resolution .145~ (XX\• ,mnn

93 ,\; 38,221.

agencies to make that activity a regular item on the agendas of their governing hodies.
( ·onsidcring that thc scourge of drug abuse continut·s to
sprcad and has reachcd cpidemic proportions, both in
developed and in some developing countries,
Co11s1dcring .fúrthcr that transit States. which havc no
control o ver the productíon of or demand for illicit drugs,
a1c incrcasingly afkcted by the illicit drug trame.
Rccogni::111g that illegal production of drugs, illicit drug
traflic and drug abuse are political. security, cconomic,
social and medical problems. in hoth producing and consuming countrics, which must be met with a comprehensive. elkctive and co-ordinated strategy on the national.
regional and international lcvcls.
.. lcknow/edging that rnnstraints of an economic and
technical nature are obstacles to many developing countrics in their light against illcgal drug cultivation and produl'lion, as well as illicit drug trame and drug abuse.
. 1nwc that the illegal production of drugs must be
stopped and that integrated rural development programmes, including crop substitution, combined with control
activitics are dfcctivc mcasurcs to curh thc productíon of
íllicit drugs.
Notmg w1th apprecia//011 the generous contributions
madc so far and recently pledged to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control, which should continue,
considering the great nccds in this lield,
.hvarc ofthe need to improve regional, interregional and
international co-operation and co-ordination in ordcr to
intensify thc struggle against illegal production of drugs,
illicit drug traffic and drug abuse,
l\11nd/ii/ ofthe dccision takcn by the Committce for Programme and Co-ordination at its twenty-third session to
undertake at its twcnty-fifth session, in 1985, an intergovernmcntal review of drug control on the basis of an indepth evaluation study to he preparcd by thc SccrctaryCieneral. 94
1. ( ·a/Is upon Mcmber States that have not yet done so
to ratify thc international drug control treaties and, until
such time, to endeavour to abide by the provisions
thereol:
2. Invites Member States to make generous contributions to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control
to enable the Fund further to improve and strengthen its
activities to reduce thc illicit supply oí, traffic in and
demand for narcotic drugs:
3. Ca/Is upon donor countries to allocate an appropriatc portian of thcir devclopment aid rcsources to programmcs aimed at the reduction of illegal production of drugs
and to the devclopmcnt of programmes to control drug
abuse and drug traffic in thc developing countries;
4. ( 'a/Is upo11 producing countries to identify suitable
projects for possiblc presentation to the Fund, to the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmcs
of the lJnited Nations system and to international and
regional financing institutions;
5. l'rges thc specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and
other international organizations concerned with assistance to developing countries to initiate and continue, as a
mattcr of priority, within thcir respective fields and within
existing budgetary resources or through voluntarily contrihuted funds, activitics to hclp developing countries to
take thc necessary steps to stop the illcgal cultivation and
l),.¡ St'e

Otf,cwl Rt'(11rdY nf r 111' (lcncra/ h\f'mb/r. f'l11rtr"oghth ,\'n\·1011.
38 (A -18 181. part one. para. 195.

S111111/1·1111·111 \',,

200

production of and trafficking in drugs. in consultation with
and incorporating the experience of the Fund:
6. Invites intcmational financing institutions to consider giving financia! support to activitics in producing
countrics with a view to stopping the cultivation and production of illicit drugs, and calls upon Member Statcs to
encourage regional financing institutions to support such
projects;
7. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmcs of the United Nations system to
identify special drug control activities in their respective
fields and to accord higher priority to drug control activities in their programme budgets;
8. Requcsts the Secrctary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session. through the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the Economic and Social
Council, on the drug control activities carried out by the
specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes concerned. pursuant to the present resolution;
9. A/so requcsts the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to improve the co-ordination of drug control
activities within the United Nations system and among
Member States, the specialized agencies and programmes
and other international and regional organs and organizations involved in drug control activities, with due consideration for the respective jurisdietions of those hodics, so
as to avoid duplication of efforts in this field;
10. Furthcr rcquests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on measures to
improve co-operation and co-ordination of drug control
activities within the United Nations system. in the light of
the intergovernmental review of drug control to be undertaken by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its twenty-fifth session.
/00/h plcnary meeting
16 Decemhcr I 983

38/94.

Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances

The General Assemhly.
Recalling its resolution 33/ l 73 of 20 December 1978.
entitled "Disappeared persons". and its resolution 37/180
of 17 December 1982 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Bcaring in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1983/20 of 22 February 1983, 9 ' in which the Commission decided to extend for one year the term of the
mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, and Economic and Social Council
decision 1983/141 of 27 May 1983, in which thc Council
approved the Commission's decision.
Convinced that the action taken, in consultation with thc
Governments concerned, to promote the implementation
of the provisions of General Assembly resolution 33/ 173
and other United Nations resolutions concerning the
plight of missing or disappeared persons should be continued,
Expressing its cmotion at the anguish and sorrow of thc
families concerned, who should know the fate of thcir relatives,
l. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on
Human Rights to extend for one year the tcrm ofthe mandate of the Working Group on Enforced or lnvoluntary
9S See Officia! RC/'ord, orthc l,cono1111c ami Soual C·011w1/. /V83. Su¡,¡,/,·
111c11t No

3 (F/1983113 and Corr.lL chap. XXVII. ,ect A

Disappcaranccs. a\ laid down in Commission resolution
llJX3120:

.'. /;'xprc.1scs 1t1 ll/J[)recial!on to the Working Group for
thc work it has done and to those Governments that havc
co-operated with I t:
,. Ca/Is upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to studv this qucstion as a matter of priority and
to takc any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of
thc task of thc Working Group when it considers thc
report to be subm 1tted by the Group at its fortieth session;
4. .-lpprnls to ali Ciovernmcnts to provide thc Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the
full co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian
objectivcs and thcir working methods based on discretion;
S. Rcnnl's its rcqucsl to the Secretary-General to cont111ue to providc thc Working Group with ali neccssarv
assistancc.
/OOth plcnar,· meeting
/6 Decemhcr 1983

38/95.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

/'he General .1.1 ,cmf,/L
Rccalling its rcsolution 371177 of 17 December 1982, in
which it, intcr afia. rcquested the Sccretary-Gcneral, in cooperation with thc United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. to rnntinue to organize and implcment an
eflecti ve programme of cducational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugces from Namibia and South
Africa who had taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swa11land and Zambia.
flaring considcrcd thc report of thc Secretary-General %
rnntaining the rcview by the High Commissioner ofassistance programmes for student refugees from South Africa
and Namibia,
llíoting with apprcclatwn that sorne of the projects recommended in the rcport on assistance to student refugees
in southern Afnca have been successfully completed,
Not/1/g with conccrn the continued influx into Botswana.
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia of student refugces from
South Africa, as well as from Namibia.
Conrinccd that the discriminatory policics and repress,vc measurcs being applied in South Africa and Namibia
will lead to a furthcr cxodus of student refugces from those
countries,
Conscious of thc burden placed on the limited ti.nancial,
material and administrative resources ofthe host countrics
bv thc incrcasing num bcr of student refugees,
.tppreciat111g thc efforts ofthe host countries to deal with
their student rcfugce populations. with thc assistance of
thc international rnmmunity.
L /,'ndorscs the assessments and recommcndations
contained in the rcport of the Secretary-General and commcnds him and the lJnited Nations High Commissioncr
for Refugecs for their efforts to mobilize resourccs and
organize the programme of assistance for student rcfugecs
in thc host countries of southern Africa:
"l
Hxpresscs 1/s apprcciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho. Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees. in spitc of thc pressure which
thc continuing in flux of those rcfugces cxerts on facilities
111 thcir countric,
