VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Noting with satisfaction that the Solomon Islands
achieved full internal self-government on 2 January
1976 and that the Governments of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Solomon
Islands agree that the Territory should proceed to early
independence,
Noting also with satisfaction the development assistance provided by the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, Australia and New Zealand, as well as the
assistance of the United Nations Development Programme in the economic development of the Territory
during 1976,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Solomon Islands;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Solomon Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to continue to assist the people of
the Solomon Islands towards the achievement of independence;
4. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the people of the Solomon Islands,
to continue its efforts towards diversification of the
economy of the Territory;
5. Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all possible assistance to the people of the
Solomon Islands in their efforts to consolidate their
national independence and, to that end, invites the
specialized agencies and the institutions associated with
the United Nations to work out concrete programmes
of assistance to the Solomon Islands;
6. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under review.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/47.

Question of the Gilbert Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,16
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power relating to developments in the Territory, 17
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
16 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chaps. III and XIX.
17 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.

121

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Gilbert Islands;18
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Gilbert Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration;
3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to continue to take measures to
expedite the process of decolonization in the Territory
in accordance with the relevant recommendations of
the Special Committee, including in particular the observations of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in 1974;19
4. Requests that steps be taken towards diversification of the economy of the Territory and that the administering Power continue to enlist the assistance of
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system in the development and
strengthening of the economy of the Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the Gilbert Islands,
including the possible dispatch of a further visiting
mission in consultation with the administering Power,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/48.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,20 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
June 197621 at the invitation of the Government of
New Zealand, as the administering Power, and the
people of the Tokelau Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 3428 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the question of the Tokelau Islands,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 22
Having also heard the statement of one of the members of the Visiting Mission, 28
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to help the people of the Tokelau Islands to realize
18 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev. l), chap. XIX.
rn Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/
Rev.I). chap. XXI, annex I.
2 0 /hid., Thirty-first Session, Sup/Jlernent No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chaps. III and XVII.
21 Ibid., chap. XVII, annex.
22 fbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meeting, paras. 1-11.
2:1 Ibid., 24th meeting, paras. 3-7.
