44

General Assembly-Fifth Session

424 (V).

Freedom of information: interference with radio signals
The General Assembly,
Whereas freedom to listen to radio broadcasts regardless of source is embodied in article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,8 which reads:
"Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and
expression" and whereas this right "includes freedom
to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any
media and regardless of frontiers",
Whereas article 44 of the International Telecommunication Convention, Atlantic City, 1947, 9 provides
that "AU stations, whatever their purpose, must be
established and operated in such a manner as not to
result in harmful interference to the radio service or
communications of other members or associate members . . . [ and that] Each member or associate member undertakes to require the private operating agencies
which it recognizes and the other operating agencies
duly authorized for this purpose, to observe the provisions of the preceding paragraph",
. Consid~rin[J that the duly authorized radio operat~ng a~enc1es m som_e countries are deliberately interfermg with the recept10n by the people of those countries
c~rtain radio signals originating beyond their terntones, and bearing in mind the discussion 10 which
took place in the Economic and Social Council and in
the Sub-Commission on Freedom of Information and
of the Press on this subject,
Considering that peace among nations rests on the
goodwill of all peoples and governments and that tolerance and understanding are prerequisites for establishing goodwill in the international field,
I. Adopts the qeclaration of the Economic and Social
Council contained in its resolution 306 B ( XI) of
9 August 19?0 to the _effect that this type of interf~rence constitutes a v10lation of the accepted principles of freedom of information;
2. Condemns measures of this nature as a denial of
~he right of ~11. persons to be fully informed concernmg news, opmmns and ideas regardless of frontiers ;
3 .. I mJites the governments of all Member States to
refram from such interference with the right of their
peoples to freedom of information;

o!

4. Invi,tes all governments to refrain from radio
bro~dcasts that would mean unfair attacks or slanders
agamst oth~r peoples anywhere and in so doing to
conform stnctly to an ethical conduct in the interest
of world peace by reporting facts truly and objectively;
~· 5. ln-z:i~es also Memb~r States to give every posJ!ble fac1hty. s?. that thetr peoples may know objectively the a';t1V1t1es_ of the Unit~~ Nations in promoting
peace 3:n~, m particular, to fac1htate the reception and
transth1ss10n of the United Nations official broadcasts.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
: See r~lution 217 A (III). .
Rad~ee CFi,r,al Act of the International Telecommunication and
011/e,.enc~s, Atlantic City, 1947, International Telecommumcaton Umon, Geneva.
10
See documents E/ AC.7 /SR.135 to 139, E/SR.4-05 and
E/CN.4/Sub.1/SR.68 to 86.

'° .

425 (V). Question of the freedom of information and of the Press in times of emergency

The General Assembly,
Considering that freedom of information and of the
Press is one of the fundamental freedoms and sh0uld be
advanced and safeguarded,
Considcring that limitations might be placed on t_his
freedom in emergencies or on the pretext of emergencies,
Recommends to all Member States that, when they
are compelled to declare a state of emergency, measures
to limit freedom of information and of the Press shall
be taken only in the most exceptional circumstances and
then only to the e..xtent strictly required by the situation.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
426 (V).

Draft

Convention on Freedom
Information

of

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 313 (IV) of 20 October
1949, the recommendation 11 of the sixth session of the
Commission on Human Rights regarding freedom of
information and the discussion 12 concerning that recommendation at the eleventh session of the Economic and
Social Council,
Considering that freedom of information and the
Purposes of the United Nations are indivisible,
1. Appoints a Committee consisting of the representatives of the following fifteen countries : Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, France, India, Lebanon, Mexico, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Yugoslavia, which shall
meet at the Headquarters of the United Nations as
soon as possible, but not later than 1 March 1951, to
prepare a draft Corwention on Freedom of Information,
taking into consideration the draft 13 approved by the
United Nations Conference on Freedom of Information held at Geneva from 23 March to 21 April 1948;
the text 14 voted during the second part of the third
session of the General Assemblv; article 14 of the
provisional text 15 of the draft Fir;t International Covenant on Human Rights; and the observations 16 contained in the summary records of the meetings of the
Third Committee dealing with the question;
2. Requests the Committee to report to the Economic and Social Council at its thirteenth session on
the results of its work and to submit recommendations,
in particular, with regard to the advisability of con11 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifth Year, Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 5, annex IV. '
12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eleventh Session, 404th meeting, and document E/ AC.7 /SR.
139.
13
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Thi,-d Committee, Annex, documents A/961 and A/C.3/
518, and A/C.3/518/Corr.1.
H See resolution 277 A (III).
15
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifth Year, Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 5, annex I.
16
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Third Committee, 320th-324th meetings.
