S/2002/1376

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2002
Original: English

Report of the Security Council Mission to Kosovo and
Belgrade, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
14-17 December 2002

I. Terms of reference of the Mission

(i) Use the opportunity created by the local
elections
to
move
forward
with
the
decentralization process and to further develop
democratic institutions;

1.
At the invitation of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kosovo, Michael Steiner, the
Security Council decided to send a mission there, as
conveyed to the Secretary-General by the President of
the Council in his letter of 21 November 2002
(S/2002/1271). The visit took place from 13 to 17
December 2002. Earlier Council missions to Kosovo
took place in April 2000 (see S/2000/363) and June
2001 (see S/2001/600).
2.

(ii) Promote
inclusion;

(b) In this context, to observe the operations of
UNMIK and the situation on the ground, and
specifically to obtain an update on Mr. Steiner’s
benchmarks, including the rule of law, the rate of
sustainable return and the privatization agenda; in
addition, to discuss the challenges faced by UNMIK,
particularly the follow-up to the local elections,
decentralization and the situation in Mitrovica; and
report its conclusions to the Security Council;
(c) To convey a strong message to the
provisional institutions for self-government, local
leaders, the newly elected municipal officials and all
others concerned, about the need to:

reconciliation

(iv) Ensure public safety and order, promote
stability and security;
(v) Support
the
full
and
effective
implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) and fully cooperate with UNMIK
and the international security presence to these
ends;
(d) Explore ways to enhance cooperation
between UNMIK and the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia on the basis of the UNMIKFederal Republic of Yugoslavia Common Document of
5 November 2001, and the opportunities for increased
cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade;
(e) Look at the impact of the regional situation
on the work of UNMIK.

II. Composition of the Mission
3.

Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby (Norway) (Head of
Mission)
Ambassador Stefan Tafrov (Bulgaria)

02-74648 (E)

201202

*0274648*

and

(iii) Reject all violence and condemn extremist
and terrorist activities;

The Mission had the following objectives:

(a) To find ways to enhance support for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to this
end;

inter-ethnic

S/2002/1376

Ambassador
(Mauritius)

Jagdish

Dharamchand

Koonjul

Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser (Mexico)
Ambassador
Federation)

Gennady

M.

Gatilov

(Russian

Ambassador Adam Thomson (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Ambassador Richard S. Williamson (United
States of America)
Counsellor Paul Ekorong à Dong (Cameroon)
Minister Counsellor Chen Xu (China)
Minister Counsellor
(Colombia)

José

Renato

Salazar

First Counsellor Emmanuelle d’Achon (France)
Counsellor Paul Goa Zoumanigui (Guinea)
Counsellor John Paul Kavanagh (Ireland)
Brigadier General Yap Ong Heng (Singapore)
First Secretary
Republic)

Milad

Atieh

(Syrian

Arab

III. Activities of the Mission and
summary of meetings
Upon arrival in Pristina on 14 December 2002,
4.
the Mission received a briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as
briefings
by
the
Principal
Deputy
Special
Representative and Deputy Special Representatives of
the UNMIK pillars, police and justice (United
Nations), civil administration (United Nations),
institution-building (Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)) and economic
reconstruction (European Union).
5.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral stated that Kosovo had made notable progress
over the past three years, with important developments
occurring in the last six months. The overall
improvement in the security situation was illustrated by
a 27 per cent decrease in the crime rate. In 2002, for
the first time, the inflow of minority returns to Kosovo
exceeded the outflow; the second round of municipal
elections had been conducted in an orderly and
peaceful manner; UNMIK had extended its authority to

2

the northern part of Mitrovica; the process of
privatizing socially owned enterprises had begun; the
transfer of the remaining Kosovo Albanian prisoners
from Serbia proper had taken place; and the provisional
institutions of self-government had been established.
Kosovo had 105 commercial bank offices and a
functioning social service, with 70,000 payments
having been made through the basic pension scheme in
November 2002 alone.
6.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral pointed out that Kosovo has a multi-ethnic
Assembly and Government to which UNMIK had
begun the process of transferring responsibilities and
gradually moving from direct administration (with the
exception of the responsibilities reserved to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General) to advising
and monitoring these fledgling institutions, which still
needed to be consolidated and strengthened. In order to
assist local authorities in taking full responsibility
under the Constitutional Framework, UNMIK was
continuing capacity-building programmes, including
training for the police and local judiciary. In this
context, UNMIK was trying to ensure that the
provisional institutions remain within, and fully
respect, the Constitutional Framework. There had been
some tension with the local leaders who wanted further
responsibilities delegated to them. Among the
problems encountered were attempts by the Kosovo
Assembly to go beyond its mandated powers and not
fully comply with all the provisions of the
Constitutional Framework, particularly with regard to
minority interests. The Assembly had passed six laws,
of which two were promulgated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, two were
pending and two were rejected on the grounds that the
Kosovo Assembly had overstepped its powers in the
areas of foreign policy and minority rights. The Special
Representative had used protection mechanisms with
regard to the higher education law and his authority to
appoint minority judges and prosecutors.
7.
The recent municipal elections had been
successful and produced changes in the political
landscape at the local level. Kosovo Serbs had
participated for the first time in elections at the
municipal level, albeit in small numbers in areas where
they did not constitute a majority, resulting in a power
shift in some municipalities. In the northern part of
Mitrovica, there had been a virtual boycott of the
ballot. The implementation of the election results was

S/2002/1376

ongoing, and had seen minority community
representatives in some areas being brought in as
coalition partners alongside the majority parties. The
percentage of women in municipal assemblies had
increased from 8 to 29 per cent.
8.
UNMIK still retained certain responsibilities in
the municipalities, which were carried out by the Civil
Administration pillar. With reductions in its budget (18
per cent less than the previous year’s funding),
UNMIK was adjusting to face the new budget realities.
Accordingly, it had accelerated reductions in the Civil
Administration pillar, cutting staff by 50 per cent and
projecting a further 40 per cent reduction in the next
year. Therefore, by the end of the fiscal year, UNMIK
would retain only minimal monitoring capabilities in
the municipalities, which might in turn limit its ability
to ensure management controls and inter-ethnic
fairness at the municipal level.
9.
Promoting returns, combating organized crime,
and developing the economy remained the main
priorities and challenges. UNMIK had focused on
creating the conditions for sustainable and voluntary
return of minorities to Kosovo. A turning point had
been reached in 2002, when the inflow of people to
Kosovo outpaced the outflow. Increased donor funding
for return projects was necessary to support further
progress in 2003. Providing internally displaced
persons with information relating to the conditions for
return, and establishing an appropriate infrastructure,
such as education, social services, employment and
income-generating projects, were ongoing. However,
the situation remained fragile, as ethnically motivated
incidents and vandalism hampered the return process.
While the continuous engagement of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) in providing a safe and secure environment
was still necessary, the main challenge was not in
keeping a physical peace but rather “mental
peacekeeping”. The majority should take responsibility
for the well-being of minorities and minorities should
integrate and participate in the institutions established
under resolution 1244 (1999).
10. A secure environment was not just a precondition
for minority return but also for investment in Kosovo.
Inhabitants of Kosovo were focusing more and more on
the economy as the security situation became relatively
safer. The high level of unemployment, about 56 per
cent, remained a challenge. Kosovo had entered into
the stage of long-term economic development,
including the initiation of the privatization process.

The power situation remained unstable despite
significant progress in restoring the electrical capacity
that had been lost as a result of the lightning strike in
July. An increased demand for electricity and nonpayment of electricity bills exacerbated the issue. The
application of a tough disconnection policy increased
the collection of bills from less then half to 80 per cent.
11. The recent appointment of 11 Kosovo Serb judges
and prosecutors signalled a major step forward in the
establishment of a multi-ethnic judiciary. The extended
length of pre-trial detention, due to the time necessary
for translation, remained a problem. UNMIK
explained, in response to questions from the Mission,
that a number of cases of war crimes had come to trial
in Kosovo in 2002 in accordance with the
responsibilities of UNMIK in this area. Should the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia issue
a warrant against a person in Kosovo, UNMIK would
make the necessary arrests. The reasons for such
arrests should be explained to the general public in
simple terms, making clear that such arrests were
directed against individual suspects and not against
communities or institutions.
12. The Kosovo Police Service (KPS), now more
numerous than UNMIK police, played an increasingly
important role in providing law and order in Kosovo.
Currently, one police station was being run solely by
KPS. KPS had also established itself as a legitimate
police service in the north. The recruitment of KPS
officers in the north of Kosovo, however, continued to
face opposition from elements in the Kosovo Serb
population. Organized crime remained a challenge. The
Kosovo Organized Crime Bureau had become more
operational, contributing to anti-crime efforts.
Cooperation in the region with Albania, Serbia proper
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia would
assist in the fight against organized crime.
13. UNMIK relations with Belgrade had improved.
The Kosovo Government would soon be represented in
the High-Ranking Working Group as a full member.
Direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina had not
yet started. Such a dialogue on practical matters of
common concern was a necessity.
14. One of the main challenges following the
establishment of the provisional institutions was
managing the aspirations of the Kosovo Albanians for
independence and staving off challenges to the
authority of UNMIK during the interim period. For

3

S/2002/1376

example, despite the ambitions of some members of the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), UNMIK remained
committed to KPC’s status as a civil emergency agency
with no military or security functions. It had been
clearly stated that Kosovo’s status remained open and
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) was the only
guideline for UNMIK. The Security Council would
determine the future status and no party had a right to
prejudge it.
15. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral stated that Kosovo no longer saw itself as an
“island”. Regional cooperation was improving.
Solutions that might lead to a mono-ethnic Kosovo
were not an option, as this might have repercussions,
causing a chain reaction throughout the region,
primarily in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Nor was
partition an option.
16. In order to manage this critical interim period and
measure progress and setbacks in Kosovo, UNMIK had
introduced the benchmark concept. This approach is
supported by the Security Council. UNMIK was now in
the process of operationalizing the benchmarks by
defining specific indicators and, starting in January,
would report to the Council on their implementation,
providing a baseline against which progress could be
measured. Recent consultations with the provisional
institutions had indicated, however, that the
benchmarks had not yet been internalized as their own
goals. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral had emphasized the importance of the
“standards before status” concept, noting that, while it
had been widely accepted in Kosovo, concrete actions
in that direction had yet to be seen.
17. The Council Mission in its interventions
supported the “standards before status” approach and
the prioritization of the rule of law, economic
development and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. It also supported the extension of
UNMIK’s authority to northern Mitrovica and
welcomed UNMIK’s cooperation with Belgrade and
with the international security presence on this issue.
The Mission felt that it was important that the same
administrative system was applied throughout Kosovo.
The Mission supported the initiative of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for a
“decentralization plan” for Kosovo, underlining the
importance of developing such a plan in consultation
with the local communities and in accordance with

4

European standards. The Mission welcomed the
improved cooperation between UNMIK and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and noted the
importance of enhancing that cooperation.
18. On 14 December, the Mission met with
representatives of the provisional institutions of selfgovernment, namely the President of Kosovo, Ibrahim
Rugova; the Prime Minister, Bajram Rexhepi; the
President of the Assembly, Nexhat Daci; and the InterMinisterial Coordinator for Returns, Milorad
Todorovic.
19. The Kosovo Albanian representatives reported
significant progress over the past three and a half
years, including the improved security situation; the
creation of a functioning police service; and the
establishment of provisional institutions of selfgovernment. They assessed the car bombing in Pristina,
on the eve of the Mission’s arrival, as sending the
wrong message about the security situation, which,
they noted, had in fact been improving. Economic
development, including the need to address the high
unemployment rate, implementation of privatization
and integration of ethnic minorities remained priorities.
The productive working relationship between the
provisional institutions and UNMIK had been
encouraging, but a further transfer of authority should
be discussed and accelerated. While admitting that
Kosovo’s status remained an open issue, an early
recognition of Kosovo’s independence was advocated
as a means of accelerating the democratization of the
region and economic development in Kosovo. Some
believed that placing standards before status was
ineffective — rather both should be pursued
simultaneously. They maintained that it was difficult to
implement the standards required without a
concomitant level of responsibility, and that some
standards could not be achieved without defining the
status of Kosovo. Nevertheless, the provisional
institutions were committed to continuing cooperation
with UNMIK in efforts to create a tolerant democratic
society. The President of Kosovo warned that
confirmation of the Serbia-Montenegro Constitutional
Charter could generate problems in the region.
20. The President of the Assembly pointed out that,
although ethnic Albanians constituted 90 per cent of
Kosovo’s current inhabitants, minorities occupied 34
per cent of the seats in the Kosovo Assembly, which
demonstrated the level of respect for minority rights in
Kosovo. The fact that the Kosovo Assembly was the

S/2002/1376

only parliament in the region to adopt a resolution on
the return of minorities also illustrated the Assembly’s
commitment to respecting the rights of all residents and
to supporting the rule of law. With regard to Kosovo’s
Government, relations, including inter-ethnic relations,
within the Cabinet were excellent. The Government
was also engaged in affirmative action, offering
employment to minorities.
21. The Inter-Ministerial Coordinator for Returns
provided a different assessment. The Kosovo Serb
population had little reason to be satisfied with the
degree of progress, since two thirds of the Kosovo Serb
population remained displaced. Kosovo Serbs
experienced difficulties in all areas, from health and
education to the use of their language and alphabet.
Inside Kosovo, freedom of movement for minority
communities
remained
unsatisfactory.
While
unemployment among Kosovo Albanians was high, it
was even higher within the Kosovo Serb population.
The issue of missing persons continued to complicate
the political situation and impede reconciliation
between the two communities. “Standards before
status” was supported as the appropriate approach to
the situation in Kosovo and the representative called
for implementation of the decentralization strategy. All
representatives, regardless of ethnicity, supported the
goal of achieving European standards.
22. The Mission emphasized the “standards before
status” approach and the responsibility of the
provisional institutions for assuming the competences
transferred by the Constitutional Framework for the
benefit of all inhabitants. The Mission further
underlined the provisional institutions’ responsibility
for working together with UNMIK for the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and stressed
the importance of full cooperation with the Tribunal.
Underlining international support for a democratic,
pluralistic and multi-ethnic Kosovo, the Mission urged
the Government to see itself as the government for all
the inhabitants of Kosovo and not just as the
representatives of its own electorate. In this context,
the Mission called upon the representatives to
demonstrate
clear
leadership
in
promoting
reconciliation and the inclusion of all communities.
The international community sought progress in this
field and closely monitored developments. The Mission
called upon the Kosovo leaders to publicly denounce
acts of violence, hate speech and expressions of
intolerance.

23. Noting that the rule of law was the foundation for
a democratic society and for economic development,
the Mission warned that lawlessness affected all
communities and undermined all efforts to create a
prosperous and democratic Kosovo. The Mission
encouraged the provisional institutions to work closely
with UNMIK and other international organizations
(Council of Europe, OSCE, European Union) for the
realization of the benchmarks, and towards achieving
European standards. The Mission stressed that, above
all, the provisional institutions must take responsibility
for the inclusion of all communities and the respect for
human and civil rights, as well as the respect for law
and order in Kosovo. The importance of increased
cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade was also
underlined.
24. Also on 14 December, the Mission met with
representatives of the Kosovo Assembly, including
members of major Kosovo Albanian political parties
and the Kosovo Serb coalition (Povratak), as well as
representatives of other ethnic communities. The
Assembly members were deeply divided along ethnic
lines in their assessment of the current situation. The
mainstream Albanian parties pledged to work towards
the establishment of the rule of law and democracy for
all communities in Kosovo. They asserted, however,
that their efforts had been restricted by a lack of
authority and by the Special Representative’s reserved
powers. To make the provisional institutions more
efficient, Kosovo Albanian representatives requested
that the authority of the provisional institutions be
further extended. Some of the representatives claimed
that substantial self-government in Kosovo had already
been achieved with the establishment of provisional
institutions. A new Security Council resolution was
therefore needed. Some requested that the Security
Council address the issue of Kosovo’s status. The most
extreme suggestions went as far as changing UNMIK’s
mandate and limiting it to monitoring functions, or
transferring the monitoring task to the European Union,
with the continued presence of NATO, until final
status, which would respect the right of selfdetermination, was recognized.
25. Kosovo Serb representatives said they believed
that the positive changes which had occurred in
Kosovo had not affected the situation for the ethnic
Serb minority. They emphasized, in particular, the lack
of the freedom of movement and neglect for the
cultural rights of minorities, insufficient returns and the

5

S/2002/1376

destruction
of
churches.
The
Kosovo
Serb
representatives urged UNMIK to be more proactive on
the issue of returns and on the protection of the rights
of minorities. Representatives of other Kosovo
minorities had been better integrated into Kosovo’s
institutions but, nevertheless, encountered a lack of
attention from the international community to their
specific problems and some pending issues relating to
their cultural rights.
26. The Mission supported the “standards before
status” approach of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, emphasizing that the earlier the
benchmarks were achieved, the earlier the status issue
could be approached. Standards were also important for
economic development, as without stability and the
rule of law no foreign investments should be expected.
The Mission noted that the Security Council remained
committed to Kosovo and urged the Assembly
members to denounce ethnic hatred and focus on the
future. The Mission underscored the responsibility of
the Assembly and all its representatives and political
parties to assume the competences transferred by the
Constitutional Framework for the benefit of all the
people in Kosovo, and emphasized the importance of
observing democratic procedures in the working of the
Assembly. A special emphasis was given to the
inclusion of, and respect for, the views and interests of
all communities important for a democratic, stable and
prosperous Kosovo. The Mission underlined the
responsibility of all representatives and political
parties, to work together with UNMIK for the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), stressing that a “result-oriented” approach by
all parties to legislative work was essential. The
Mission urged the Assembly members to seek
consensus, noting that a constructive opposition was
vital for a functioning democracy.
27. It further underscored the importance of increased
cooperation
between
Pristina
and
Belgrade.
Participation in the work of the Assembly was
necessary in order to promote the interests of the
communities. Non-participation led to a lack of
representation and the loss of any possible influence on
the legislative process. The Mission noted that each
community had a different agenda, and emphasized
that multi-ethnicity was the only way forward, and
urged the communities to engage in a constructive
dialogue. It is most important for the different

6

communities to learn to listen to each other and not to
speak past each other.
28. On 14 December, members of the Mission met
with families of missing persons. Representatives of the
families of missing persons noted the support provided
by UNMIK and by the Special Representative in
clarifying the fate of some 3,500 missing persons. This
included a recent UNMIK organized exhibition of
personal effects that allowed the identification of some
of the missing. The relatives of the missing persons
sought the Mission’s assistance in receiving relevant
information from the Serbian and Yugoslav authorities
on the fate of their family members, including opening
records believed to be in possession of Serbian courts
for review by the Tribunal. The Mission noted the need
to address this important issue and undertook to study
the material presented and take appropriate action.
29. At KFOR headquarters on 15 December, the
KFOR Commander, Lieutenant General Fabio Mini,
briefed the Mission on the security situation and the
main tasks and challenges of the international security
presence. KFOR had assessed that a safe and secure
environment existed in Kosovo, punctuated by some
acts of violence. It had continued its weapons searches
at crossing points and within Kosovo, and the number
of reported weapons discovered at crossing points had
decreased, although that could be only a seasonal
phenomenon. Principal challenges to public security
concerned the continuing existence of inter-ethnic
violence, organized crime and social and political
extremism. The perception among the minorities was
that insecurity was growing. An information campaign
was important in addressing that perception and KFOR
continued to provide static guards at certain
patrimonial sites and to provide escorts. Regrettably, a
large number of churches had been destroyed in the
first months of the mission. More recently, the debate
on final status could fuel extremism and impact the
security situation and therefore needed to be carefully
managed.
30. While KFOR maintained and developed a climate
of safety and security, it also continued to support
UNMIK and to decrease the level of dependency on
KFOR. It supported UNMIK in its fight against
organized crime, but did not assume law enforcement
responsibilities in that regard. That support included
the transfer of appropriate responsibility to the civil
authorities, so as to facilitate KFOR’s withdrawal from
large-scale framework operations. The handover of

S/2002/1376

responsibilities would proceed as the civilian bodies
were ready. The transfer, or “unfixing”, was a common
strategy between KFOR and UNMIK, involving
decisions based on a common threat assessment and
agreement between both parties. Some tasks remained
purely military in nature; others could be carried out by
UNMIK police and the Kosovo Police Service. KFOR
was also working closely with UNMIK in the process
of transferring civilian functions at Pristina Airport,
and would continue to fulfil certain functions at the
airport. KFOR had recently restructured itself into four
brigades from the previous five, and troop levels had
been reduced accordingly. The number of troops
currently stood at 27,188, from a top strength of 49,400
in December 1999. The further restructuring and
downsizing of KFOR would not affect its ability to
operate and would be based upon an assessment of the
security situation. Overall, the cooperation and
coordination between UNMIK and KFOR were
excellent.
31. The Mission supported the efforts of KFOR and
acknowledged that the presence of KFOR continued to
be an essential factor of stabilization and security in
Kosovo and in the region. Minority communities
continued to look to KFOR for their security. It noted
that the security situation had improved over the last
year and that KFOR could take credit for this
development. The Mission expressed deep concern at
the influence of organized crime on Kosovo, while
acknowledging that it was not a phenomenon exclusive
to Kosovo but one that affected the entire region and
needed to be solved through a regional approach. It
took note of the support provided by KFOR to the
efforts of UNMIK and the local authorities in
combating organized crime.
32. Also on 15 December, the Mission visited
Mitrovica and held a series of meetings, the first of
which was a briefing on the Kosovo Trust Agency and
the process towards privatization by Andy Bearpark,
the Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Economic Reconstruction (European
Union pillar). The Deputy Special Representative
stated that there had been a notable improvement in the
economic situation. A significant amount of
reconstruction had been carried out; the road system
was functioning; and Kosovo had the highest growth
rate in Europe for the past three consecutive years,
albeit from a very low baseline. UNMIK had

successfully fostered a change from the former cashbased economy to the use of banks.
33. The current economic situation was, however,
based on the presence of the international community
with its significant spending power, the large aid
programme and remittances from the diaspora. During
the past year, inflows resulting from the international
community’s presence had decreased, as organizations
began to downsize heavily. The amount of donor
funding had decreased, from €650 million in 2001 to
€437 million in 2002 and was projected to fall to €271
million in 2003. Serious economic decline, with its
related problems, was forecast for 2004. Normally, a
decline in grant funding would be offset by access to
international financial institutions, but this had proved
difficult, given Kosovo’s unresolved status. UNMIK
was working with the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund to find a creative solution to obtain
access. Local political leaders had not yet shown
themselves ready to assume responsibility for such
long-term economic decisions. Organized crime and,
more worrying, institutionalized corruption, were
further impediments to economic development.
34. Direct investment was needed in order to drive
economic development forward. Privatization would
attract the private sector to invest, although it would
not solve all of Kosovo’s economic problems.
Enterprises had to be brought into the private sector in
order to bring in investment, promote trade and create
employment. The appropriate vehicle to achieve this
goal was the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA). It was
responsible for privatizing (or liquidating) some 550
socially owned enterprises and for managing the
transition and transformation of publicly owned
enterprises. The Agency did not have the mandate to
privatize publicly owned enterprises. The KTA
headquarters had recently been relocated to northern
Mitrovica, to foster economic development in the
north.
35. It was estimated that only a small number of
socially owned enterprises were economically viable,
most of them in agricultural processing. The KTA
board had recently approved the first wave of 25 firms
to be offered for sale as “flagship privatizations”. It
was hoped that the tenders would be published early in
2003. Privatization alone would not produce income or
employment, but it would free productive capacity.
Any funds generated would be frozen to cover potential
claims from owners and creditors. Privatization would

7

S/2002/1376

result in the loss of non-essential jobs in socially
owned enterprises. UNMIK had been in constant
dialogue with authorities in Belgrade on the issue of
privatization.
36. During the visit to Mitrovica, the Mission also
held a meeting with representatives of Kosovo Serb and
Bosniac civil society, the majority of whom were
women. These representatives observed that northern
Mitrovica was the only truly multi-ethnic city in
Kosovo. Their perception of the situation in the rest of
the province, characterized by increased insecurity and
a complete lack of freedom of movement, uncontrolled
sale of property, absence of returns and the slow pace
of decentralization, was not positive. Kosovo Serbs
were looking for and requesting their basic rights,
including freedom of movement, education, freedom to
exercise their religion, access to health care and the use
of their own language and alphabet. The economy and
the employment situation in the north had to improve.
Previously, 85 per cent of Serbs worked for socially
owned enterprises; now, none of them were employed.
Kosovo Serbs had had no chance to benefit from the
international humanitarian assistance phase, which was
now coming to an end. Without such assistance, Serbs
in the north would be unable to cope, especially as
connections with Belgrade were being cut by UNMIK.
37. The low voter turnout in northern Mitrovica had
been the local Serb reaction to existing conditions.
Those who had voted were unable to visit elected
Assembly representatives in Pristina, who themselves
had to travel there by armoured vehicle. Where such
basic guarantees were found wanting, it was
questionable whether participation in Kosovo’s selfgoverning institutions would bring results. Expressing
a different view, one representative advocated the need
to look forward. While it was difficult to acknowledge
that Kosovo Serbs had become a minority, it should be
accepted. Nevertheless, there was a minimum below
which they could not go. Decentralization should have
been implemented prior to holding the recent elections.
38. Kosovo’s Serb and Albanian communities had
lived together in the past without incident. For the past
three years the international community had tried to
force them to think about living together again. It
would be possible to live together once more, but the
issue should not be forced. One representative urged
that time pass and business be allowed to take hold to
help draw the two communities together. Other
representatives placed greater emphasis on the need to

8

improve freedom of movement before concentrating on
the economy. The Bosniac representative believed that
UNMIK could have done more to prevent the departure
of Bosniacs from Kosovo through, for example, a veto
on the sale of property.
39. The situation ultimately required a political
solution. People would not remain in Kosovo if they
did not have prospects. Conditions were more dramatic
in the minority enclaves. A mono-ethnic Kosovo would
be the end result. A path towards Europe was crucial,
even though to date the majority community had been
built up to European standards while the non-majority
communities had been left behind.
40. The women of northern Mitrovica experienced
the same problems as women around the world. They
were well educated and capable of making a positive
difference if they were given the chance and support.
Women could also contribute to the development of
civil society and play an important role in reconciling
communities.
41. The Mission referred to its messages, made at the
reception the preceding evening. The Mission wanted
Kosovo to be a multi-ethnic, inclusive society. It
appealed to the representatives to integrate and find a
life within Kosovo. The Mission had also called upon
the Kosovo Albanian leaders to make room for the
minorities to live in Kosovo. The Mission believed that
if there were a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo
integration into Europe would be easier. The Mission
also wanted a unified Kosovo, and so supported
UNMIK’s actions in Mitrovica. In order for the
economy to function and to attract investment, Kosovo
needed to become a normal society. The former
situation of reliance upon socially owned enterprises
would not return. Something new must be built. Until
recently, Mitrovica had been divided and was not
attractive to investment. The Mission encouraged the
representatives to look to the future, not to the past.
The Mission also supported returns. It stressed that all
extremism must stop and that everyone should try to be
more pragmatic. There were a lot of practical problems
that needed to be dealt with, and everyone should work
together and focus on these issues. The Mission cited
the Security Council resolution on women, peace and
security and noted the special role and ability of
women to help in conflict situations. The Mission was
aware of all the problems and difficulties that the
Kosovo Serbs were facing. The international presence

S/2002/1376

was important to help solve the problems and to create
an atmosphere for their resolution.

(DSS); three of them are Kosovo Albanians and three
Kosovo Serbs.

42. Also during the visit to Mitrovica, the Mission
received a briefing from the Special Representative,
and the Regional and Municipal Administrators of
Mitrovica, on the evolution of the UNMIK presence in
northern Mitrovica and the status of implementation of
its Mitrovica
strategy. The
former
parallel
administration was an incomplete continuation of the
pre-conflict municipality. It did not operate fully, but
only in certain limited areas. The establishment of
UNMIK authority had been smooth, but required
continuous follow-up to become self-sustaining.
Excellent coordination with KFOR had contributed to
the successful implementation of the strategy. Over 550
applications, many from staff of the former parallel
structure, had been received for only 70 positions.
Quick-impact projects were ongoing and university
education in the Serbian language was now available. It
was important to return Kosovo Albanians to the north
and Kosovo Serbs to the south. The economic situation
in the north, however, remained precarious.

45. The Presidents of Mitrovica, Srbica and Vucitrn
municipalities were encouraged by the past
developments in Mitrovica region and expressed
gratitude for the support of UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard.
The Kosovo Albanian community was trying to assist
UNMIK to establish a society based on the rule of law
and human and minority rights standards. There were
several recent examples of projects that had been
undertaken by Albanian and Serb communities that
demonstrated that coexistence was possible. More
needed to be done, however. They acknowledged the
need for joint cooperation and encouraged further
economic opportunities for the region. The decision to
open an UNMIK office in northern Mitrovica was
welcome. However, to ensure long-term cooperation
regarding Mitrovica, the consolidation of the office, in
line with resolution 1244 (1999), was necessary. Full
transparency was paramount. They expressed the hope
that UNMIK would also maintain cooperation with the
citizens of Mitrovica as well.

43. The real challenge remained security and
overcoming the fears of both communities.
Reconciliation had been blocked for a long time by the
parallel structures. UNMIK supported reconciliation,
but believed that it had to come from within if it was to
have a fundamental effect; it could not be imposed.
UNMIK would continue to promote inter-ethnic
dialogue through trade, business, returns and other
practical issues. Continued political and financial
support from the international community was key to
this process. Those who wanted to create two
municipalities did not truly want a multi-ethnic society.
The presence of an office of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/Republic of Serbia Coordination Centre in
northern Mitrovica was acceptable if the office
provided a liaison function only and not a parallel
administration.
44. On 15 December, the Mission met with the
Presidents of the Municipal Assemblies in Mitrovica
region, namely, the President of Leposavic
municipality, Velimir Bojovic; the President of
Mitrovica municipality, Faruk Spahija (LDK); the
President of Srbica municipality, Ramadan Gashi
(PDK); the President of Vucitrn municipality,
Muharrem Shabani (LDK); the President of Zubin
Potok municipality, Slavisa Ristic (DSS); and the
President of Zvecan municipality, Dragisa Milovic

46. The Presidents of Leposavic, Zubin Potok and
Zvecan municipalities welcomed the opportunity for
the representatives of all the municipalities to meet
together for the first time. The Kosovo Serb population
living in Mitrovica was less than satisfied with the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). They
expressed the hope that the mission in Kosovo would
not come to an end before the resolution had been fully
implemented. They expected the international
community to focus in the coming year on the return of
the Serb and other non-Albanian communities to
Kosovo. Full freedom of movement and security for
minority communities was a prerequisite. That
included the need for assistance from international
donors to returnees, as well as investment in the
economic infrastructure of Mitrovica. While the
Kosovo Serb community was in favour of the rule of
law in Kosovo, it should apply to all communities.
They noted that statements by Kosovo Albanian
representatives in favour of Kosovo’s independence
would mean that the Serbs of Kosovo would not dare to
stay. While northern Mitrovica was truly a multi-ethnic
society, the same could not be said for the rest of
Kosovo.
47. The Mission referred to the statement made by
the Head of Mission the previous evening in which all

9

S/2002/1376

the Mission’s messages were contained. The Council
supported and applauded standards before status. It
wanted Kosovo to be multi-ethnic and multi-national.
The rule of law should be the basis for normalcy, and
this would attract investment.
48. Also on 15 December, the Mission visited the
Kosovo Police Service School in Vucitrn, where they
were briefed by the Director of the School, Steve
Bennet, and the Police Commissioner, Stefan Feller, as
well as a high-ranking KPS officer, Colonel Ahmeti,
and met with a multi-ethnic group of KPS officers. The
Kosovo Police Service School was central to building
the KPS. It offered, besides a basic training course, a
range of specialized and advanced courses. While basic
training continued, the school had turned its focus
towards supervision and management and specialized
in-service training. The institution-building pillar
(OSCE) continued to operate the School at full
capacity while transition was going on within its
administrative and instructional functions. International
staffing levels had been reduced from a peak of 267
(early 2001) to 86. Concurrent to this reduction and as
an ongoing process, national staff were training for
national professional officer status to fill the
administrative posts previously held by international
staff. After a period of operational duties, fully trained
KPS officers had returned to the school to become
trainers.
49. UNMIK police and KPS were a single
organization and present throughout Kosovo. It had
been deliberately established as one entity to ensure a
seamless transition to a sustainable local police service
in the future. Now there were more trained KPS
officers (5,545) delivering police services in Kosovo
than UNMIK police officers (4,500). KPS officers
included 16 per cent minority and 16 per cent female
members. The goal was to have 6,530 KPS officers in
2004, and to continue the handover of police stations to
full KPS control, the first having occurred in Gracanica
on 15 November. The merit-based competitive system
of recruitment was highly selective. Some 23 per cent
of KPS officers were former police officers. Despite
initial pressure in northern Mitrovica not to join KPS, a
sufficient number of applications had been received. It
had evolved into a police service that was trusted and
respected by the inhabitants of Kosovo. The transition
was moving towards all stations under KPS control,
with international police being responsible only for
monitoring and advising. UNMIK police had set up an

10

internal mechanism to address complaints. The Mission
welcomed the positive developments in creating a truly
multi-ethnic police service.
50. On 15 December, the Mission met with leaders of
returnees from Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb
communities and the Municipal Assembly President in
the Gnjilane municipality, as well as with
representatives of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and nongovernmental organizations. Sustainable returns were
one of the major priorities for UNMIK. UNMIK and its
partners were guided by a strategy based on the
principle of a bottom-up approach: meeting the needs
of internally displaced persons and refugees for
employment, health care and access to public services;
linking demand and opportunities for return; and
facilitating inter-ethnic dialogue at return sites.
51. UNHCR and non-governmental organization
representatives indicated that, for sustainable returns,
the trust of the local population was required. This
could be achieved through organizing meetings and
making no distinction between returnees and the local
population. Income-generation projects were of
ultimate importance, relieving returnees from
humanitarian assistance. Returns in the context of the
reconstruction process made those communities more
attractive for further returns.
52. UNHCR considered returns in the context of the
protection of human rights. Building infrastructures
around returns facilitated the rehabilitation of the entire
community, thus making the local population more
receptive and promoting the integration of returnees.
Applying that approach had enabled returns to mixed
communities in the Gnjilane area. Some 5,800
members of minority groups had returned to Kosovo,
mostly to the Gnjilane region. Although that number
represented perhaps 2.5 per cent of internally displaced
persons and refugees from minority communities in
Kosovo, it formed a basis for working for higher levels
of returns.
53. Limited freedom of movement and discrimination
in the delivery of social services, together with
economic factors, particularly the high level of
unemployment, remained constraints for returns.
Proactive positions of the provisional institutions, the
involvement of municipal authorities and donor support
were necessary to overcome those obstacles. UNMIK

S/2002/1376

was seeking donor funding of €30 million for returns in
2003.
54. The same day, the Mission visited the Pristina
Municipal Assembly, where it met with deputies from
various political parties. Most of the Assembly
members noted the improvement of the security
situation.
They
expressed
support
for
the
decentralization concept on the assumption that it
would mean the transfer of power to municipalities
rather than the creation of ethnic enclaves. The
conversion of KPS into a municipal police was
suggested. Municipal Assembly members believed that
the current economic situation was the major obstacle
for returns. In their opinion, the municipality was not
in a position to provide housing, jobs and schools for
potential returnees. In that connection, one Kosovo
Albanian representative referred to the “standards
before status” concept, and stated his belief that
sustainable returns were possible only after standards
were reached. Some Kosovo Albanian Assembly
members believed that ethnic Serbs did not want to
integrate and accept the new reality in Kosovo.
55. The only Serb member of the Municipal
Assembly was pessimistic about the progress achieved.
She was concerned that, of some 44,000 Serbs who
lived in Pristina before the war, few remained in the
city; Serb cultural sites had been destroyed; and no
Serbs had been employed in the major Kosovo
enterprises. The decentralization concept and
regulation No. 2000/45 on local municipalities gave
minorities a chance to coexist in Kosovo, providing a
necessary security mechanism. Restoring the property
rights of the minorities was an urgent priority and
progress was too slow in that regard. Representatives
exchanged harsh words when it came to describing the
situation of the Serb minority in Pristina.
56. The Mission noted the importance for all
communities to learn how to live together and urged
the Assembly members to reject extremism of all
kinds. The Mission further encouraged them to look to
the future and seek moderation.
57. Also on 15 December, the Head of Mission,
accompanied by some Mission members, met with a
group of Kosovo women representing some of the
different ethnic communities, members of the political
establishment and civil society. Members of the
Kosovo Assembly representing the ethnic majority
followed the line of the mainstream Kosovo Albanian

parties, indicating the progress achieved and calling for
the expeditious transfer of power to the provisional
institutions of self-government and for Kosovo’s
independence. Standards and status should therefore be
applied on a twin track, particularly because some
standards could not be accomplished without status.
Referring to suggestions of conditional independence
that had been made by some think tanks over the past
year, they called for Kosovo to be given immediate
independence but to remain an international
protectorate. They claimed that the minority had been
integrated and a dialogue had already begun with the
Serb community. Some asserted that a multi-ethnic
Kosovo would be possible only when the standard of
living became attractive not only to the local
population but also to immigrants. Members of the
Assembly were concerned that their law-making role
was restricted by the reserved powers of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and believed
that new laws should replace outdated legislation
promulgated during the prior regime. While 34
members of the Assembly were women, none served in
the Government.
58. The civil society representatives emphasized that
women of different ethnicities were working together
on peace-building projects but did not receive any
support from UNMIK or from OSCE. The Bosniac
community member complained that the concerns of
her community had been neglected, and stressed that
the multi-ethnicity concept should apply to all
minorities, not only to Serbs.
59. The Head of the Mission emphasized that women
had an important role to play in reconciliation and
called on them to build consensus in the society. He
urged the majority to be inclusive and the minority to
participate in Kosovo institutions. The Head of the
Mission reiterated the Security Council’s support for
the “standards before status” concept, emphasizing that
no investments could be expected without that.
60. On 16 December, at the end of the visit, the
Mission and the Special Representative held a joint
press conference at Pristina. The Head of the Mission
provided a general overview of the activities of the
Mission. He reconfirmed the statement issued on 14
December (see annex I) and noted the positive progress
that had been made since the Council’s last visit (see
annex II). Thereafter he and the Special Representative
responded to questions.

11

S/2002/1376

61. On the same day, the Mission, accompanied by
the Principal Deputy Special Representative, had
separate meetings in Belgrade with the President of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Vojislav Kostunica, the
Prime Minister of Serbia, Zoran Djindjic, and the
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia and President of the
Coordination Centre of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija, Nebojsa Covic.
62. The Yugoslav and Serbian authorities noted
progress in Kosovo, particularly the recent municipal
elections, the establishment of provisional institutions
of self-government, the appointment of Serbian judges
and prosecutors and good relations between Belgrade
and UNMIK. They supported the establishment of a
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. But, Kosovo remained
far from this goal. The security situation required
further improvement. The slow pace of returns, the
lack of respect for the human rights of minorities and
the destruction of the Serb cultural heritage in Kosovo
were of concern. They did not believe that one could
claim serious improvement unless there was a
significant return of internally displaced persons,
which had not yet occurred. Verbal support and
attempts to address these issues were insufficient —
concrete results were necessary. The key to improving
the situation was decentralization and returns. The
Prime Minister expressed his personal sentiment in
favour of creating specific central structures to
guarantee the collective rights of minorities. The
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs later spoke along
similar lines.
63. The authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia favoured a direct dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, and noted that earlier invitations
to the Kosovo Albanian leadership to open such a
dialogue had been rejected. They believed that UNMIK
could facilitate such a dialogue by promoting contacts
between Belgrade and influential bodies or groups in
Kosovo. President Kostunica noted that the first areas
of cooperation should be concrete and focus on issues
of concern to all communities and the region. The
improved relations between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Albania were noted as a positive
development.
64. The authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia supported the “standards before status”
approach. Kosovo’s final status should not be
prejudged, for example, through the structure of the

12

stabilization and association process for Yugoslavia.
The time was not yet ripe for final status discussions
because the standards had not yet been fulfilled.
Mr. Djindjic believed that, when the time was ripe, the
options for the final status of Kosovo should be
measured against their consequences. All interlocutors
believed that Kosovo’s future should be considered in
the regional context and in the European prospective.
In this regard, Mr. Djindjic proposed a democratic
European strategy for the entire region.
65. Mr. Covic emphasized the continuing relevance
of the provisions in the Common Document of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK, and he
called for the Council’s full support for its
implementation. The authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia supported Serb participation in
Kosovo institutions. Such participation, however,
would be meaningful only if minorities would truly
benefit from it and their voice was heard. President
Kostunica noted that parallel institutions in northern
Mitrovica would not exist anymore.
66. The issue of privatization of Kosovo’s enterprises
was raised, and the constructive dialogue with the
economic reconstruction pillar (European Union) was
noted. The problem of debts owned by Kosovo was
also raised, together with Kosovo’s direct access to
international financial institutions. Organized crime,
smuggling and corruption remained a problem for the
region and were concrete areas where cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina could prove fruitful.
UNMIK’s efforts to foster a regional approach to these
issues, such as the recent conference on cigarette
smuggling held at Pristina, were appreciated.
67. The Mission underlined the importance of
Belgrade’s full cooperation in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), which the Mission supported.
It stressed the need for full cooperation with the
Tribunal. Also, the resolution of outstanding issues in
Kosovo could be achieved only in dialogue among all
affected parties. There could be no right of veto, but
neither could there be any exclusion of legitimate
interests or parties. The Mission welcomed the
improvement in relations between Belgrade and
UNMIK, and underlined the importance of continuous
cooperation between Belgrade and UNMIK. It was
important that Kosovo Serbs be encouraged to
participate fully in the provisional institutions of selfgovernment. The Mission appealed to Belgrade to
encourage Kosovo Serbs to be constructive partners in

S/2002/1376

these institutions. The Mission was committed to
promoting the return of internally displaced persons
and refugees to Kosovo. The respect for security,
human and civil rights was vital for stability and
prosperity in Kosovo, as well as throughout the region.
68. Later that afternoon the Mission met with
representatives of the Serbian Association of Families
of Missing Persons. Representatives of the families of
missing persons appealed to the Mission to help to
resolve the fate of some 1,300 Kosovo Serb and other
non-Albanian individuals who had gone missing
before, during and, especially, after the arrival of the
international presence in Kosovo. Noting that 2003
would mark the fourth anniversary of their
disappearance, the representatives urged UNMIK and
the relevant international organizations, as well as the
Government in Belgrade, to do more to find out what
had happened to them. The members of the Mission
heard several compelling personal accounts from the
relatives of the missing persons and, underlining the
importance of resolving the fate of the missing from all
communities as a matter of priority, promised to study
closely the information provided to them at the
conclusion of the meeting and to take appropriate
action.
69. On 17 December, the Mission met with the
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, Goran
Svilanovic. Mr. Svilanovic noted good cooperation with
neighbours and stressed the need for the Kosovo issue
to be put in a regional framework within which
political issues, such as minority problems and the
establishment of European standards, should be
included. Regional cooperation, particularly the
improvement of relations between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and Albania, could be helpful for
improving the situation in Kosovo. Cooperation on the
fight against trafficking and corruption was also of
importance. A regional economic agenda included
cooperation on the establishment of free trade areas;
transport and communication; agriculture; the regional
energy market; and new technologies. Cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina could be developed on
practical issues such as crime prevention and energy.
Mr. Svilanovic believed that “quick fixes” could
jeopardize the situation in the region. A longer-term
European prospective was more viable. The
enlargement of the European Union could be a tool for
resolving the Kosovo issue.

70. The return of internally displaced and missing
persons remained highly important and emotional
issues. Security, the efficiency of the elected
institutions, public services and education also
remained priority areas. Mr. Svilanovic believed that
Kosovo Serbs should be encouraged to stay in Kosovo
and supported the facilitation of a dialogue within
communities and between them.
71. The Mission noted the complexity of the situation
in Kosovo, affected by distrust and apprehension on
both sides. It underscored that the majority should take
responsibility for the well-being of the minority and
that the minority had to participate in the work of the
local institutions. Minorities must enjoy better security
and improved freedom of movement. The Mission
noted the difficulties related to the return of minorities
but expressed hope for a possible improvement in the
situation. The Mission encouraged the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to persuade Kosovo
Serbs to participate in Kosovo’s local institutions. The
Mission objected to parallel structures in Kosovo and
expressed appreciation for the role of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in the resolution of the
situation
in
Mitrovica.
Belgrade’s
enhanced
cooperation with UNMIK was welcomed. Members of
the Mission noted the substantial progress in Kosovo
but acknowledged that the situation there remained
fragile. In this regard, the importance of the
benchmarks approach and a reconciliation process had
been emphasized. Members of the Mission stressed
that, whatever the future status of Kosovo, it would
need to relate to the region. An eventual expansion of
the European Union could provide a unique
opportunity for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
join the European Union set of standards.
72. On 17 December, at the end of the visit, the
Mission held a press conference at Belgrade. The Head
of the Mission provided a general overview of activities
of the Mission. Thereafter, he responded to questions.

IV. Findings of the Mission
73. Since the last mission of the Security Council to
Kosovo, the Mission finds notable progress in several
areas as regards the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). Elections held for the
Kosovo Assembly in 2001 and the municipalities in
2002 have led to the formation of the provisional
institutions of self-government and the new municipal

13

S/2002/1376

assemblies. The process of handing over power and
responsibilities to the local institutions continues.
There is also progress in the area of the rule of law.
Crime rates are down and security is improving. The
Kosovo Police Service continues to increase in
numbers, and the judiciary is in the process of being reestablished — both of them as multi-ethnic bodies. For
the first time, there is a larger number of minority
returnees than those leaving. Nevertheless, the overall
figures of internally displaced persons and refugees
from minority communities returning remain low. The
Mission noted a sharp contrast between the number of
returnees and those who still remained internally
displaced, and the daunting task that lies ahead and the
financial implications of this task. There is also
progress in the preparations for the privatization
process. Cooperation between UNMIK and Belgrade
has improved. The establishment of UNMIK
administration in the northern part of Mitrovica has
been necessary for the implementation of a uniform
standard of administration throughout Kosovo and
marks an important move against parallel institutions.
The Mission believes that UNMIK’s presence in the
northern part of Mitrovica is an important step forward
for the normalization of living conditions in the city.
74. The Mission in this respect is impressed by the
work of UNMIK and KFOR, and it also notes the
interest in and dedication to this work by some
members of the communities in Kosovo.

77. The Mission notes that, in spite of these positive
developments, the situation remains fragile in Kosovo.
Much work remains to be done, both by UNMIK and
the Kosovo institutions and communities. This covers,
inter alia, the rule of law, sustainable return, local
ownership
of
Kosovo’s
progress,
democratic
development, inter-ethnic reconciliation and dialogue,
cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade and the
fight against organized crime.
78. The firm establishment of the rule of law is
central to achieving security, functioning democracy
and sustainable economic development. Even though
there has been notable progress in this area, the
Mission finds that a continued strong effort is
necessary to achieve the goals in this area.
79. The sustainable return of minorities is a
precondition for a multi-ethnic society. A considerable
amount of attention and resources should be dedicated
to this issue. Even more than financial assistance, there
is a need for region-wide and local commitment to
supporting conditions for sustainable return. Security,
confidence-building and economic viability are all vital
factors that must be addressed in order to achieve a
significant, sustainable and successful return process.
This is a responsibility for all levels of Kosovo society.
UNMIK should, together with local institutions and
civil society, continue to work with a comprehensive
approach in order to move the return process forward.

75. The formulation of benchmarks for the realization
of standards is a constructive approach for the further
development of Kosovo as a democratic, multi-ethnic
society. The Mission looks forward to the next report
on UNMIK with a further detailing of the benchmarks
so as to measure progress. The Mission hopes that the
benchmarks can be worked out with local authorities in
Kosovo to build local “ownership” of them. The
Mission holds the view that “standards before status” is
the only viable way forward.

80. Reconciliation and dialogue measures are
paramount in this regard. One important contribution to
reconciliation between the communities is the
resolution of the fate of the missing persons from all
communities. UNMIK is encouraged to press forward
on these issues in consultation with ICRC, KFOR, the
provisional institutions and concerned local nongovernmental organizations and with Belgrade.
UNMIK is requested to keep the Council regularly
informed. The Council is urged to continue to follow
the issue.

76. The Mission was consistent in its message to all
interlocutors regarding standards before status, multiethnicity and integration of all communities, and their
responsibility for the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). It urges the newly
elected bodies to use their competencies, transferred in
accordance with the Constitutional Framework, for the
benefit of all inhabitants. The Mission stresses the
importance of participation by all communities in the
work of elected bodies.

81. The Mission points out that the progress achieved
so far has been driven to a large extent by the
international community. The Mission has the firm
impression that local ownership and commitment to
these processes has been less than could have been
expected. It is important that UNMIK make further
efforts to involve the local institutions and political
leaders in the practical formulation and implementation
of political goals and strategies. A case in point is the

14

S/2002/1376

further specification and implementation of the
benchmarks for the eight standards articulated in the
“standards before status” policy. A greater degree of
local ownership of, and commitment to, the realization
of these standards is a prerequisite for their ultimate
successful implementation. Naturally, the communities
themselves also have a critical responsibility in this
regard.
82. The recently held municipal elections were
conducted in a well-organized and non-violent fashion.
Participation levels were on average disappointingly
low, especially so as regards Kosovo Serbs. Greater
effort must be made to promote participation in the
political process in Kosovo. Effective participation by
all communities in these institutions is a prerequisite
for a functioning democracy in Kosovo. Special
emphasis is given to the inclusion of, and respect for,
the views and interests of all communities by the local
institutions. The Mission stresses a “result-oriented”
approach through consensus.
83. The Mission underscores the necessity that
elected representatives act in a responsible and
solution-oriented manner to provide basic services for
the inhabitants of their municipalities. The Mission
emphasizes that the handing over of responsibilities
from UNMIK administrators to the locally elected
bodies needs to be done in a way that ensures local
ownership and accountability. There are huge tasks for
the municipal assemblies to address. Municipalities
have a particular responsibility to foster dialogue,
reconciliation and conditions for sustainable return and
to act against corruption. UNMIK should support
efforts in this regard.

linked to political issues but also to security, law and
order and economic development. The Mission points
to the need for regional cooperation in order to, for
example, effectively combat organized crime, including
trafficking.
87. In the light of the many difficult issues yet to be
resolved, the Mission is of the view that continued
substantial international engagement in Kosovo will be
necessary for the foreseeable future.
88. The Mission would like to express its
appreciation to the Special Representative, Michael
Steiner, and the staff of UNMIK for their efforts to
realize the decision of the Security Council. The
Mission likewise expresses its gratitude to General
Fabio Mini and KFOR. The implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) remains high on the Security
Council’s agenda, and the Mission is impressed by the
hardworking dedication of the men and women of
UNMIK, local and international, working together with
local and international partners to fulfil (the objectives
of) this resolution.

84. The Mission urges UNMIK, in consultation with
local institutions and elected representatives, to further
elaborate the proposal for a decentralization of
competences to municipalities without delay.
85. It is the opinion of the Mission that the time has
come for cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade on
practical issues. UNMIK should consider the ways and
means of facilitating such contacts and practical
cooperation. The provisional institutions of selfgovernment should take steps within their competences
to make this possible.
86. The Mission underscores the importance of
viewing developments in Kosovo in a regional
perspective. Events in Kosovo have an impact on the
surrounding region and vice versa. This is not only

15

S/2002/1376

Annex I
Remarks made by the Head of the Mission at Pristina on
14 December 2002
The Security Council is focused on three key issues in Kosovo: standards
before status, multi-ethnicity and integration.
We fully support the eight standards articulated by the Special Representative
to the Secretary-General, Michael Steiner, as the yardstick for measuring Kosovo’s
progress. We also strongly endorse his priorities: “standards before status”. The
foundation of all other standards is the rule of law.
The people of Kosovo have much to do to achieve these standards. Verbal
support is not enough. Real efforts must be made on the ground to make the
standards reality. Kosovo is still a long way from having truly functioning
democratic institutions and a society in which minorities can fully participate.
UNMIK has reached the stage of transferring responsibilities to Kosovo’s
provisional institutions; the more the institutions demonstrate they can execute the
responsibilities they already have, the more they will be given.
Nothing is more important than a demonstrated commitment to multi-ethnicity,
not only in words but also in deeds.
All habitants of Kosovo must be able to live in security and dignity.
A Kosovo where members of minority communities are oppressed will face a
bleak future of self-isolation.
Nothing would make a more powerful, positive impression on the international
community than significant and sustainable returns of displaced people.
As the majority, Kosovo Albanians must take responsibility for the security of
members of minorities and their full access to public services.
All people of Kosovo must reject violence and condemn extremist and terrorist
activities.
At the same time, members of minorities must integrate into Kosovo society.
Parallel institutions have no future; integration is the only way forward.
We recognize Kosovo’s progress in establishing inclusive democratic
institutions. Now Kosovo’s elected leaders must ensure that they operate
democratically.
That means the majority respecting the rights and role of the minority. As the
Secretary-General said on his visit here, “Democracy is not ‘winner takes all’”.
The Security Council fully supports the assertion of UNMIK’s authority in the
northern part of Mitrovica.
Recent progress in Mitrovica represents a major step in making Kosovo a
multi-ethnic and integrated society founded on legitimate authorities and the rule of
law.
Improving the quality of life in Kosovo is now almost entirely in the hands of
the people of Kosovo themselves.

16

S/2002/1376

No unilateral steps will determine Kosovo’s final status. The United Nations
Security Council will, in consultation with all concerned, ultimately determine
Kosovo’s final status.
Those who have Kosovo’s best interests at heart will focus all their energies on
making progress towards the eight standards.
All the standards are important. Kosovo must demonstrate its commitment to
building a multi-ethnic society based on the rule of law. This will determine whether
Kosovo is seen as a problem or as a partner by the international community.

17

S/2002/1376

Annex II
Statement made by the Head of the Mission at a press
conference held at Pristina on 16 December 2002
You all have heard my speech on behalf of the Security Council from Saturday.
The message of the Security Council has been consistent. What we have experienced
here in Kosovo only underscores the validity of this message.
But I have to say compared to what we saw 18 months ago, there has been
substantial progress.
The establishment of institutions is a major step forward. The security
situation has improved significantly. The KPS is taking on increasing responsibility
for law and order. The return process is under way, albeit on a small scale. The
process of privatization is on track.
We are impressed by the work of UNMIK and KFOR as well as the dedication
shown by local political leaders.
It is important that this work continues. The first steps have been taken. Much
more remains to be done. This is vital if Kosovo is to become a multi-ethnic and
democratic society.

18
