United Nations

S/PV.6308

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6308th meeting
Wednesday, 5 May 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Edokpa
Ms. Eloeva
Mr. Gümrükçü
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process (S/2010/214)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-34793 (E)

*1034793*

S/PV.6308

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2010/214)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nepal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in Nepal.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Landgren to take the seat reserved for
her at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/214, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process.
Members of the Council also have before them a letter
dated 5 May 2010 from the Secretary-General

2

transmitting a letter of the same date from the
Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United
Nations, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2010/229.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Ms. Karin Landgren, to whom I give the floor.
Ms. Landgren: Nepal’s peace process is at a
delicate and critical moment, as negotiators work to
resolve the current stand-off between Maoist
supporters and the Government, primarily over Maoist
demands for a national unity Government. As the
general strike in Nepal enters its fifth day, negotiations
among the major parties are dealing squarely with the
major and contentious governance and other peace
process issues that have long been side-stepped,
including critical constitutional questions concerning
Nepal’s proposed federal structure and form of
governance and the integration and rehabilitation of
Maoist army personnel.
Soon after the 2008 election, the Interim
Constitution, which emphasized the importance of
governing through consensus, was amended to permit
an opposition, eliminating a vital element in managing
Nepal’s post-conflict transition. For much of the past
year, the major parties have identified the
establishment of a consensus Government as the path
to greater confidence, and thereby to the conclusion of
the peace process.
As part of a possible package agreement, the
parties are also discussing a handful of other longstanding issues, including ending the paramilitary
function and activities of the Maoist Young Communist
League and the return by the Maoists of all seized
property, both of which were addressed by earlier
agreements but never implemented. Extending the
imminent deadline of the Constituent Assembly is also
under discussion. All the elements of a solution to this
impasse are acknowledged by the major parties. The
main stumbling blocks in the negotiations are,
reportedly, the timing and leadership of a proposed
new national unity Government and the modalities for
the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel. If crisis is averted through a deal in the
coming days, it will be vital to put in place effective
machinery for its monitoring and oversight.
The United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN)
has long warned of the dangerous slide in the peace
process. The process remains marked by profound
10-34793

S/PV.6308

mutual mistrust, with majority Governments having
reinforced the divisions between the Maoist and
non-Maoist parties for nearly two years. In that
polarized climate, the Maoists — the largest political
party — have remained in opposition for the past year.
Other parties have challenged the Maoists’
commitment to multiparty democracy and the rule of
law and have called on them to abandon recourse to
violence. The Maoists, for their part, have expressed
doubts about the commitment of other major parties to
the socio-political changes foreseen by the peace
agreements, to the new constitution and to the fresh
elections that would follow. Several other current risks
to the peace process are touched on in the report before
the Council (S/2010/214), including the looming
deadline for the promulgation of a new constitution.
Tensions have worsened since my last report to
the Council in January (see S/PV.6260). Since early
March, clashes among political parties, especially their
youth wings, have increased. Localities began
reporting renewed extortion or forced donations by the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M),
calling to mind wartime practices. According to
reliable reports, Maoist cadres were told to prepare for
revolt. Meanwhile, the Defence Ministry announced
that fresh recruitment to the Nepal Army would begin,
in breach of the peace agreements. Overt challenges
have grown to the federal, secular and republican basis
of the Interim Constitution. Madheshi leaders have
expressed deep frustration at their sense of exclusion
from the centre of policymaking and from the highlevel political mechanism. The security situation in the
Terai remains a concern, and across the country chief
district officers feel increasingly beleaguered.
Those events, combined with the lack of decisive
progress on the constitution and on the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel, have stoked
public unease over a possible return to open conflict or
of an autocratic pre-emption of Nepal’s democratic
transition. The death of Nepali Congress President
Girija Prasad Koirala has prompted a tripartite
leadership struggle within the party. Along with
continued deep factionalism within the Communist
Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist) (UML), has
exacerbated the political stalemate.
Last July, G. P. Koirala proposed the
establishment of the high-level political mechanism to
break that stalemate. The initiative itself became the
subject of numerous preconditions, but the mechanism

10-34793

was finally established in January and met a few times
before Mr Koirala’s death on 20 March. The high-level
political mechanism was a step towards addressing one
of the long-term deficits of the peace process, namely,
the weak architecture of negotiation, consultation and
monitoring of the implementation of past agreements.
But it may turn out to have been too little and too late.
In recent days, the Government and the Maoists have
accused one another of actual or imminent breaches of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, a reminder that
no overall monitoring mechanism exists.
The Maoists brought large numbers of supporters
to Kathmandu for May Day, followed by an indefinite
general strike, from 2 May, calling on the Government
of Madhav Kumar Nepal to step down and pave the
way for a Government of national unity. The Prime
Minister has rejected calls for his immediate
resignation, but has said that he will not be an obstacle
if an understanding is reached among the parties.
UNMIN has warned of the grave risks to the
peace process should the stand-off persist. The
Government has said that the Nepal Army will
intervene if the Maoist protest should turn violent, and
has placed the national security forces on high alert.
The Maoists have insisted that their protest will remain
peaceful. However, one member of the Maoist army
was found in possession of a hand grenade while
travelling on a public bus, a reckless act which
UNMIN immediately condemned; and Maoist
supporters were arrested in Kathmandu with five
homemade socket bombs. Ingredients used in the
manufacture of improvised explosive devices were
reportedly seized from a Kathmandu hotel.
By the conclusion of the fourth day of the general
strike, several clashes had occurred between Maoists
and local residents in different localities, and there are
reports that counter-campaigns may be organized, which
can be expected to exacerbate tensions. Economic losses
from the strike are significant. Party workers have
started to suffer from waterborne diseases, and
temperatures are high in Kathmandu and the Terai. The
UCPN-M has reportedly seized a few Nepal Army
officers in civilian dress and handed them over to the
security forces while publicly accusing them of spying.
The overall level of control and restraint shown
by the Government and the Maoists is commendable.
All the same, the risks grow from one day to the next.
This situation should not be allowed to continue, and

3

S/PV.6308

all encouragement is needed for both sides to deepen
their discussion, come to agreement and resolve the
crisis speedily.
In 10 days, UNMIN will conclude its current
mandate, extended at the requested of the Government
of Nepal in January on the basis that the Mission’s
remaining activities would be completed at least two
weeks before 28 May, the date on which Nepal’s new
constitution was to be promulgated, according to the
Interim Constitution.
Although the drafting of a new federal
constitution was the primary task of the Constituent
Assembly, the parties have not agreed on either the
appropriate federal structure for Nepal or the future
form of Government. In mid-April, the leaders of the
governing coalition parties — the Nepali Congress and
the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified MarxistLeninist) — said that the constitution could not be
drafted by the deadline. In response to widespread
alarm over a political vacuum being created on 29 May,
the Speaker of the Constituent Assembly, Subas
Nembang, recently advised that there is no legal or
constitutional impediment to extending the tenure of
the Constituent Assembly, as all provisions of the
Interim Constitution can be amended except those on
Nepal’s republican and federal nature. Extending the
term of the Constituent Assembly is among the issues
now under negotiation.
Also under negotiation is how to resolve the future
of nearly 20,000 Maoist army personnel, which lies at
the heart of the peace process. Under the peace
agreements, they are to be integrated into the security
forces or rehabilitated. The question of how many might
be integrated has only recently become the subject of
open discussion and negotiation among the parties.
At the initial stages, the Government proposed
that 3,000, or some 15 per cent of the verified total
Maoist army personnel, be brought into the country’s
security forces, while the UCPN-M asserted that all
their members should be accommodated. The Technical
Committee has undertaken some planning for
rehabilitation packages, including a cash component,
for the remainder. Since March, however, the Maoist
members have not taken part in meetings of the Special
Committee. Negotiators in the present impasse report
that the Nepali Congress and UML are pressing for an
agreement on the numbers to be integrated, while

4

UCPN-M wishes first to agree on the modalities for
integration.
The former Maoist combatants urgently need
solutions, as individuals and as a key to the peace
process of Nepal. As the recent experience of
discharging the disqualified personnel shows on a far
smaller scale, the integration and rehabilitation of the
larger number of verified personnel requires a carefully
planned and managed process, with details worked out
well in advance of implementation. Poorly-executed
social rehabilitation or an excessive reliance on cash
packages can sow the seeds of future problems. Earlier
in the year, Nepali commentators voiced concern at the
discharge of disqualified personnel with training and
educational possibilities that are strictly optional. I urge
the parties to invest adequately in the planning, design,
implementation, monitoring and oversight of all phases
of the integration and rehabilitation exercise, with
which the United Nations remains available to assist.
Resolution 1909 (2010) of last January called on
UNMIN, working with the parties, to make
arrangements for its withdrawal and for the handingover of its residual monitoring responsibilities. As the
report before the Council notes, UNMIN proceeded to
conduct extensive consultations with the parties, both
bilaterally and jointly.
In response to our expectations of a detailed
discussion of options that would permit the transfer of
monitoring, the parties designated senior members
familiar with the peace process and with the role of
UNMIN. Five of the six participants were current or
former ministers, three are members of the Special
Committee on integration and rehabilitation, and three
had either been part of the original peace process
negotiating teams or otherwise engaged in peace
initiatives. Four of the six are now part of the task
force seeking to resolve the current crisis.
Between 14 March and 26 April, we engaged in
some 12 hours of collective discussion during three
review meetings, considering alternatives to UNMIN
and the expectations the major political actors hold of
the Mission. Conducting the discussions under
Chatham House rules contributed to frank and
productive debate. In accordance with the request of
the Security Council, UNMIN proposed several options
that would reduce or eliminate entirely our monitoring
role, including its replacement or supplementation by a
mixed military body, by a national civilian body, or by

10-34793

S/PV.6308

consolidating cantonments or weapons storage
containers, making clear that our suggestions were not
exhaustive.
The parties conveyed unanimously that UNMIN’s
departure at this point in the peace process would not
be beneficial. They also conveyed that alternative
monitoring arrangements were not feasible. They
recommended that UNMIN’s role be relevant to the
current state of the peace process and, in particular,
that UNMIN assist the Special Committee on the
planning and implementation of integration and
rehabilitation. The group also asked that UNMIN be
ready to facilitate other aspects of the peace process, as
might be requested. Disagreement emerged over the
nature of UNMIN monitoring, with some suggesting
that UNMIN should no longer monitor the Nepal Army
due to changed circumstances, but focus exclusively on
the Maoist army, while others proposed that UNMIN
monitor the integration process itself, as well as the
democratization of the Nepal Army.
In successive letters requesting the extension of
UNMIN’s mandate, the Government of Nepal has
referred to the important role played by UNMIN in
providing support and facilitation within its mandate to
Nepal’s nationally-driven peace process. As the report
now before the Council notes, the issues on which the
parties expressed agreement in our consultations are
also issues to which UNMIN can strengthen support
within its existing mandate. There is manifest logic in
linking the departure of UNMIN to the resolution of
the matter of the Maoist army personnel. And, in a
separate development, UNMIN recently facilitated a
high-level but low-key resolution of a disagreement
between the Maoists and the Government on the issue
of payments to Maoist army personnel in the
cantonments.
As the Council is well aware, UNMIN is set up to
operate in an environment of relative confidence and
relative compliance by the parties with the agreements
they themselves have negotiated. The Agreement on
the Monitoring of the Management of Arms and
Armies, which placed restrictions on both armies and
assigned to UNMIN a light monitoring role, was
foreseen as a short-term arrangement. Between the
April 2008 election and January 2009, the number of
arms monitors was reduced from 186 to 90, and then to
73, the minimum requirement, which also presupposed
that the need for UNMIN monitoring would soon come
to an end.

10-34793

Through the many challenges of Nepal’s peace
process, the Security Council has often underlined its
understanding and support. The process has progressed
with relative speed, notably in its early stages, but also
with dramatic setbacks. It is a year today since the
Council met to the news of the resignation of thenPrime Minister Prachanda, following his unsuccessful
attempt to sack the Chief of Army Staff. Despite a
number of fragile moments, the parties have kept the
peace. It is imperative that their commitment to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement be reinforced, as
there is considerable distance still to travel.
The political parties speak of the logical
conclusion of the peace process in the near term as
being attained when the Maoist army personnel are
integrated and rehabilitated, or when the new
constitution is adopted. But this process is ultimately
about resolving long-term underlying causes of the
conflict. Serious challenges remain, such as the
exclusion of marginalized groups, the lack of basic
services and adequate security for all, and the search
for justice, as is particularly evident in the consistent
impunity granted to Maoist and Government actors
alike for past and current human rights violations.
Many
Nepalese
are
disappointed,
their
expectations of the peace process still unfulfilled.
There is no room in this peace process for violence,
and addressing the role of armed actors is a high
priority and a cornerstone of a sustained peace. The
parties, too, can demonstrate greater seriousness in
monitoring and being held to their prior commitments.
During his visit to Nepal in March, Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe warned that fully half of all peace
processes fail within a decade. With the strong
encouragement of all supporters of the peace process,
Nepal’s political parties can and must pull the process
back from its present disarray and animosity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of May. I extend my sincere
thanks to you for providing me with this opportunity to
speak before the Council.
We too have taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in

5

S/PV.6308

Nepal (UNMIN) (S/2010/214), which highlights an
assessment of the situation in Nepal over the past four
months. Furthermore, I acknowledge the remarks just
made by Ms. Karin Landgren, Representative of the
Secretary-General, on the latest status of Nepal’s peace
process. However, I would like to stress that conflict
has not returned to Nepal and that the overall situation
is very much under control despite the current tensions.
The Council is aware that at the moment, we are
going through a difficult time in the country, with some
roadblocks in the peace process and the constitutionmaking exercise, coupled with the agitation caused by
the opposition party. Following the past tradition of
resolving mutual differences with dialogue and
compromise, we are hopeful that it will be possible to
bridge the differences, while keeping the long-term
perspective of the peace process in mind.
Commitment to and the effective fulfilment of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement are key to movement
out of the current situation. After all, it was to raise the
quality of life of the people through stable, democratic
and accountable governance that Nepal went through
various movements and transformation processes in the
past several decades. The general welfare of the
greatest number of people, if not immediately all the
people, is the fulcrum around which the whole process
of change and progress revolves. It is on that basis that
the resolution of the current situation will be found. As
I speak here, substantive and serious dialogue is under
way among the major political parties in order to find a
reasonable compromise that we hope will substantially
move forward the peace process.
The Government of Nepal is committed to
making sure that we reach the logical conclusion of the
peace process, with the sole objective of ensuring
stability, peace and prosperity for the people of Nepal.
The people of Nepal have long waited, with great hope
and expectation, to resolutely move ahead towards the
post-transition era.
Looking over the long term perspective, however,
the nationally driven peace process of Nepal has
achieved some remarkable progress since the signing of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on 21 November
2006. The promulgation of the Interim Constitution,
followed by the elections to the Constituent Assembly,
and subsequently, the declaration of Nepal as the
Federal Democratic Republic stand as notable
achievements. Moreover, in the past several months, the

6

successful discharge of disqualified Maoist combatants,
with the help of the United Nations, has reinforced our
belief that our peace process can deliver substantial
progress, even though at times it moves slowly, with
occasional setbacks. The fact that the process of
discharging the disqualified was completed recently,
within the shortest possible time once it started, also
reassures us that once modalities are agreed upon,
implementation of the issues in question will be
expedited.
We have seen elsewhere in the world that
transition from a situation of armed conflict to one of
lasting peace and stability is always fraught with many
uncertainties and obstacles. That is the nature of such
conflict-induced transformations. We may establish
peace with a great breakthrough, but for peace to be
sustained, we need to address a myriad of issues that
surround that undertaking.
Nepal’s peace process, historic and unique as it
is, is not confined solely to the signing of the Peace
Agreement and elections to the Constituent Assembly.
It also means writing a constitution that guarantees
multiparty democracy, human rights, a federal structure
and inclusive governance. It has a much broader
agenda to deal with the historic transformation of
Nepal’s political, economic and social structure.
This transformation process is, undoubtedly, a
colossal task by any measure. Taking this historic
challenge as an opportunity, we have already taken
some hard-hitting but specific measures to ensure
inclusiveness and democratic governance. The
Government and all the stakeholders in Nepal have,
therefore, time and again expressed commitment to
bringing the peace process to a meaningful conclusion
with that broad objective.
Concerns have been expressed in different
quarters as to the future course of Nepal’s peace
process, especially in the light of the slow progress in
meeting the constitutional deadline to promulgate a new
constitution for the country, which is an integral part of
the peace process. I take this opportunity to assure the
Council that dialogue is continuing among the major
political parties on the future course of action to be
followed in the post-28 May 2010 situation.
Given the seriousness of the issues involved and
the commitment of the major political players to
resolving the deadlock through dialogue, we are
hopeful that a solution acceptable to all stakeholders in

10-34793

S/PV.6308

the peace process and to the general public will be
found, with a view to ensuring that Nepal’s peace
process reaches its logical end in a reasonable period
of time, in keeping with the high hopes and aspirations
of the Nepalese people.
The Government and the people of Nepal remain
thankful to the United Nations for having provided a
helping hand since the advent of our peace process.
UNMIN has already accomplished many of the tasks
set out in its original mandate by fulfilling many of the
key responsibilities, including the elections to the
Constituent Assembly.
There are always successes and shortcomings in a
complex peace process like ours. We need to build on
the positive prospects to maintain the momentum, and
we are aware of that. For that reason, and also as we
are at an important juncture of the peace process, the
Government of Nepal has decided to seek the extension
of UNMIN’s mandate.

10-34793

As the Government of Nepal is fully committed
to pursuing the peace process with vigour and agility,
with the help of all stakeholders, we are confident that
we will be able to conclude the peace process with
tangible progress in the days ahead. We highly value
the international goodwill, support and cooperation in
our peace process, including that of the Security
Council.
I am hopeful that the Council will favourably
consider the request of my Government for the
extension of the mandate of UNMIN until 15 September
2010.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

7
