100

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

present resolution, to consider, as appropriate, new
projects in outer space activities and to submit a report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, including
its views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
98th plenary meeting
15 December l 983

38/81. Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations in ali their
aspects
The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965. 2053 A (XX) of 15
December 1965, 2249 (S-V) of23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII)
of 13 December 1967, 2451 (XXIII) of 19 December
1968, 2670 (XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of
17 December 1971, 2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972,
3091 (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3239 (XXIX) of 29
November 1974, 3457 (XXX) of 10 December 1975, 31/
105 of 15 December 1976, 32/106 of 15 December 1977,
33/114 of 18 December 1978, 34/53 of 23 November
1979, 35/121 of 11 December 1980, 36/37 of 18 November 1981 and 37/93 of 10 December 1982,
Taking account ofthe views expressed and issues raised
on the question of peace-keeping during the debate on the
ítem,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security,
Conscious of the vital role played by United Nations
peace-keeping forces in support of decisions of the Security
Council in discharging its primary responsibility in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing that the presence of United Nations peacekeeping forces authorized by the Security Council in conflict areas demonstrates the common concern of Members
ofthe United Nations in the preservation of stability and
easing of tension in those areas,
Aware ofthe extremely difficult financia! situation ofthe
United Nations peace-keeping forces in the light of the
heavy burden incurred by troop contributors, especially
those from developing countries,
Stressing the collective responsibility of Member States,
in accordance with the Charter, to share equitably the
financia! burdens of such operations established by the
Security Council, which should continue to be conducted
with maximum efficiency and economy,
Urging, at the same time, that other areas of cooperation with and support for United Nations peacekeeping forces should be encouraged,
Recognizing the need to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of United Nations peace-keeping forces,
Commending the Secretary-General for the way he is
carrying out peace-keeping operations of the United
Nations decided upon by the Security Council,
Convinced that the importance of the issue of United
Nations peace-keeping is such that the United Nations
should continue to work for a comprehensive review ofthe
whole question of peace-keeping operations in ali their
aspects,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee on
Peace-keeping Operations, 16
16 N38/381.
17 See A/38/132-S/15675 and Corr.l and 2. annex. sect. L para. 171.
18 See A/34/542, annex, sect. l. paras. 280-299.

l. Expresses its conviction that peace-keeping operations ofthe United Nations, conducted with the consent of
the host country and with respect for its sovereignty and
territorial integrit). in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. are an essential function of the United
Nations, though not a substitute for the peaceful settlement of disputes and therefore of a temporary nature;
.., Urges ali concerned to co-operate fully in the implementation of United Nations peace-keeping operations;
3. Reaffirms and renews the mandate given to the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations by relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Expresses concern about the difficult financia! situation of United Nations peace-keeping operations;
5. Urges again the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in accordance with its mandate, to
renew its efforts to work towards the completion of agreed
guidelines that will govern the conduct of United Nations
peace-keeping operations in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, and to devote further attention to
specific questions relating to the practica! implementation
of peace-keeping operations;
6. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to submit a status report on its present situation, to determine the areas of possible progress and other
arcas where progress would be difficult to achieve or is still
pending, and to consider proposals to reactivate and
rationalize its work;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations
m ali their aspects".
98th plenary meeting
15 December 1983

38/82. Questions relating to information
A
The General Asscmblr.
Recalling its resolutions 34/ l 8 l and 34/ l 82 of 18
December 1979, 35/201 of 16 December 1980, 36/149 A
of 16 December 1981 and 3 7/94 A and B of 1O December
1982,
Stressing anew the importance of the establishment of a
new world information and communication order and, in
this regard, recalling the relevant provisions of the Political Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, 17 as well as the relevant provisions of the Final Declaration of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September
1979, 18 of the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs ofNon-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 9 to 13 February 1981, 19 and of the fifth and
sixth meetings of the Intergovernmental Council of Ministers of lnformation of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Georgetown in May 1981 and at Valletta in June 1982,
Recalling the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary
session, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, 2º
¡q See A/36/116 and, orr. l. annex.

2il See Ai36!534. annn 11

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Recalling the relevant provisions of the Final Act of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
signed at Helsinki on 1 August 1975, and those ofthe Concluding Document of the meeting of representa ti ves of the
participating States of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, held at Madrid from 11 November
1980 to 9 September 1983,
Reca/ling, on the occasion of the thirty-fifth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 21 its article 19, which provides that everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression and that this right includes
freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas through any
media and regardless of frontiers, and article 29, which
stipulates that these rights and freedoms may in no case be
exercised contrary to the purposes and principies of the
United Nations,
Recalling a/so resolutions 4/ 19 and 4/21 adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-first session, held at Belgrade from 23 September to 28 October
1980, 22 and resolution 2/03 adopted by the General Conference at its fourth extraordinary session, held in París
from 23 November to 3 December 1982, 21
Recalling a/so the relevant provisions of the Declaration
on the Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace, 24
Recallingfurther the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Council ofMinisters oflnformation ofthe members ofthe
League of Arab States at its nineteenth regular session,
held at Tunis on 9 and 10 October 1983,
Considering that international co-operation in the field
of communication development should take place on the
basis of equality, justice, mutual advantage and the principies of international law,
Conscious that, in arder progressively to remedy existing
imbalances, it is essential to strengthen and intensify the
development of infrastructures, networks and resources in
the communication field and thus encourage a wider and
better balanced dissemination of information,
Conscious that the development of communication
infrastructures, including national and regional capacity
for indigenous message production and dissemination, is
one of the important factors of genuine participation by a
large majority of developing countries in international
exchanges,
Emphasizing its full support for the lnternational Programme for the Development of Communication of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, which constitutes an important step in the
development of the infrastructures of communication in
the developing countries and the establishment of a new
wotld information and communication order,
Recognizing the central role ofthe United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the field
ofinformation and communication within its mandate, as
well as the progress accomplished by that organization in
that field,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the implementation
of the lnternational Programme for the Development of
Communication and the establishment of a new world
information and communication order, and on the impact
21 Resolution 217 A (III).
22 See United Nations Educational. Scientífic and Cultural Organizatíon.
Records ofthe General Conference. Twemi·-first Sesswn. vol. 1, Resolulions.
sect. III.
23 lbid., Four/h Extraordinarv Session. vol. 1 and corrigendum. Resolutions, sect. II.
•
24 Resolution 3 3/7 3.

101

of current technological developments and practices and
their application in the communication and information
sector; 25
2. Under/ines, on the occasion of the fifth anniversary
of the Declaration on Fundamental Principies conceming
the Contribution of the Mass Media to Strengthening
Peace and International Understanding, to the Promotion
of Human Rights and to Countering Racialism, Apartheid
and Incitement to War. 26 the importance of efforts made
so far for its implementation;
3. Again calls upon ali Member States and ali organizations of the United Nations system, intemational, govemmental and non-governmental organizations and professional organizations in the field of communication to exert
every effort to make better known through ali means at
their disposal the issues underlying the demand for the
development of communication capacities in developing
countries as a step towards the establishment of a new
world infarmation and communication order;
4. ( ·ons1ders that the lnternational Programme far the
Development of Communication represents a significant
step towards the establishment of a new world information
and communication order and welcomes the decisions
adopted by the Intergovernmental Council of the Programme at its fourth session, held at Tashkent, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, from 5 to 12 September
1983: ,,

5. Notes with satisfaction the co-operation ex1stmg
between the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and ali other
organizations of the United Nations system, particularly
the International Telecommunication Union, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
the Universal Postal Union, whose projects have been
approved by the lntergovernmental Council of the Programme;
6. Expresses its appreciation to all Member States that
have made or pledged a contribution towards the implementation of the Programme;
7. Again calls upon Member States and organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system as well as other
international govemmental and non-govemmental organizations and concerned public and prívate enterprises to
respond to the appeals of the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to contribute to the Programme by making
greater financia! resources available, as well as more staff,
equipment, technologies and training resources;
8. Notes with satisfaction the progress made under the
Global Satellite Project for Dissemination and Exchange
of lnfarmation, executed by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in cooperation with INTELSA T and INTERSPUTNIK and
with the regional radio broadcasting unions in Africa,
Asia, Europe and the Arab States and supported by the
Programme:
9. Notes that very few countries have responded positively to resolution 4/22 concerning the reduction of telecommunication tariffs far news exchanges, adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-first session, 22 and calls once again upon Member States to
respond positively and effectively to that resolution;
25 A/38i457. anne,.
26 United Nations Educat,onal. Scientilic and Cultural Organization,
Record.,· o(the General Con/i!rcm·e. Tw,,ntieth Session. vol. 1, Resoluttons, pp.
100-104

27 See A/381457, annex. scrt I.A.

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

102

10. Reaffirms its strong support for the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and its
efforts to establish a new world information and communication order, as well as for that organization's second
medium-term plan for 1984-1989 and its stimulation of
research with a view to meeting the challenges of accelerated technological development and the increasing role of
communication in societies and cultures;
11. Requests the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
to continue his efforts in the information and communication field and to submit to the General Assembly. at its
thirty-ninth session, a detailed report on the application of
the Programme and the activities relating to the establishment of a new world information and communication
order and, in co-operation with the International Telecommunication Union, on the effects of the accelerated development of communication technologies on societies and
cultures.
98th plcnary meeting
I 5 Deccmher 1983

B
The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolutions 3535 (XXX) of 17 December
1975, 31/139 of 16 December 1976, 33/115 A to C of 18
December 1978, 34/181 and 34/182 of 18 December
1979, 35/201 of 16 December 1980, 36/149 B of 16
December 1981 and 37/94 B of 10 December 1982 on
questions relating to information,
Recalling article 19 of thc Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 21 which provides that everyone has the
right to freedom of opinion and expression and that this
right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and
ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers, and
article 29, which stipulates that these rights and freedoms
may in no case be exercised contrary to the purposes and
principies of the United Natiom,
Recalling a/so articles 19 and 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 28
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Política) Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983. 17 in which the importance ofthe establishment ofa new world information and
communication order was stressed anew, as well as the relevant provisions ofthe Final Declaration ofthe Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979. 18
of the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries. held at New Delhi
from 9 to 13 February 1981, 19 and of the fifth and sixth
meetings of the Intergovernmental Council of Ministers of
lnformation of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Georgetown in May 1981 and at Valletta in June 1982,
Reca/ling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 197 4, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
28 Resolution 2200 A (XXI). anncx.
29 Report o{the lnternational Con/érencc 1n Support o/ 1he Strugg/c o/thc
Namibian Peop/e for lndependencc. l'am. 25-29 l{)fil 198./ (A/CONF 120•
13). para. 238.

Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and intemational economic co-operation,
Recalling the Declaration on Fundamental Principies
concerning the Contribution of the Mass Media to
Strengthening Pcacc and International Understanding, to
thc Promotion of Human Rights and to Countering
Racialism, Apartheid and Incitement to War, 2~ as well as
thc relevant rcsolut1ons on information and mass communications adopted by thc General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its ninetecnth, twentieth, twenty-first and
twenty-sccond scssions,
Reca/ling the relevant provisions of the Final Act of the
Conferencc on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
signed at Helsinki on I August 1975, and those ofthe Concluding Documcnt of thc Madrid meeting of representativcs of the participating States of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe, held from 11 Novcmber 1980 to 9 Scptember 1983.
Recalling a/so thr relevant provisions ofthe Declaration
on the Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace. 24
Taking note of that part of the Programme of Action on
Namibia of the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle ofthc Namibian People for Independence, held in
Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983, relcvant to the activities
rcquested of the Dcpartment of Public lnformation to
develop and fürther strengthen the dissemination of information regarding the struggle for independence of the people ofNamibia, with a view to reaching the broadest possible public by meaos of a more systematic and better
co-ordinated information campaign, 29
Taking note ofthe Geneva Declaration on Palestine and
the Programme of Action for the Achievement of Palestinian Rights, unanimously adopted by the International
Conferencc on the Question of Palestine, 30 in particular
scction II.D of thc Programme of Action,
Conscious of thc need for ali countrics, the United
Nations system as a whole and ali others concerned, to collaborate in the establishment of a new world information
and communication order based, inter afia, on the free circulation and wider and bctter balanced dissemination of
information. guaranteeing the diversity of sources of information and free access to information, and, in particular,
thc urgent nccd to change the dependent status of the
developing countrics in thc field of information and comm unication, as the principie of sovereign equality among
nations extends also to this field, and intended also to
strengthen peace and international understanding, enabling ali persons to participate effectively in political, economic, social and cultural life and promoting understanding and fricndship among ali nations and human rights,
Reatfirming that the establishment of a new world information and communication order is linked to the new
international economic order and is an integral part of the
international development process,
Emphasizing thc important role that public information
plays in promoting understanding of and support for the
establishment of thc new intemational economic order
and international co-operation for development.
l:°fnphasizing the role that public information plays in
promoting support for universal disarmament and in
increasing awareness of the rclationship between disarmamcnt and dcvclopmcnt among as broad a public as possihlc.
JO Report o/ thc /11/cmatwnal ( ·on/áenci· 011 thc Questwn ,,¡ l'a/estme.
(;c11cva, 29 .-l11g11s1-7 Sc¡>l,'111h,·r /98.i (l lnitcd Nations publication. Sales No.
r: 8.1 1.21 ). chap. l. sccts. \ ami B.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of thc Special Political Com_m_•_·u_e_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _l0_3

Reaffirming the primary role which the General Assembly is to play in elaborating, co-ordinating and harmonizing United Nations policies and activities in thc field of
information and recognizing the central and important
role ofthe United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization in the field of information and communication,
Taking note of the statement by the Under-Secretar)General for Public Information. on I November
1983, 31 on the question of equitable geographical balance
and professional requirements in reinforcing thc statT of
the Department of Public lnformation.
Taking note of its resolution 371234 of 21 December
1982 entitled "Programme planning".
Emphasizing the complementarity of the activities in
the field of information and communication and the nced
to strengthen co-operation and co-ordination between the
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system that <leal with ditTerent aspects of information and
communication,
Emphasizing its full support for the lnternational Programme for the Development of Communication, which
constitutes an important step in the development of thc
infrastructures of communication in the developing countries,
Conscious that the transfer of technology to dcveloping
countries is vital for the acceleration of the establishment
of a new world information and communication order
based on justice, freedom and equity,
Taking note of its resolution 3 7/92 of I O December
1982 entitled "Principies Governing the Use by States of
Artificial Earth Satellites for lntcmational Direct Television Broadcasting",
Expressing its satisfaction with the work ofthe Committee on lnformation as reflected in its report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, .1 2
Expressing its appreciation to the Joint United Nations
lnformation Committee for its efforts towards improving
co-ordination of the public information activities of thc
various organizations of the United Nations system,
Taking note with satisjaction of the report of the Secretary-General on questions relating to information, 33
Also taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization, 25
1. Approves the report of the Committee on lnformation 32 and ali the recommendations contained in paragraph 94 A, annexed to the present resolution. affirms the
requests and appeals reproduced thcrein and urges their
full implementation;
2. Reaffirms the mandate given to the Committec on
lnformation by the General Assembly in its resolution 34/
182;
3. Requests the Committee on lnformation. keeping in
mind its mandate, the essential tasks of which are to continue to examine the policies and activities of the Department of Public lnformation of the Secretariat, to continue
to promote the establishment of a new, more just and
effective world information and communication order and
to continue to seek the co-operation and active participation of ali organizations of the United Nations system,
particularly the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the Intemational Telecommu31 Ojjic,al Records vfthe Cicneral Assemh/y. Th1r/1'-t'1Khlh Se11w.•1. Specwl
Political Committee, 17th meeting, paras. 49-58.
32 !bid., Thirty-e1gh1h Sn\/lm. Supp/emml .\o . .' 1 (A, .18 21 and Curr 1

and 2).

nication Union, while taking ali possible steps to avoid
any overlapping of activities on this subject;
4. Rcaffmns its strong support for the United Nations
Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization and for
its cfforts to promote thc establishment of a new world
information and communication order;
5. Reitcrates its appca/ to Member States. to the information and communication media. both public and prívate, as well as to non-govemmental organizations, to disseminate more widely objcctive and better balanced
information about the activities of the United Nations
and, lntcr afia, about the efforts of the developing countries towards their economic, social and cultural progress
and about the etTorts or the intemational community to
achievc intemational social justice and economic development. international peace and security and the progressive
elimination of international inequities and tensions, such
dissemination being aimed at achieving a more comprehensive ami realistic image of thc activities and potential
of the United Nations s:ystem in all its purposes and
cndea vours;
6. Rcqucsts that the Joint United Nations Information
Committee. as the cssential mstrument for inter-agency
co-ordination and co-operation in the field of public information, be strengthened and made more effective and that
its secrctariat elaborate new methods of work and longertcrm indica ti ve planning and joint action, especially in the
promotion of a new v.orld information and communication order:
7. Reajjirms the importance of the rapidly increasing
role of United Nations public information programmes in
fostering public understanding and support of United
Nations activities and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to review the curren\ activities ofthe Department
of Public lnformation with a view to ensuring a better and
more efficient use of its available resources in cooperation, as needcd, with the Joint Inspection Unit;
8. Requests the Department of Public lnformation to
contribute more effectively, through its training programmes, to the development of human, managerial and technical resources of the mass media from devcloping countries:
9. Rcqucsts the Secretary-General to take urgent steps,
within the next programme budget, to enable the Caribbean U nit in the Radio Servicc of the Department of Pubhe Information to begin a meaningful work programme, as
outlincd in the rclevant report of the SecretaryGeneral, 34 in particular by the introduction of full program ming in French;Creole and limited programming in
Dutch/Papiamento:
1O. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to cnsure that regional television news
magazines are produced for national broadcasting organizations which request them and undertakc to broadcast
them on a regular basis. taking into account the priorities
set by the General Assembly:
11. Invites the Dcpartment of Public lnformation, in
view of the decision of the Govemmcnt of Indonesia. to
rcopen, as a matter of priority. the United Nations Information Centre at Jakarta:
12. Invites the Department of Public Information to
give a favourable repl) to the request of the Govemment
of the United Republic of Cameroon that the United
Nations lnformation Centre at Yaoundé be strengthened
and that a full-time din·ctor be appointed:
33 A, 38 387 and Add. l
14 ·\ ¡\( •. 198;(•';

General Assembly--Thirty-eighth Session

104

13. Invites the Dcpartment of Public lnformation to
give a favourable reply to the request of the Government
ofthe Republic of Burundi that the United Nations lnformation Centre at Bujumbura be strengthencd and that a
full-time director be appointed;
14. Invites thc Commission on Transnational Corporations, when cxchanging information with the Committec
on Information, as encouraged by rccommcndation 21 of
the Committee annexed to the present rcsolution, to draw
the attention ofthe Committee to documents produced by
the Secretariat relevant to the Committee's mandatc. in
particular those ofthe United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, when they have been considered by
the Commission, together with the Commission's comments on them, provided that care is takcn to avoid overlapping or duplication of work hetwecn the two intergovernmental bodies;
15. Requests the Department of Public lnformation to
cover adequately policies and practiccs which violatc thc
principies of international law relative to belligerent occupation, in particular the Geneva Convention relativc to
the Protection of Ci vilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, 35 wherever thcy oceur. especially those policíes and practices which frustratc the attainment and exercise of the inalienable and national legitimatc rights of thc
Palcstinian people in accordancc with thc relcvant resolutions of the United Nations:
16. Expresses its satis/action with the work of the
Round Table on a Ncw World Information and Communication Order organized jointly by the United Nations
and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, held at lnnsbruck, Austria, from 14 to
19 September 1983, and its subscquent report; 3 r,
17. Requests the Secretary-General to cnsure that the
Department of Public Information, jointly with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
convenes a second round table in 1985 in ordcr to follow
up in more detail the progress made towards the establishment of a new world information and communication
order, in which professional journalists, decision-makers
and researchers in the various disciplines concemed, representatives of the intemational media and profes~ional
organizations and associations would participate:
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Committee on Information, at its substantive session in
1984, on the implementation of ali the recommendations
contained in the Committee's report:
19. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution and. in particular. on
the implementation of ali thc recommendations contained
in the annex to the present rcsolution;
20. Requests the Committee on lnformation to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssion;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the itcm entitled "Qucstions relating
to information".
98th plenary meeting
15 Dcccmher 1983
ANNEX

Recommendations of the Committee on lnformation
1. The forty-three rccommendations of thc Committee on lnformation
approvcd by the General Assembly ín rc,olut10n 37 94 B of 10 Dccember
1982, as well as ali provisions nf the rcsolutínn, are reiterated. Thosr rcc
l5 United Nations, Trcalr Sem·,. ,ni. 7'i, No. 971. JI. 2X7.

ommcndat1ons pending 1mplementation should be implemented in full.
takrng into account the v1cws expressed by delegations al the 100th plenary
meeting of thc thtrty-sn cnth session of thc Assembly on I O December
19X2
1
The rnandate of the Comrn11tee on Information should be renewed
as set forth in (jcneral Assembly rcsolution 34/182 of 18 December 1979
and rcatlírmed 111 Assernhly resolu11ons 35/201 of ló Dccernhcr 1980. 36
149 of 16 Dcccmber 1981 and _,7 '94 of I O Decernber 1982.

i>RO\tOTION DI· 1111- 1--Sl>\Hl I\HMl'.""1 01 .-\ NI"\\, MORf· JLSI ANI> MURI· HH.l'-

rl\ I·

WORI D

INFORMA"IION

,\",Jl)

COMMllMCATION

•d REN{jflff1' Pl-,\TF AND IJ\iHR"IATIO'-IAI
Illi· 1-RH· CIR( l l \rl()r'-,.

,\]\:i)

ORDER

IJ',, n J\il>I-I)

TO

llNDERSTANDIN<t ANll BA"iH> OJ',,

Wl[)tR ,\'\.() Hl·rn:R H-\1 ¡\'1('1-1) DISSf-.Ml1'"ATIO!\

OI· INFURM-\flON

1. Ali rnuntnes. thc l lntted Nations systern as a whole. and ali others
rnnccrned, should collahorate in the establishment of a new world informatton and comrnunicatíon order bascd, 1n/cr aha. on thc free circulation
and wider and bctter balanced dissemination of information, guarantceing
thc diversíty of sources of inforrnation and free access to information, and.
ín particular, thc urgen! nced to change lhe dependen! status of the dcveloping countries in the lield of rnformation and communication as the prinnple uf sovereign equal1ty among natwns cxtends also to this field, and
,ntcnded also to strengthcn peace and mtemational understanding, enablrng ali persons to partinpate dfrctively in political. economic, social and
cultural lile, and promoting understanding and friendship among ali
na11ons and human right,.
4. An appeal should he addressed to thc intcrnational media to obtain
thctr support for the elforts of the intema11onal community towards global
development and. in part1cular, for the elforts of the developing countrics
for their uwn economir. sonal and cultural progress.
5. An appeal should he addrcssed to the whole llnited Nations system
to co-operatc in a conccrted manner, through its information services, in
promoting the dcvelopment actívities of the llnited Nations, in particular
thc improvcment of the rondit1ons of the lives of the people of the devclopmg countne-s.
6 Such appeals should he aimcd al achieving a more comprehensive
and realistic image of thl' act1vities and potential of the llnited Nations
systcm. in ali its purposes and endeavours. as laid down in the Charter of
the llnited Nations.
7.

The nced should he noted for the creation ofa chmatc ofconfidence

111 rclations among Sta tes as a means of casing tension and. in this context.

an appeal should be addressed to ali Statcs and mass media to help promote the purposes of strcngthening peace and understanding.
8. Reatlírming the primary role which the General Assembly is to pla}
m claborating. co-ordinatrng and harmonizing Unitcd Nations policies and
activ11ies in the lield ofinformation and recognizing thc central and importan! role of the llnited Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organ11.ation in the tield of informatíon and communication, the co-operation
hetween that organization and the United Nations in promoting the establishment of a new world information and communication order should
takc more regular forms. t·specially at the working leve), through which the
contribution of the Department of Pubhc Information to the elforts of the
l 'nitcd Nations Educat1onal, St·ientifir and Cultural Organization should
he maximized.
9. The Department of Public Informatíon should disseminate as
widcly as possible information on thc activities ofthe United Nations Educational. Scientific and ( ·ultural Organization in the establishment of a new
world information and communication ordcr and on the work of the Committl'e on lnformation in that tield.
l ll. The Committee on lnformation, noting the valuable etlort of the
l 1n1tcd Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the
promotion of a new world information and communication arder, recommends that the Department of Public Information take steps to avoid an}
overlapping of its activities on this subject wilh !hose of the United
Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization. while stressing
at thc same time the cver-growing significance of the close working coopcration betwecn the linited Nations and the latter organization.
11. Ali countries, tht· llnited Nations system as a whole. and others
rnncemed. should be called upon to givc thc llnited Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organintion adequate support and assistance in lht·
ticld of information and communication. The tifth anniversary of lhe Declaration on Fundamental Principies concerning thc Contribut10n of the
Mass Media to Strengthcning Peace and lnternational Understanding, lo

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee ------~- _ _ _ _ _ _ _l0_5_

the Promotion of Human R1ghts and tu Countenng Racialism. Apartheid
and lncitement to War. 26 should be marked b; thc General Assembly.

rcceivcs are appropriatel) ut1l11,·d rn Ihe p,·rformance of thc pubhc 111ti>rmation tasks of the llnitcd Nat1ons.

12. Thc Secretary-Cieneral should be requcsted to prescnt tn the General Assembly at its thirty-cighth session thc rcport of the Round Table on
a New World lnfonnation and Communication Order. held at lnnsbruck.
16
Austria, from 14 to 19 Sept,·mber 1983. •

(ul Wnh a , iew to further promotion and dn elopment of funct1onal
and mutually bcnclicial rn-opcratiun betwccn the Department and the
Pool, thc e,isting arrangcmcnts rn the Dcpartment for the rnnduct of this
co-opcration should be cstabl1'hcd on a more regular basi,:

13. An appeal should be addressed to the whole Unitcd Nations system and thc developed countries to co-opcratc in a concerted manncr
towards strengthening the informallon and communication infrastructurcs
of the developing countries in ac<:ordancc with the priori tics attached to
such areas by the developing countries. In this regard. full support for the
lnternational Programme for Dcvelopmcnt of Communication of the
United Nations Educational, Scientitíc and Cultural Organi,ation, which
constitutes an importan! step in the devclopmcnt of thcse infrastructures.
should be emphasized.

(h) In , iew of the successful joint rn, eragc h; thc Pool of importan!
conferenccs and othcr evcnts within thc l lnitcd Nations systcm. this practicc should he continued and furthn strcngthrned:

14. The Department of Public lnformation should further strengthen
its co-opcration with the Pool of Non-Ahgned News Agencies. as well as
with regional news agencies of developing countries. as this co-operation
constitutes a concrete step towards a more JUSI and equitable world tlow of
information. thus contributing to the establishment of a new world information and communication order.
15. The Unitcd Nations system, particularly the United Nations Educational. Scientitíc and Cultural Organization, should aim at the provision
of ali possible support and assistance to the developing countries with
regard to their interests and needs in the field of mformation and to actions
already adopted within the United Nations system. including, in particular:
(a) Assistance to developing countries in traming journalists and technical personnel and in setting up appropnatc cducational institut1ons and
research facilities:
(b) The granting of favourablc conditions to provide developing countries with access to such communication technology as is requisite for the
establishment of a national information and communication systcm and
corresponden! with the speciftc situation uf the country conccrned:
(e) The creation of condit1ons that will graduall~ cnable the devcloping
countries to produce the communication technology suited to their
national needs. as well as thc necessary programme material, specilically
for radio and tclevision broadcasting, by using their own resourccs:
(d ) Assistance in cstablishing telecommunication links at subregional,
regional and interregional levels, especially among developing countries.
free from any kind of conditions.
16. Ali the information activities of the Department of Public lnformation should be guided by, and carried out in conformity with. the principies of the Cha11er of the U nitcd Nations and the aspiration for a new
world information and communication order, as well as conform to the
consensus reached among States in resolutions 4/ 19. 4/21 and 4/22
adopted by thc General Conference of the United Nations Educationai,
Scientiftc and Cultural Organization at its twenty-first sess,on. 22
17. The Secretary-Gcneral should be rcquestcd to ensure that the activities of the Department of Public lnformation. as the focal point of the
public information tasks of the United Nations, should be strcngthened,
keeping in view the principies of the Charter of the United Nations and
along the lines established in the pertinent resolutions of the General
Assembly and the recommendations of thc Committee on lnformation. to
ensure a more coherent coverage of, and a better knowledge about, the
Unitcd Nations and its work. especially in its priority arcas, such as those
statcd in section 111, paragraph 1, of Assembly resolution 351201, including
international peace and security, disarmament. peace-keeping and peacemaking operations, decolonization. the promotion of human rights, the
struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination. economic, social and
development issues, the integration of womcn in the struggle for peace and
development, the establishment of the new international economic order
and ofa new world information and communication order, the work ofthe
United Nations Council for Namibia and programmcs on women and
youth.
CONTINUAllON m EXAMINAllON O> lJNIHI> NAIIO~S PUBI.IC INHJRMATION
POLICIES AND ACTIVITIFS, I'\/ lHF LIGHT 01- lH!'. !:'.VOi lJTtor-. 01- lr-.TFRNATIO!'•,;AI. Rl:'.LATIO'.'-lS, PARTICl IARI Y DLRINC.. 11-H PA'H TWO !)E( <\DFS, A!'ID

OF THE IMPERATl\'J-.S OJ- TlH l:SlAHLISHMl:Nl 01· THE NEW INTl-RNATIO!\Al.
ECONOMIC ORDI--R AND OF A NEW "'ORl I> INFORMo\TICJN AND { OM'1L1 r-.;l('A~
fll)f',,;

ORDER

18. The Department of Public lnformation should ensure that the
daily dispatchcs of the Pool of Non-Aligned Ncws Agencies which it
-17 A/ AC.198/64.

(<') Thc Dcpartment should cons1dn the poss1b1lity of utihting the dispatches reccived from thc Pool to estabhsh a data base on the mformat,on

and rommunicatíon facilities m th1,_· non-aligned countries.

19. In connection with thc trainmg programme l,lf JOurnahsts and
broadcastcrs from developing countrics that the Dcpartment of Puhlic
lnformation organizes cvery ycar, thc possibility should be rnnsidered of
allocating the last week ofthe programmc for a ,isit by them to one ufthc
developing countries for the purpose of acquaint,ng themselves with the
ways m which information on thc llnitcd Nations IS reeeived and utili1ed.
20. !'he Secrctary-(iencral should be rcqucstcd to makc availabk to
the Committce un lnformat1on. at ns substantive session in 1984, a rcport
on thc outrnmc of the artivities condueted b) the lnternational Telcrnmmumcation llmon with regard to thc World Communications Year.
21. Thc cxchange of inforrnat1nn bctwecn thc Committec on lnformation and thc Commission on Transnational Corporations rn matters pertainmg to the mandate of thc ( ·omm1tt,·c should he cncouragcd.

22. Thc Secretary-tieneral should be requested to suhmit to thc General Assembly at its thirty-eighth se~s,on thc final report on thc acquisition
of a l lnited Nations commun1rat1ons satellitc. m thc manncr outhned in
paragraph 20 of Assembly resolut10n 37 94 B.
23. The Secretary-General should b,· rcquestcd to implcment fully the
requcst. 111 paragraph 14 of General Assembly rcsolution .16: 149 B, that
present Lnited Nations short-wavc broadcasts ovcr rented transmitters
should be placed on a daily schedule throughout thc ycar. to the extent that
thi, can he accomplishcd through more cfkctivc utilirntion of ex1sting
resources.

24. Thc Secrctary-Gencral should be rcqu,·stcd to eontinuc thc cooperation bctwcen the Departnwnt of Pubhc lnformation and thc Un ion of
Nat1onal Radio and Telcvision Organi1ations of Africa. as well as w1th
radio stations whirh are mcmbcr, of that llnion. in order to broadcast
United Nations radio programmcs on those radio stations. and further
rcqucsts thc Sccretary-General to co-operate with the national radio broadcasting organizations in Africa for widcr hrnadcasting of llnited Nat1ons
radio prograrnmcs.
25. Thc Secrcta1,-Gencral should he requested to prescnt to the substantive session of the Comm,ttee on lnformation in 1984 a comprehcnsive report on the viability ofa world-w1de llnited Nations short-wavc network. taking into account thc vicws cxpresscd al the fifth substantive
scssion of the Committee.
26. The Secretary-General should be rcquested to implement fully the
proposals contained in his repon regardmg programming in the Portugucse
language in the .African llnit ofthe Radio Scrvice 37 and to take immcdialt'
steps for the strengthcning of programming in the French language.
27. rhc Secretary-Gcncral shnuld be requestcd to maintain the lunctions of the Middle East 1Arab1c l lnit as the producer of A rabie television
and radio programmes. to strcngthen and expand this unit through the
redeployment of existing rcsourrcs to enable it to function in an cffrctiv,·
manncr, and to repon to thc Committec on lnformation al its substantive
session in 1984 on the meas u res taken in implenientation nf this rcrnmmcndation.

28. In v1ew of the 1mportancc of l 'rnted Nations broadcasting for thc
European rcgion. steps should be taken to maintain and enhancc the functions of the European l lnit in the Radio Scrvicc through redeployment of
existing resources.
29. The inclusion of Bengalt and lndoncsian among the languagcs of
the Asían U nit of the Radio Sen·icc for the purpose of undertaking programming al a meaningful le, el, as approvcd in 1982, should be implemented in full and Bahasa Malaysia (Malay) should also be included
among the languagcs of thc unl! through rc,kployment of available
resources.

30. Whereas the French Languagc Production Scction of the Press and
Publications Division hardly has a,a,lablc the mcans to provide press
relcases in sufficient numbers to rneet the necds of the numerous dclegatlon, from ali gcographir area:-. \\'Íshing to use Frem:h as their \\-Orkíng lan-

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session

l06

guage. the Committee on lnformation rcquests that the Secretary-Gcneral
should provide that Sectiun with the appropnatc mea ns through bctter and
more equitabk use of available resources. The t umm,ttec rccomrncnds to
the Departmcnt of Public lnformation that 11 makc apprupriatc use of thc
official languages of thc U,·ncral Asscmbly in dornnlt'nts and audio, isual
material s. in view of thc nccd to disscminate more hruadly and dkctively
information on the activitics of the Unitcd Nat1om lo the greate.,t crossscction of the public, using thc grcatest number of communications mc,ha.
31, llnited Nat1ons mformation ccnttcs should continue to assist press
and mformation media m thcir rcspccti ,e countries. and, 111/er u/Ítl. promote the establishment ol a new world 111format1un and communica\1011
order.
32. While co-operation bctwcen thc Departmcnt of Public lnformatiun
and thc Unitcd Nations Devclopment Prograrnme in the tield should be
promotcd to the maximum extent, ti is also importan\ to bear in mind thc
intrinsü.: functiuns of UnitnJ Naliun~ mfünnaliun n:ntre~ as <listim:t frum

those of Unitcd Nations development activitics. Thc l inited Nations information centres should redouble their efforts to publici,e thc activities and
achievements of upcrational activities for dcvelopmcnt. including thosc of
the Programme, taking into arcount the priorities dctcrmined by the (icneral Assembly.
33. In countries whcre the si,c, population. th,· state ofmedta and nongovemmental and othcr orga111zations. or the role being played by thetr
Govemments in United Nations affatrs warrant 1t. separate United
Nations information centres should be established, as and whcn rcsourccs
become available. In other cases, the residen\ representatives or residen!
co-ordinators of the Unitcd Nations Dcvelopment Programme may be
entrusted with being acting directors of United Nations inforrnation centres. provided that they are periodically briefed and evaluatcd by thc
Departmcnt of Public lnformation with rcgard to thetr information tasks
and providcd that appropriatc local staffand cquipment can be allocatc·d to
them within availablc resources.
34. The Committce on lnformation, having rnns1dered the rcport of
the Secretary-General on thc study on ways and means to enhance the role
of the Unitcd Nations information centres within the structure of the
Department of Public lnformation 38 rernmmcnds that the clfrctiveness of
United Nations information centre, should contmue to he improved:
(a) Through thc continued rcvicw uf thc cxtcnt of dccentralization
which can be achieved within the mcrall guidance of the Department of
Public Information:
(b)

Through better training of centre directors and their personnel:

Through an improved feedback and rcporting system:
Where appropriate, through rcalloca\!on ofarnilablc rcsourrcs for
local reproduction and other neccssary expenditures:
(e) Through appointing the best qualified persons \\ith professional
expcrience from ali different geographical rcgions to the posts or centre
directors, in vicw of the incrcased importancc of thc work of the Unitcd
Nations information centres nctwork. taking into account Article 101. paragraph 3, of the Chartcr of the lln1ted Nations:
(e)

(d)

(/) Through filling existing vacancics al the level of information centre
director without further delay, in order to assure the continuation of thc
work of the centres under thc ncccssary prolt·,sional guidance of thc
Departmcnt uf Public lnformation:
(g) Through enabling the Externa! Relations Div1s1on of the Department of Public lnformation to fullíl its importan! role uf managcmcnt, guidance, supervision and monitoring of United Nations mlormation centres
in order to ensure that the universal character of the United Nations and
the manifold mandate of the Dcpartment be duly rcllcctcd in the work of
the information centres:
(h) Through strengthcning thc capacity uf and improving the scrviccs
rendercd by the centres within the ,·xisting resources ofthe Department of
Public lnformation, so that the centres can play their indispensable role or
fostering an inform~d public opinion abuut the l lnitcd Nations throughout
the world.

35. The Departmcnt of Public lnformation should focus on. and givc
wider coverage to, economic. social and devclopment activities throughout
the United Nations system, with the aim uf achieving a more comprchensive image of the activities and potenttal of thc Unitcd Nations system.
taking into account thc priorities set by the General Assembly. The Unitcd
Nations information centres, among others, should play an importan! role
in this regard. The Department of Public lnformation should encourage
the organization ofround-tablc discussiuns betwecn chicf editors for press.
radio and television serviccs of different countries.
38 A/AC 198/61.
39 Al AC 198/óO.

36. Thc Department uf Public lnformation should promote an
,nformed understanding of the work of the Unl\cd Nations in the arca
dcltncated in General Asscmbl) rcsolutions 34 1 146 of 17 Dccembcr 1979.
.16: 109 of lll lkccmbcr 1981 and 37/108 of 16 December 1982.
37
·1 he lommtttcc ,m lnformation tah·s note w1th apprenat1on ofthe
rc·port of the Scrrctar, .,jcneral on the study on ways and mcans to
cnhance thc role of thr Unitcd Nations information emires within tht·
structure uf thc Dcpartment uf Public lnformation. •18 Thc Secretary( iennal should bl' requcstcd to submit to the Committee at its substantive
scss1un in 1984 a detailcd rcport containing concrete proposals m rl'spect
of th,· suggestiuns prescntcd in paragraphs 44 to 46 of the repon.

.18. The Sccrctary-C,cneral should be requested to ensure that United
Nations information centres oricnt their activities to disseminatc informa\!on on questions accordtng to the mandatcs and priorities of the Depart111cnt of Puhlic lnformation ,·stahlishcd b) thc (il'nl'ral Assembly.
.19. Urgl'nt steps shuuld he taken to ensure that thc Unttcd Nations
lnformation Scrv1ce at Vienna g1ve. as a mattcr of priority, adcquate service in the German language in order to actas mformation centre for Austna and thc Federal Rrpublic of German). Such steps. whirh are to be
takcn w1thm cxisting resourccs, may involve redcployment of posts,
mdud1ng those originally assigncd to the United Nations Industrial Developmcnl Organization-Un,tcd Nattons lnformation Scrvicc. The Committcc should be informed about the implemcntation of this recommendation
at its substantive scssiun m 1984.
40. Taking into account the requcst of thc Govemment of Nicaragua
lor the opening of a Untted Nations informat1on centre at Managua, thc
Sccrctary-General should be rcquestcd to take the appropnate stcps for thc
prompt establishment of thc crntre, through thc rcdcployment of cxisting
rcsourrcs.
41. l'he Untted Nat1ons information centres should be requcstcd to
intenstfy direct and syskmatic communication cxchangc with local mformation and cducational n>mmunities in a mutually beneficia! way. espcrially lll arcas of particular intercst to host countrics.
4}. A detailed and v.dl documented factual surnmary account of the
coveragc by widely representa ti ve world media of developments affecting
the Palestinian pcople from June to Deccmb,·r 1982, should he prepared.
withm existing rcsource,. and be submitted to the General Asscmbly at its
th1rty-eighth session.
4J. The Committee on lnformation, taking note with appreciation of
t he rcprn1s of the Sccrctary-General on the devclopmcnt or systematic
cvaluation procedures for the activities ofthc Department of Public lnforrnation 39 and on the in-depth evaluation ofthe work ofthe Department of
Public lnformation. 40 encouragcs thc Secretary-General to continue his
cílórts to develop a system for monitoring and evaluating the elfectivt·ness
uf the activities of the Department, particularly in the pnority a reas determmed by the General Assembly. This systematic evaluation process
shuuld be pursued and a progress report should be submitted to thc Commi ttce at its substantive session in 1984. The Committee looks forward to
rcce,ving in due coursc the progress report on the implemcntation of dcc,sions takcn on the basis or thc Secretary-General's rcport 40 which is to be
prc,cnted to thc Committee for Programme and Co-ordination at its
twcnty-sixth session.
44. Future rcports uf the Department of Public lnformat1on to the
Committee on Information and to the General Assembly. in particular on
ncw programmcs or 011 the e.xpansion of existing programmcs, should ,·ontam:
[<1) More adequatc mformation on thc output of the Department in
respcct of each topic included in 1ts work programme. which forms the
bas1s of its programme hudgct:

(/•)

Thc costs of the activitics undertaken in respect of each topic:
More adequatc mformation on targct audiences, end-use of the
Department's products and an analysis of fced-back data ren·ived by the
Dcpartment:
(e)

(d ) The Departmcnt's naluation of thc dfect1veness of its ditferent
programmes and act1vit1cs:
(e) A statcment detallmg the prionty lcvel which the Sccretary-Ueneral
has attached to curren\ or future activities of the Department, in documcnts dealing with such art1vt1ics.

45. The Committec on lnformation notes the steps takcn by the
Dcpartment of Public lnformation in redressing the imbalance in the staff
ofthat Department, partirnlarly III thc Radin and Visual Services Division.
The Departmcnt should cuntinuc to intensify 1ts elforts to that end, and,
until equitable geograph!L'al distribution is ach1cved. thc Secreta1,-Gencral
40 bAl ·.51, 198317.

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _I_V_._Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Spedal Political Comm_it_t_ee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _1_0_7
should take urgen! steps 10 increase the representat,on of undcrrepresented groups of countrics. in accordance wilh A nicle I O1. paragraph
3. ofthe Charler ofthe United Nations and General Assemhly rcsolutions
33/143. 35/201, 36/149 and 37/94 B; in lhis regard. the Sccretary-(jeneral
is requested to submit a repon to the Commillee on lnforma1i11n at its substantive session in 1984.
46. Member States should be called upon to make voluntary contrihutions to the Unitcd Nations Trust Fund for Economic and Social lnfónnation.
47. The General Assemhly should takc note of the repon of the Sccrctary-General on various aspects of the regionalization of the Radio and
Visual Services Division of the Dcpartmcnt of Public Informat,on 41 and
examine it in the light of its resolutions 35/201 and .16· 149 B.
48. The World Disarmament Campaign should givc full considcrallon
to the role ofthe mass media as the most effective way lo promotc in world
public opinion a climate of understanding, confidcnce and co-operation
conducive to peace and disarmament, thc cnhancement of human rights
and development. Within the context of the World Disarmament Campaign and Disarmament Wcck, the Dcpartment of Public Information
should fulfil the role assigned to it by the General Asscmhly hy utili1ing its
expertise and resourees in public information lo ensure maximum effcctiveness.
49. The quality, usefulness and coverage of lhe daily prcss rdeases and
the weekly news summary issued by thc Dcpartment of Public lnformation
in ali working languages should be further enhanced and improvcd in vic"
of the importan! public information tasks which thcy can pcrform. The
Department should continue to co-operate closely wi1h and provide assistance to !he United Nations Correspondents Associalion. Scrv1ces provided
at the Press Section ofthe Departmcnt of Public lnformalion hooth for 1he
media and delegations should be improved.

50. The Committee recommends. in v,ew of the 11nportancc of graph1c
presentation for a variety of public information ac1ivi1ics. including posters, exhibits and publications, that thc Secretar)-{icncral should consider
redeploying a post of graphic designer from the Dcpartmenl of ( ontérenn·
Services to thc Departmenl of Puhlic lnforma1ion.
51. The role of the Departmcnl of Public lnformation. as dctincd h)
the General Assembly in severa! relevan! resolutions. as the focal point for
the formulation and implementation of information activilies of thc
United Nations should be re-emphasi,ed. and lhe Sccrctary-{ieneral
should be rcquested to study !he full implications ofthis mallcr and suhmil
a repon to the Committee on lnformation al its substantive ~ession in
1984.
52. The operations of the Non-Govcrnrnental Liaison Scrvices
(Geneva and New York), as inter-agency projects rcaching specific \argel
audiences in the industrialized countries on international dcvelopment
issues, should be continued on a stable finanóal basis through United
Nations participation in these services. Thc Commillee further recommends that the Secretary-General should he rcquested to urge ali lhe spccialized agencies to make long-term contributions to thc financing of these
services, thereby stressing their inter-agency charactcr.
53. The Department of Public Information and thc llnited Nations
Development Programme. as importan! clements of l lnitcd Nations intormation and development activities, should be requested to co-operatc
more closely with each other. both at Headquarters and in thc field. in
order to concentrale their resources. avoid duplicalion and effectively foster the proccss of development.
54. The Joint United Nations lnformation Commillce. as the essential
instrument for inter-agency co-ordination and co-operation in the field of
public information, should be enhanced and given more rcsponsibility,
thus improving its co-ordination and cost-benefil efficiency of the public
information activities of the cntire United Nations systcm.
55. The Joinl United Nations Information Commillee should continue
to strengthcn its activities in the fields of dcvelopmcnt education and
development-support communications.
56. The recommendations contained in the repon of the Joint Unitcd
Nations Information Committee on public perceptions of the United
Nations system 42 should be implemented. An appcal should be addrcsscd
to Governments and !he mass media to transm,t accuratc informa110n on
major activities ofthe United Nations. espccially thosc· listcd in ,\rt1ck I or
the Charter of the U nitcd Nations.
41 AJ AC.198/62.

42 See A/ AC.198/68.
43 Resolution 33173.

57.

Thc Joint llnited Nations lnformation Committee should continue

to rcport on its programmes and artivitics to thc Committer on lnforma-

tion for guidancc and support.
58. Since /Jel'clop111cnt Forum ,s the only intcr-agency publication of
1he llnited Nations systcm which cnnccntrates on developmcnl issues, the
Secrctary-Gcneral should contmuc. 111 accordancc with pcrtinent resolutions of lhe (ieneral Assemhly. to support its puhlication from the regular
hudget whiil' intensifying his l'lforts to securc a sound and mdependent
linanc1al hasis for ns continucd publication. Ali lhc spccialized agennes
and other organi,ations of the 1 'nited Nations system should be urge'<! lo
contrihute to thc financing of this system-widc puhlication. therehy recogni,ing 1ts intcr-agency character

59. Having takcn note of thc repon on !he reloca1ion of Del'c/o¡,111ent
For,1111. the Commillec on Information recommends that !he Secretary(ieneral should be requcsted to cnsure lhat /)ere/o¡,ment Forum will retain
its editorial policy of intellectual independcnce. thus enabling this publication to continue to serve as a "orld-widc forum in which di verse opinions
on issues relatcd to econom1c and social developmenl ran he freely
cxprcssed.
60. Thc Sccretary-Gcneral should he requcsted to submit a report to
lhc Commillcc on lnformation on the curren! status of financia! arrangemcnts for the puhhcation or thl' 11 orld NCJnpapl'I" Su¡,¡,lement projecl.
61
In v1ew ofthe fact thal. as is pointed out in the report ofthe Secretary-General on thc in-depth cvaluation of !he work of !he Dcpartment of
Puhlic lnformation. 40 lhe production of the UN Chronic/e is administrativdy separate from its dis1ribu11on and sales. thus adding to the problem
of its wider and more effective dissemination. it is recommended that !he
Sccretary-(ieneral should cons1der transfcrring the sales activity ofthc UN
<'hron,c/e to thc Departmcnl of Puhlic Information.
62. fhc importancc of !he Dcclaration on the Preparation of Societies
for l.ifi: 111 Pean· 43 should he notcd and Member Statcs called upon to
impkment 1t.

38/83.

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
A
ASSISTA~CE TO PALFSTINI' REFUGEES

Fhc <icncra/ Assemhl.r.
Recal/ing its resolution 37/120 K of 16 December 1982
and ali previous resolutions on thc qucstion, including resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948,
Taking note of the report of the Commissioner-General
of the U nited Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. covering the period from
1 .July 1982 to 30 Junc 1983, 44
1. Notes wilh deep rexret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) has not been
effected, that no substantial progress has been made in the
programme endorsed by the Assembly in paragraph 2 of
its resolution 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952 for the reintegration of refugees either by repatriation or resettlement
and that, therefore, the situation of the refugees continues
to be a matter of serious concern;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General
and to ali the staffofthe United Nations Reliefand Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, recognizing that the Agency is doing ali it can within the limits of
available resources, and also expresses its thanks to the
spccialized agencies and prívate organizations for their
valuable work in assisting the refugees;
3. Reiterates its request that the headquarters of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Rcfugces in the Near East should be relocated to its former
sitc within its arca of opcrations as soon as practicable;
44 O/fuwl Records o/ the (icn,rnl
1111·111 \·,,

1 / (A 18 •13 and Con 1)

lssemhlr. Fhim·-c1ghth Sess1on, S11pp/e-
