S/PV.7026

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7026th meeting

Thursday, 29 August 2013, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Nassau
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Ms. Power

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2013/444)

13-46102 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1346102*

S/PV.7026

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2013/444)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Zarif,
who is joining today’s meeting via video teleconference
from Pristina.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Enver Hoxhaj to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/444, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: During the latest reporting period and
since, important progress has continued to be made
towards the implementation of the agreement reached
between the parties on 19 April. Leaders in Pristina
and Belgrade have upheld their commitment to work
towards the implementation of the agreement in a
timely and constructive manner, notwithstanding some
complications in the process. Such progress remains
fundamental to building mutual trust and realizing
the key aspirations of both parties, the population in
Kosovo and, indeed, the region.

2

Following the appointment in June of a KosovoSerb from the north as commander of the northern
regional police directorate, his leadership team was
announced on 20 August, including a Kosovo-Albanian
deputy from the south. On 11 July, the Kosovo Assembly
approved a revised version of a draft law on amnesty in
order to facilitate the transition of qualified personnel
from police offices of the Serbian Ministry of Interior
in northern Kosovo to the Kosovo Police. However, that
law, along with two others essential for implementation,
faces challenges raised by the opposition in Kosovo’s
Constitutional Court.
In early July, Serbia’s Interior Ministry completed
the closure of its police offices in the four northern
municipalities, subsequently verified by the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR) and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). While the local population remains
wary of changes in the status quo, the initial stages of
implementation in the police area have been met with
broad public acceptance.
On 17 June, Serbia’s High Judicial Council
instructed the three operating Serbian courts in Kosovo
to cease receiving cases in anticipation of the full
implementation of the court-related components of the
19 April agreement. The provisions on the functioning
of a unified justice system in Kosovo — detailed in
both the agreement and its integral implementation
arrangements of 22 May — will require substantial
additional work by the parties in order to be fully
realized. It is commendable that each side has
demonstrated full awareness of the importance and
delicacy of the subject and has proceeded with further
talks on implementation in a cautious and deliberate
fashion.
During the fifteenth round of meetings in Brussels
on 27 August, Prime Minister Dačić and Prime
Minister Thaçi discussed the complex subjects of
telecommunication and energy — on which progress
has been slow — and agreed that discussions would
continue at the technical level. The parties also took
stock of progress in the implementation of the 19 April
agreement, including preparations for holding local
elections in Kosovo on 3 November. Given the short
time frame, organizing local elections throughout
Kosovo has presented particular challenges.

13-46102

S/PV.7026

The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe responded swiftly and garnered necessary
resources to facilitate voting in the northern
municipalities, as well as by eligible internally displaced
persons. The registration of political entities for the
elections is also an intensive exercise in the short time
window. Although registration has begun, it remains a
challenge that requires a flexible, confidence-building
approach from all quarters, as does finding other
mutually acceptable voting arrangements and material.
It is crucial that elections succeed in delivering
viable local authority able to properly represent and
defend the interests of local communities, as foreseen
in the agreement. To that end, it is important that full
participation in the election be encouraged, particularly
in the northern municipalities, where local authority
has long lingered under dispute and controversy. To
achieve that result, steadfastness and flexibility will
be required from each side, in particular to address
effectively the concerns of the local population and
overcome the uncertainty that currently prevails in the
north.
As I have previously stated in the Council, the
implementation of the historic 19 April agreement and
each of its elements is a delicate process that demands
sustained efforts and focus. In that light, it is essential
for the parties to keep their focus on the implementation
of what has been agreed, without introducing additional
fundamental issues that are, at present, outside of the
political dialogue agenda. Doing otherwise may put at
risk the progress achieved so far.
Of equal importance for success is a sustained
effort to improve confidence and promote progress
in inter-community reconciliation. That is a shared
responsibility of political leaders at all levels and
will also require continuing international support.
Accordingly, long-standing issues of vital importance
for reconciliation should also receive renewed attention
and vigor during this period, alongside bolstering the
political process.
The determination of the fate of persons missing
since the time of the conflict has made little new
progress in recent months, despite the joint efforts of
the Kosovo-Albanian and Serb family associations
of missing persons to encourage more effective and
collaborative action. While EULEX is prepared to
undertake new investigations, within its mandate and
means, to support comprehensive reviews of legacy

cases, and to support new police investigations when
and wherever new evidence can be uncovered, it cannot
succeed in that task without additional information
from all concerned.
Achieving greater success in that regard requires
foremost the exertion of renewed political will to
encourage more information to be brought forward
and to afford adequate witness protection. The affected
families rightly demand justice, reparation and closure
on the cases of their missing loved ones. On the eve
of the International Day of the Victims of Enforced
Disappearances, I call upon the parties to rededicate
their commitment to that end.
Of similar importance are the further steps being
taken to safeguard religious and cultural sites in
Kosovo, both in the context of the high-level dialogue
and work at the municipal level. Successful preparations
by the Kosovo police have enabled it to take over from
KFOR the responsibility for the protection of the Peć
Patriarchate, in early August. It is important that such
efforts do not falter, as is threatened, for example,
by the procedural delays in the establishment of the
cultural heritage council in Rahovec/Orahovac.
An important and timely visit in June by
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, served to underscore
many of the same issues and outline a range of areas in
which institutions responsible for the rule of law and
human rights protection in Kosovo could be made more
effective. Her recommendations focused, in particular,
on remedies for weak legislation, more vigorous
implementation of the law and tougher responses to
instances of hate speech and ethnic intolerance.
On 28 June, the European Council issued important
decisions on its enlargement, including the decision
on the start of the accession negotiations with Serbia
and the opening of negotiations for a stabilization and
association agreement with Kosovo.
Those major steps are, in great measure,
attributable to the visionary leadership demonstrated
by both sides during the European Union-led political
dialogue. Helping the parties sustain momentum is
now the shared and central goal of all the international
presences in Kosovo and beyond.
Among the greatest challenges is building
confidence in the process in the north, where little such
confidence presently exists. I wish to acknowledge

13-461023

S/PV.7026

efforts being made in that respect by the parties and,
equally, to note the significant gap that is yet to be
closed. The formation, outside the framework of the
19 April agreement, of a provisional assembly for
Kosovo and Metohija is a sign of the still predominant
apprehension in northern Kosovo concerning the
implementation of the agreement.
The political challenge involved is difficult to overestimate, not least in view of the ambitious time lines
foreseen in the implementation plan. Accordingly, the
parties should persevere with a high degree of creativity
and flexibility and redouble efforts to address the
substantive and detailed questions emanating from the
population in the north.
For our part, UNMIK continues to actively adapt
its activities in the field to most effectively support
the political process and related work on the ground.
UNMIK’s facilitation and mediation roles have been
enhanced by additional experienced personnel in the
north, while the UNMIK Administration in Mitrovica
has continued its active engagement in local mediation
and conflict prevention.
Preparations are currently under way for
the implementation of confidence-building and
reconciliation projects in a number of key areas
throughout Kosovo, mostly through the United Nations
Kosovo team and other international partners. Our
local mediation role and capacity continue to be drawn
upon throughout Kosovo, providing an effective
communication link in support of resolving practical
public and social service issues. We are contributing
to building local confidence, which helps keep residual
tensions low and, in turn, broadens the space for further
progress in the political dialogue.
The implementation of the 19 April agreement
requires concentrated efforts and the avoidance of
distractions related to issues that are yet to be tackled
through direct dialogue. Through its ongoing support
to the parties as they pursue solutions by making
necessary compromises, the Council continues to
play a key role in supporting the long-term success
of this process. I wish to express deep appreciation
to the Council members for their continued political
engagement in that regard.
I close by thanking you, Madam President, and
all members of the Council for their support for
UNMIK’s work as we continue to promote progress and
reconciliation on the ground.

4

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Zarif
for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Mrkić (Serbia): I thank you, Madam President,
and members of the Security Council for convening
this meeting under resolution 1244 (1999).
At the outset, let me express my gratitude to the
Council for continually addressing the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, which is demonstrated by the fact
that the Council convenes meetings to discuss this issue
regularly, every three months. I also thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his commitment and dedication in guiding the
United Nations team in the field and for his daily
efforts to find a way to overcome the still-deep gap of
distrust that divides the ethnic communities in Kosovo
and Metohija.
The Republic of Serbia, too, is firmly resolved to
work to achieve that goal, as we believe that reducing
the distrust is the only right way, that is, a precondition
for creating better living conditions for all. Last April,
we signed the Brussels agreement in order to facilitate
the solution of questions of vital importance for all
people in the province, hopeful that the signers from
Pristina would share our enthusiasm in overcoming the
problems that we have been facing for far too long.
However, it is with regret that I have to state that
that has not always been the case. We do hope that
there is a political will in Pristina, although we know
that concrete results in solving people’s problems,
particularly those besetting minority ethnic groups in
the province, are in very short supply. We therefore
consider that the continued presence of the United
Nations in Kosovo and Metohija is of paramount
importance for future developments, especially at
this sensitive juncture when, after a very long time,
possibilities can now be discerned for all those living
in Kosovo and Metohija to begin to live better and for
its ethnic communities to begin to overcome tensions.
The tensions between the communities have existed
for decades, and it would be illusory to expect them to
disappear within a matter of months. If indeed we long
for a future where everyone can live in peace, without
fear for their lives, we have to solidify the foundations
laid down by the Brussels agreement and work, day in
and day out, towards bridging the deep gap brought

13-46102

S/PV.7026

about by decades of lack of trust and confidence. On
the long road, in addition to goodwill and hard work,
we also need an honest broker, not someone who
will do our job for us but who will ensure that all the
participants in the process are guided by the idea of the
long-term betterment of all our people, rather than by
the predominance of the ethnic majority.
It is precisely in that role of impartial overseer of
the process of historic reconciliation that the Republic
of Serbia perceives the United Nations. For several
decades now, the world Organization has worked to
improve the living conditions for all communities
in Kosovo and Metohija, and it is equipped with the
necessary knowledge and experience for the road that
lies ahead.
I have to say that we would have liked to have made
more progress on that road, alone and without outside
assistance, and thus be able to seek agreements with
representatives from Pristina on all matters without
assistance. That in itself would demonstrate the political
maturity of both sides. However, just as the signing of
the Brussels agreement would not have been possible
this year without European Union mediation, without
Baroness Ashton, I am afraid the implementation of
the agreements may not be possible without the active
participation of the United Nations.
While we are firmly resolved to prove that Serbia is
up to the challenges and tasks with which it is presented,
we also need a guarantee that the other side will not
undermine the agreements already reached. In view of
the enormous efforts invested so far by the Republic of
Serbia in finding solutions acceptable to all sides, we
would like to see — and we do not see — the other side
investing efforts to bring about very necessary changes
in the field. Apparently, the status quo suits the other
side much more, and that is why we assume that they
want international actors to leave the province.
I am sure that the Council needs no reminding that
the task of the international presence in Kosovo and
Metohija is not to promote the independence of Kosovo.
By resolution 1244 (1999), this body established the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and charged it with the mandate of
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in the province. Accordingly, what we are dealing
with is the setting of standards, which is our primary
goal — not the establishment of a status, which appears
to be that of Pristina.

As our goals — at least in that domain — evidently
differ, we consider that the Brussels agreement is only
the beginning of the normalization of relations, not the
end. We would not be warning of attempts to undermine
agreements had we not already registered a number
of them in this short period of time. For instance,
satisfaction is expressed in the report (S/2013/444)
of the Secretary-General over the amendment of
the law on the budget in the Assembly of Kosovo.
We, too, would be satisfied if it did not break a prior
bilateral agreement. In fact, the amendments to the
law are contrary to the agreement made in the working
group on the implementation of the integrated border
management agreement last January.
Under that agreement, the funds collected from
the transfer of goods for individuals and legal entities
in the municipalities in northern Kosovo and Metohija
are to be credited to the fund for the development of
the north. The amendments adopted in the Assembly,
however, provide for the establishment of a development
trust fund for the association of Serb municipalities in
Kosovo and Metohija. In that way, the funds would
be initially credited to the Kosovo fund — treasury/
budget — and only then to the fund for the development
of the north. That modification runs counter to the spirit
of the political agreement. Rather than eliminating
the obstacles to the normalization of life, it creates
additional ones.
Another example of the breach of trust is the
situation in Brdjani. The report states that Serbs
protested because of the attempts by internally displaced
Albanians to build houses in that part of northern
Kosovska Mitrovica. The truth of the matter, however,
is the persistence of Kosovo and Metohija Albanians
in altering the ethnic structure of Brdjani through land
grabbing and building without a permit. In fact, local
Serbs had agreed with returnee Albanians that they
could rebuild their houses without any encumbrance
whatsoever. Brdjani, it should be borne in mind, is a
small place where everybody knows everybody else
and where such agreements were possible. Yet the
Serbs from Brdjani protested only after they discovered
that Kosovo and Metohija Albanians were planning to
build 172 apartments in that locality for veterans of
the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army who had never
lived there, and only for a fraction of that number for
Albanians who had lived there before 1999.
That is yet another example in which UNMIK
mediation would be of great help. We therefore

13-461025

S/PV.7026

propose that the Secretary-General request his Special
Representative to draw up an exact list of Kosovo
and Metohija Albanians who lived in Brdjani prior to
June 1999 and to present it with his next report. We
are convinced that such transparency would contribute
significantly to the resolution of disputes and that we
need a neutral international presence to achieve it.
Building confidence in Kosovo institutions among
minority communities is not aided by the signing of
the 1 July military agreement with Albania, mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General. The Republic
of Serbia protested the signing in the belief that the
agreement on military cooperation should be placed
in the context of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. Its implementation is sufficiently complex
even without the less than constructive surprises by
Pristina, especially those with destabilization potential.
The exchange of military personnel, provided for
by the agreement, would result in an increased presence
of ethnic Albanians in a very small geographic area,
interspersed with a number of enclaves populated by
Serbs, Gorani and other non-Albanians, thereby adding
to the anxiety of those already isolated communities.
Such an agreement has a potential, in case a political
decision is taken, to threaten the security of the people
in a real way and to repeat the ethnic pogrom of March
2004. Whether or not such a scenario comes to pass,
the signing of that agreement sends a clear message to
all members of non-Albanian communities as to who
controls force. It should be borne in mind that, at least
in theory, the agreement provides for the possibility that
full military force could be deployed, since the Republic
of Albania does possess heavy weapons; whereas, at
least formally, the so-called Kosovo Security Force
does not.
Of course, we do not expect that Pristina will
use the agreement with Albania for military actions
in the field, but we must emphasize the consequence:
intimidation of minority communities. Likewise, we
did not believe that the pogrom was possible before it
happened in 2004, or the dispatch of Pristina’s special
force to northern Kosovo and Metohija in the summer
of 2011.
At that time, we also kept telling our fellow Serbs
that threats to their lives were a thing of the past, but
the reality contradicted us. If we want to solidify the
trust that we have only begun to build, we now need
much more than assumptions. We need guarantees that
force will not be used.
6

Tensions continue, not only in the north but in the
entire territory of Kosovo and Metohija. The Serbs
living south of the Ibar River are facing problems.
Although those problems are different than those of
the Serbs in the north, they merit attention and serious
efforts to find solutions. Particularly worrisome is the
fact that some problems are institutional in nature and,
as a result, they involve partial and sometimes full
denial of basic minority rights in terms of security and
restitution of property.
Although the report includes a separate chapter on
northern Kosovo and Metohija, it is of particular concern
that, by choosing to treat the subject this way, it actually
minimizes emphasis on developments important for
Serbs and members of other non-majority communities
in Kosovo and Metohija. We propose that, for the
next report, the Secretary-General asks his Special
Representative to prepare an exhaustive review of the
situation in which the Serbs, Gorani and the members of
other communities south of the Ibar River live. Such a
report would be very illustrative if it included examples
of institutional encumbrances related to the exercise of
rights, the registration of ethnically motivated criminal
offences and the realization of property rights.
The property rights of Serbs are violated throughout
Kosovo and Metohija, in particular by indiscriminate
sales of companies in Serbian communities to Albanian
business people through the Privatization Agency of
Kosovo. The sales affect the economic viability of the
Serbian communities, destroy conditions for return and
undermine security. In addition, it has been a common
practice to put only ethnic Albanian workers on lists
of employees entitled to monetary compensations from
the sale of a company.
In that connection, I recall the position maintained
within the United Nations that the Privatization Agency
of Kosovo is not a legal successor of the Kosovo Trust
Agency, since it has not been established under a law
in force in Kosovo and Metohija in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).
In the light of the property issues mentioned,
I consider it necessary to re-examine the decision
on funding the Privatization Agency of Kosovo. It
would be ill-advised to leave such a sensitive issue
as privatization, which concerns all minority rights,
within the competence of the Privatization Agency of
Kosovo. The latter has already misused its powers in
the interest of the majority community on a number of
occasions.
13-46102

S/PV.7026

It has been 14 years since the Council adopted a
decision on the establishment and on the competencies
of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo and Metohija,
but some key aims of the international community
remain unfulfilled. According to data from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
there still remain 210,148 internally displaced persons
from the province living in Serbia today. More than
70 per cent of them are Serbs, 17 per cent Roma, as well
as Gorani, Bosniacs, Montenegrins and others.
Tension in Kosovo and Metohija continues to flare.
Despite our efforts, we have not succeeded in reducing
it, demonstrated by the security data presented in the
report. It has been pointed out that, taken separately
for each quarterly reporting period, it has been hard to
make precise conclusions on the basis of the number of
security incidents that took place during a particular
period. As it stands, it is possible to wrongly conclude
that the security situation is improving; whereas, in
fact, we still have a long way to go to achieve that goal.
After the completion of the report, which states that
the number of incidents related to minority communities
has been reduced as compared to those in the preceding
period, the murder of an elderly Serbian woman was
discovered. The perpetrators were never identified. That
reveals a new problem: the report is silent on the number
of discovered and tried perpetrators and the number of
cases, solved and unsolved. Also, no mention is made
of the measures taken by the authorities — whether the
police, the prosecutors or the courts.
The practice of not punishing the perpetrators of
violence against Serbs therefore continues. We still do
not know who killed 14 reapers at Staro Gracko in 1999,
following the arrival of the international presences, or
who shot the Serbian children as they played on the river
at Goraždevac in 2003. Every year, as we remember
those who lost their lives, we expect to hear what has
been done concerning them, but we have had no answer
for more than 10 years now. The pogrom of March
2004, which resulted in 19 dead and approximately
4,000 displaced, has not yet led to initiating a single
court proceeding.
Had at least one of those cases been solved or had
we seen any headway in investigations, we would now
have something to prove to the Serbian community in
Kosovo and Metohija that, over time, justice would
be served in each case. We would be able to tell the
community that meting out justice would not only
discourage potential perpetrators from committing

violence again, but that, over time, it would create a
different climate among Kosovo inhabitants, who, in
that way, might one day become guarantors of their
security.
Yet, none of those cases has been solved so far, which
leads us to believe that the culture of impunity obtains
in Kosovo and Metohija. It is therefore no surprise
that violent demonstrations broke out in Pristina after
EULEX arrested a few suspects in connection with
war crimes committed against minorities. I repeat, in
an environment like that, minorities surely do not feel
safe. If the environment were at least a bit different,
we would be witnessing more returns, and our Liaison
Officer, who assumed his duties in June, would
not be one of only 118 Serbs in Pristina, a city that
numbered 40,000 Serbs not so long ago. There were
only 302 Serb returnees to Kosovo and Metohija in
2012, fewer than in 2011, when 464 persons returned.
We are witnessing a continued decrease in the already
small numbers of returnees. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has pointed that fact
out. Even though she offers a positive assessment of
the legal and institutional frameworks for human rights
protection, the High Commissioner indicates that their
enforcement remains insufficient. That brings us back
to the question of Pristina’s political will to address
those issues.
The lack of institutional clarity, highlighted in a
joint study by the Council of Europe and the European
Union, would not be such a big problem, if it were
not yet another issue used by Pristina to intimidate
the Serbian population by resorting to arrests under
secret indictments. We continue to witness unfounded
charges arbitrarily pressed against Serbs for war
crimes. Equally disturbing is the postponement of
the amnesty law, which, incidentally, barely made it
through the Parliament, which makes Serbs justifiably
apprehensive that, pending its implementation, many
more of them might be arrested.
The Republic of Serbia takes this opportunity
to call on EULEX, which is competent to find those
responsible for war crimes, to make a contribution
towards finding a solution to that problem by presenting
a list of Serbs indicted, without interfering in individual
court proceedings.
As on previous occasions, I would like to reiterate
the importance of a full and effective investigation into
allegations of people being killed for organ trafficking.
The Republic of Serbia is ready to continue cooperating

13-461027

S/PV.7026

with the EULEX investigation team in order to establish
the truth and to achieve justice for the victims, as soon
as possible.
I must point out that the intimidation and
discouragement of returns can be much more subtle, if,
for instance, one denies the history of an entire people.
It so happens that we continue to witness attempts,
made within UNESCO, to rename the cultural and
historical heritage of the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
as the heritage of Kosovo without mentioning Metohija,
in other words, to ‘Kosovize’ it. Those attempts are
tantamount to destroying evidence of the long existence
and survival of Serbs for centuries in that area, all for
the purpose of promoting the so-called independence
of Kosovo.
As far as the Republic of Serbia is concerned, it
does not, nor will it, recognize the unilateral declaration
of independence. Let me also express our gratitude to
all those Member States that share and support our
position of principle. Too many latent tensions continue
to exist everywhere in Kosovo and Metohija. Our
experience has shown that often the slightest incident
can trigger a situation that can escalate into protests
with unforeseeable consequences.
Great efforts and concrete steps are needed to
ensure physical safety and to secure the property of
minority communities. Those steps need to be taken,
as stated in the report, by Pristina, and we believe that
the process will evolve a lot more easily and faster with
UNMIK’s assistance.
The first agreement to normalize relations is a
good beginning, but it only sets a framework for the
hard work that still lies ahead of us. We consider those
foundations good enough to build a better tomorrow,
and we must not miss this opportunity. We cannot
simply ignore obstructions, for that not only means a
return to the past but also signals a deepening in the
mistrust, which we want to overcome.
Aware of the opportunity before it, the Republic
of Serbia expects the continued assistance of the
international community, the United Nations in
particular, on the road to confidence-building, which we
believe is the only sound foundation for bringing about
a normal life for everyone in Kosovo and Metohija.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Hoxhaj.

8

Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great pleasure to address the
Council again today and to inform it about key political
developments that have taken place in Kosovo over the
past three months. Today, I would like to brief the Council
on the following issues: the state of the implementation
of the normalization agreement between the Republics
of Kosovo and Serbia, the landmark progress made
towards European Union integration, and stability and
achievements on a number of domestic issues.
Let me start by expressing our sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his support
of peace and stability in Kosovo and the region. We
welcome his efforts to understand the situation on the
ground and to present a more realistic overview of the
progress in Kosovo.
In the past three months, Kosovo has engaged
proactively in implementing the obligations arising
from the first agreement governing the normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia. There is a new
political dynamic in Kosovo, where we have achieved
substantial results. However, serious challenges remain,
which can be overcome only with political commitment,
flexibility and visionary dedication. In my view,
reaching inter-State agreement is a good basis for the
normalization of relations and mutual acceptance by
both countries, but that should also serve as a basis for
reconciliation and recognition.
Since 19 April, 15 joint meetings between Prime
Ministers Ivica Dačić and Hashim Thaçi have been
held in Brussels, thanks to the excellent mediation of
Baroness Ashton on behalf of the European Union. In
line with the provisions of the implementation plan,
the main issues discussed in those meetings were:
dismantling illegal and parallel Serb security and
judicial structures; the formation of a Serb municipality
association; the organization of local elections; and
discussions on energy and telecommunication. I can
confirm here today that there has been some progress
in the integration of a police force, establishing an
association and finalizing preparations for local
elections. At the same time, there has been no significant
progress on the integration of justice structures and in
the areas of energy and telecommunication.
On 26 June, the Assembly of Kosovo ratified an
inter-State agreement between Kosovo and Serbia by a
more than two-third majority, namely, 84 votes, which
included support by the opposition. After that, our
Government submitted a number of amendments to the

13-46102

S/PV.7026

Assembly regarding the law on local self-governance,
the rights of communities and the budget. Those
legislative changes will facilitate the implementation
of the agreement and will enable Kosovo’s institutions
to extend their democratic and legal authority into the
northern municipalities.
On 11 July, after a long society-wide debate, the
Assembly of Kosovo approved a law on amnesty.
The law aims to facilitate the integration of former
employees from Serb parallel structures into Kosovo’s
institutional system. The generous list of exemptions
from criminal prosecution and punishment for criminal
offences is a huge compromise for our side. It is a
political act taken for the sake of the normalization
of inter-State relations and in support of peace and
reconciliation.
The amnesty law has led to a political reaction
from an opposition faction in Kosovo. Therefore, the
law is currently under review by our Constitutional
Court. As a democratic country, we fully respect the
independence of the justice system. However, we
remain hopeful that the Court will confirm that the
amnesty law is in accordance with our Constitution.
In accordance with the normalization agreement and
the implementation plan, we have had a breakthrough
regarding the establishment of the association of Serb
municipalities. A preparation team has been established,
consisting of representatives from the four northern
municipalities. The team will prepare a statute for the
future association of the Serb municipalities, based
on the statute of the existing Association of Kosovo
Municipalities and in accordance with Kosovo law.
Another area of progress is the integration of the
former Serb police into Kosovo’s law enforcement
institutions. Some concrete steps have taken place
already in this area. The Kosovo police has established
a regional police department for the northern
municipalities. It has also appointed a provisional
regional director of police, who is working in accordance
with Kosovo law. There is a clear legal framework and
a timetable. The upcoming months will be critical for
the integration of former Serb police into the Kosovo
police system. This will be important in order to restore
the rule of law and public order in that part of Kosovo.
The next local elections will be held on 3 November
throughout Kosovo. In the northern municipalities,
local elections will be organized under the leadership
of Kosovo’s Central Election Commission and with

the support of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The local elections in
the northern municipalities will be organized in line
with Kosovo law, and the role of the OSCE is to facilitate
that in a number of technical aspects. These will be the
first municipal elections that will establish democratic
institutions in the three northern municipalities.
Therefore, we invite the local population to participate
in this crucial electoral process. The elections represent
an opportunity to build a joint commitment and new
civic obligations towards a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
The participation of different parties is essential
to ensure political competition and respect for the
freedom of political association. To that end, Kosovo
institutions are working to create a comprehensive list
of voters in the northern municipalities, including those
who are currently living outside Kosovo. However,
Belgrade has a critical role to play by encouraging the
participation of local Serb populations.
During the reporting period, we observed some
progress on the implementation of the agreements
reached thus far. But, at the same time, there are some
clear tendencies in Belgrade to deviate from the original
obligations deriving from the normalization agreement.
On positive moves, we also welcome the closure of the
Serb police offices in the northern municipalities. At
the same time, there is evidence that members of Serb
security structures continue to operate from private
settings, remaining on standby to destabilize that part
of Kosovo.
In the area of justice, there is no progress yet on
the implementation of provisions, and that is due to a
lack of political will in Belgrade. On the issue of the
integration of justice personnel, there is no progress
at all. We have offered the most advanced options to
integrate those structures into Kosovo’s constitutional
system, but Belgrade has consistently tried to change
the substance of the normalization agreement. The
agreement foresees a unique system of police, justice
and local governance throughout Kosovo, and Belgrade
should stick to the deal.
On integrated border management, some progress
has been noted in finalizing the construction of five
permanent joint border points, which also sets the
inter-State border line between Kosovo and Serbia.
However, there are obstacles from Belgrade, which is
not allowing Kosovo’s citizens to travel through Serbia
with Kosovo documents. That is a violation of the
agreement on the freedom of movement. Serbia is also

13-461029

S/PV.7026

undermining the agreement on customs by collecting
custom tariffs from Kosovo citizens who cross Serbia’s
territory to enter Kosovo as their final destination.
In addition, Belgrade’s failure this week to accept
the agreement on energy and telecommunication,
which has been pending for the past two years, is the
best testimony of the lack of political will to resolve
outstanding inter-State issues. However, we welcome
the opening of the Kosovo Liaison Office in Belgrade
and are rotating our Ambassador from Zagreb to
Belgrade to start the mission.
In the past three months, Kosovo marked a
milestone on its path to European Union membership.
On 28 June, the Council of the European Union took
a decision to authorize the European Commission to
negotiate a stabilization and association agreement
between the European Union and Kosovo. That
decision represents an acknowledgement of our
progress regarding democratic governance and the
normalization of relations with Serbia. It opens, for
the first time, a clear perspective for establishing
contractual relations between the Republic of Kosovo
and the European Union. By signing a stabilization and
association agreement, Kosovo will undergo the same
processes as all States in the region before joining the
European Union.
We continue to trust that the stabilization and
association agreement will contain all the essential
elements to enable Kosovo to achieve the conditions
necessary to be able to submit an application for
membership. That will offer a strategic framework
for social, economic and political modernization
and transformation. It represents a legal framework
that offers stability and security for foreign direct
investments, economic growth and job creation. We
have already formed a negotiating team and begun
preparations for negotiating the provisions of the
stabilization and association agreement. Based on
the commitment of the European Union, we expect
to finalize the agreement during spring 2014. Let me
reiterate that Kosovo’s European agenda remains a
national priority for all political forces in the country.
Regarding visa liberalization, we have approved
a package of laws that regulate a number of critical
security-related issues, such as the status of foreigners,
asylum, citizenship, the prevention of trafficking and
integrated border management. That package of laws
has now also been passed by the Kosovo Assembly. We
expect new dynamics that will enable our citizens to
10

travel visa-free to Europe, as most of the benchmarks
are already met.
Over the past three months, Kosovo has
strengthened its international position and increased
its interaction with multilateral organizations. In June
we welcomed the recognition of our independence by
important countries such as Egypt, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Yemen, Guyana and El Salvador. More
than 100 Member States have recognized Kosovo thus
far, and we have established diplomatic relations with
nearly 60 States. After achieving membership in the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
we recently became a member of the Council of Europe
Development Bank.
In this reporting period, the political, economic
and security situation continued to be stable. Kosovo
has the most stable political landscape in the region.
Despite the global financial crisis, we have managed
to maintain macro-economic stability and to have an
annual growth of 5 per cent.
Inter-ethnic relations have also been very good and
without any significant incidents except in the north of
the country. Similarly, interfaith relations have been
a positive example of peaceful coexistence for the
entire region. A special multi-ethnic task force for the
protection of cultural and religious heritage has been
established within the Kosovo police. It consists of 202
officers who provide security for 23 monuments and
sites of Serb heritage in Kosovo. The task force will
also soon take responsibility for the security of the
Patriarchate of Pejë.
The security situation throughout Kosovo has
improved, mainly as a result of the normalization
agreement with Serbia. Such improvement is essential
to promoting economic development and job creation.
The Kosovo police, in cooperation with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), has continued to display effective leadership in
maintaining security throughout the country. However,
in the past three months Serb security structures have
caused a number of incidents, preventing displaced
Albanians from returning and damaging citizens’
private and public property.
The Government has continued its institutional,
financial and political support for the return and
reintegration of Kosovo communities. Since March,
258 persons have returned to communities around the

13-46102

S/PV.7026

country. We have launched various activities aimed at
fostering the reintegration of community returnees.
We have constructed 26 new houses and implemented
infrastructure and community-based projects.
On 9 July, the North Atlantic Council announced
that the Kosovo Security Force had reached operational
capability in line with NATO standards and principles.
As a multi-ethnic force and a source of stability, the
Kosovo Security Force has now strengthened its capacity
to deal with disaster management and humanitarian
assistance. The announcement marks an important
moment in the expansion of relations between Kosovo
and NATO and confirms that Kosovo is an example
of a country with democratic, civilian oversight of the
security sector. As ever, we express our gratitude to
KFOR for its assistance to us in maintaining security
and peace in Kosovo. Kosovo hopes to join NATO’s
Partnership for Peace programme in the near future and
to become an equal member of NATO alongside other
countries of the region.
Our institutions have continued to promote
the protection of human rights and to strengthen
institutional mechanisms for human rights. With the
United Nations Human Rights Commissioner’s visit to
Kosovo in June, we gave further confirmation of our
commitment to protecting and observing international
human-rights standards. We will continue to invest
in protecting and promoting the political, economic
and socio-cultural rights of all communities living in
Kosovo.
The fate of missing persons is an issue that
continues to haunt our society; it requires continued
genuine commitment and cooperation from Belgrade
and the support of the international community. The
sooner it is resolved, the greater will be the chances
for inter-ethnic and inter-State reconciliation between
Kosovo and Serbia. We have already raised this issue
several times at our meetings in Brussels. We need to
do our utmost to uncover the truth about the fate of
those missing. In that regard, I think the United Nations
can and should play a more important role.
Kosovo is grateful to the United Nations for its
role in building State institutions and consolidating
peace. We are all aware that State- and peacebuilding
can result in long-term success only when they
promote and enable democratic national ownership and
include timely exit strategies. Fourteen years after the
establishment of an international civilian and military
presence, in June 1999, it is now time for the Council

to consider removing Kosovo from its agenda. The
moment has come to adopt a new resolution recognizing
the progress that has been made on the ground and that
we have been reporting on a regular basis for many
years now.
While there is no doubt that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
played an active role in stabilizing Kosovo between
1999 and 2007, it is now important to acknowledge
that it no longer has a role to play in Kosovo. It is time
for the Council to consider transforming UNMIK
into a United Nations political office for coordinating
all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
In that regard, the most important function for the
United Nations in Kosovo would be to support us in
our preparation for admission to the United Nations.
We understand that, in order to achieve that, what
is needed is political will and unity on the part of
Council members. We call on the Security Council to
take concrete, speedy and definitive action in order to
enable Kosovo to take its rightful place in the family of
free and democratic nations.
Let me conclude by reiterating the strong
commitment of our Government and people to
continuing to make Kosovo a successful and prosperous
country, while leaving the legacies of the past behind
and advancing our integration into the international
democratic community. We remain strongly committed
to fully implementing the normalization agreement
with Serbia, and we take seriously all the obligations
necessary for ensuring the northern municipalities’
peaceful integration into Kosovo institutions. However,
the full normalization of inter-State relations will
be achieved only when Serbia recognizes Kosovo’s
independence. Similarly, the international community’s
contribution will come to fruition when Kosovo
becomes a full and equal Member of the United Nations.
We remain deeply grateful to the Council,
our European and NATO partners and the wider
international community for helping Kosovo to become
a multi-ethnic, democratic and cohesive State.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing.
I would also like to take a moment to welcome the
new Permanent Representative of China, Ambassador
Liu Jieyi. And, of course, we welcome the Ministers

13-4610211

S/PV.7026

for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo and Serbia, Mr. Hoxhaj
and Mr. Mrkić, back to the Council, and thank them
both very much for their briefings. I commend both
Governments, and in particular Prime Minister Thaçi
and Prime Minister Dačić, for their leadership, which
has led to agreement on principles for normalizing
relations and has advanced their countries’ respective
paths towards European integration.
Today I would like to make three points, regarding
the opportunities presented by the dialogue process
facilitated by the European Union (EU), upcoming
elections and progress on issues important to advancing
normalization and understanding.
First, the United States congratulates Serbia
and Kosovo on the important steps taken towards
implementing the 19 April agreement to normalize
relations. Our EU partners recognize the significant
steps taken by both Governments, and we welcome the
European Council decisions on 28 June to open accession
negotiations with Serbia and to open negotiations with
Kosovo on a stabilization and association agreement.
The dialogue has created opportunities to enhance
stability in the region for both the security and the
economic prosperity of the people of Kosovo and
Serbia.
The Prime Ministers and EU High Representative
Ashton deserve our strong praise and continued
support for their efforts. We commend the Government
of Serbia’s work towards integrating the police into
a unitary framework and chain of command by
closing parallel stations in northern Kosovo. Equally
important, Kosovo has taken steps to amend its laws so
that implementation can move forward.
The fact that both Governments have posted
liaison officers in each other’s capitals will also help
improve relations and further dialogue. We also thank
the European Union Rule of Law Mission and NATO
for their continuing support in the implementation of
the dialogue agreements. As both Foreign Ministers
have acknowledged, much remains to be done to
fulfil the commitments they have made. We hope
to see soon the finalization of agreements on energy
and telecommunication, progress in the working
groups in Brussels to consolidate legitimate and
effective judicial and police structures in the north,
and the full implementation of all previous dialogue
agreements, including on customs and integrated
border management.

12

Secondly, we look forward to the 3 November
municipal elections in Kosovo and appreciate the
integral role that the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has been playing to
help facilitate what should be free, fair and transparent
elections. The United States urges eligible voters
throughout Kosovo to exercise their right to participate
in the democratic process. We especially urge minority
communities, including Kosovo Serbs, to participate
and make their voices heard. By voting, they have the
opportunity not only to choose their leaders but also
to hold them accountable and ensure effective and
responsive local governance.
Thirdly, I want to highlight opportunities to
overcome the violence of the past and promote
reconciliation between communities in Kosovo.
The United States welcomes Kosovo’s efforts on the
protection of religious and cultural heritage, including
the establishment of a new multi-ethnic unit within the
Kosovo Police to protect sites throughout the country,
as agreed in the dialogue. That unit is in the process
now of working with the Kosovo Force to assume
primary responsibility for the protection of the Pejë/
Peć Patriarchate. The United States encourages the
Government of Kosovo to continue to work with its
international partners, including NATO, the OSCE, the
EU and UNESCO, to ensure that the holy sites of all
religions are restored and protected.
As noted again in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/444), missing persons are an important and
unresolved issue that demands critical attention from
all parties. We reiterate the call on all concerned,
particularly the Governments of Kosovo and Serbia,
to intensify collaborative efforts to locate missing
persons, so that families can finally obtain answers
and, hopefully, some personal resolution. Ensuring
safe, stable and sustainable conditions for returnees is
another critical aspect of moving forward that requires
further attention and much work.
Let me conclude by encouraging the Governments
to maintain the momentum of the past few months. We
want Kosovo and Serbia to succeed and thrive, so it is up
to their leaders and the people of Kosovo and Serbia to
seize the opportunities created by the dialogue and the
European Union negotiations to build the foundations
for a secure and prosperous future. We stand ready to
assist in any way.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Let me at the outset thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
13-46102

S/PV.7026

Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
exhaustive briefing and welcome him here today. We
also of course welcome Foreign Minister Ivan Mrkić
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj,.

the agreements. We are counting on the involvement
of local authorities and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
promote dialogue and restore confidence.

The positive trend in the relationship between the
Serbian and Kosovo parties over the past few months
has been given significant impetus in the wake of the
signing by the two sides in Brussels on 22 May of a
new agreement for an implementation plan for the first
agreement on principles governing the normalization
of relations of 19 April 2013. That latest agreement,
in particular, lays out concrete steps and timelines for
implementation, including the necessary adjustments
to the existing legal frameworks to accommodate
the establishment of an association or community
of Kosovo Serb municipalities, the integration of the
Serbian police and judicial structures, and preparation
for local elections.

The momentum towards rapprochement and
consolidation gradually taking hold between the
two sides has seen a number of initiatives related to
protecting religious and cultural heritage. The measures
are symbolic but they are fundamental in terms of
promoting and building mutual respect between the
different components of society. We praise those efforts,
particularly those of UNMIK and UNESCO and other
partners. We are pleased to note the completion of
the recruitment of police officers to protect cultural
heritage.

More encouraging still, the parties have maintained
and strengthened their commitments through the holding
of high-level and expert-level meetings to consolidate
and accelerate implementation of the agreements.
In that regard, the parties agreed on 20 June on the
composition of the management team representing
the four northern Kosovo municipalities, which will
draft the statute of the association or community of the
Kosovo Serb municipalities and exercise some of its
powers on an ad interim basis.
All of the those developments would not have been
possible without the firm commitment of both parties
and good offices, specifically those of the European
Union. In that regard, I would like to commend the
commitment of the European Union, specifically that
of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton. We commend
her leadership, determination and perseverance to
overcome difficulties and work with the parties
in negotiations aimed at bringing about specific
outcomes. We are optimistic about the positive impacts
of her efforts and commitment to assist the populations
involved with regard to regional stability and the
prospects for integration within the European Union.
Given the dynamism initiated and sustained by
the Kosovo and Serbian parties, one could expect
some resistance to emerge and stand in the way of
the implementation of the 19 April agreement and the
subsequent agreements. In that respect, we praise the
responsible attitude of the Serbian leaders to plead the
case with the leaders in northern Kosovo to implement

With respect to security issues, the situation
continues to be calm overall. However, there are some
multi-ethnic areas where tensions persist and incidents
affecting minorities have occurred. We call on the
parties to work together to continue to control those
tensions.
We would particularly like to applaud the
cooperation between UNMIK and the international and
regional organizations present on the ground in such
varied areas as the rule of law, human rights, security
and returns. As the Secretary-General says in his report
(S/2013/444), cooperation and coordination among the
various international presences are key in helping the
parties move forward on the implementation of the
19 April agreement.
The historic agreements that the parties were able
to reach are a milestone that we hope is irreversible as
far as the process of normalization of the relationship is
concerned. The European Union, first and foremost, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
NATO and UNMIK are called upon to continue playing
their valuable roles in facilitating the achievement of
the goals of peace, stability and reconciliation in that
important part of the Balkans. But above all, it is up
to the Serbian and Kosovo parties to move forward
with the same momentum, sense of responsibility and
spirit of compromise that they have shown to date
with respect to the full effective implementation of
their commitments and the settling of pending issues
in order to bring about a political, comprehensive and
inclusive solution in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999), adopted by consensus by the
Security Council.

13-4610213

S/PV.7026

Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for briefing us on the Secretary-General’s
quarterly report (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome to New York Mr. Ivan Mrkić and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj.
In June, at a debate on the same agenda item (see
S/PV.6979), Rwanda welcomed the document signed
between the two parties. I wish to acknowledge that
it is encouraging to see the progress that Serbia and
Kosovo are making. The high degree of commitment,
flexibility, vision and creativity demonstrated by all
parties, both in Pristina and Belgrade, for the steadfast
implementation of the agreement should be commended.
There is no doubt that the full implementation of the
agreement on the ground is not far from realization.
We commend the positive spirit of both parties
and call on them to continue to engage in a substantial
discussion on matters of mutual interest, including
the transformation of the existing structures in
the north and a self-governing region that fits into
Kosovo’s jurisdiction, based on flexible application
of the provisions of the Ahtisaari plan. We call on
the international community to provide unconditional
support and resources to sustain the positive momentum.
The greatest challenge ahead requiring attention
is the scepticism in northern Kosovo. The agreement
cannot be successfully implemented without
cooperation. Implementation should therefore be
carried out with the full participation of Kosovo Serbs,
because sustainable reconciliation cannot be achieved
in the presence of lingering mistrust. In that regard, the
international community should continue to focus on
the security situation in the north and prevent further
tension, as security is a key factor in lasting peace for
all.
Rwanda commends UNMIK’s role in the
monitoring, mediation and facilitation of activities that
have contributed to the political process. The Mission
should continue to adapt to the evolving situation in
order to provide maximum support to the political
process, focusing in particular on issues related to
implementation of the agreement, and should play a role
in ensuring the coordination of all efforts. Furthermore,
UNMIK should actively help to promote reconciliation
and trust-building in Kosovo’s communities with a view
to reaching a negotiated political solution. We therefore

14

call on the people of Kosovo and other stakeholders to
increase their trust-building efforts.
Rwanda commends the progress in Kosovo’s
institutions that facilitate economic and political
stability, strengthen the rule of law and good
governance and improve the protection of human
rights and socioeconomic conditions. We hope that the
prevailing atmosphere will lead to the permanent peace
and stability that the people of region deserve.
Rwanda reiterates its support for the regional
perspective in resolving differences, and therefore
expresses full support for the continued guidance of
the European Union in bringing the two parties closer.
There is no doubt that the dialogue has marked progress
in terms of concluding the agreement. The credibility
of the entire dialogue process has been the cornerstone
of the achievements we see today.
We believe that it is through dialogue, rather than
threats or violence, that mutual issues can be solved.
Rwanda urges all to refrain from any action that could
undermine the achievements attained so far.
In conclusion, let me thank the European Union
for its instrumental role in the negotiations leading to
the tangible progress we witness today. I also express
my appreciation to UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and all partner organizations that, in a difficult context,
continue to play a role in establishing security and the
rule of law and, above all, in bringing together the
different communities in Kosovo and strive to seek a
definitive settlement.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): First,
I thank you, Madam President, for the kind words of
welcome and assure you of China’s close cooperation.
I thank Mr. Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I have listened
carefully to the statements made by His Excellency
Mr. Mrkić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Hoxhaj.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands its legitimate
concerns with regard to the question of Kosovo.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) forms the
important legal basis for the settlement of the question
of Kosovo. China believes that, in accordance with the

13-46102

S/PV.7026

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and under the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) and international law, all parties should seek a
mutually acceptable settlement plan through dialogue
and negotiation. It remains the best and only option for
resolving the Kosovo question.
China appreciates Serbia’s active efforts to seek
a political settlement of the question of Kosovo. My
country welcomes the substantive results achieved in
the high-level political dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. We encourage both parties to continue the
process of pragmatic, constructive dialogue aimed at
achieving a lasting settlement of the question of Kosovo
and maintaining peace and stability in the region of the
Balkans and in all of Europe.
At present, the political and security situation in
Kosovo is showing a positive trend. However, the
situation in northern Kosovo is tense. All parties
concerned should effectively protect the legitimate
rights and interests of all ethnic communities in
Kosovo and actively promote national reconciliation.
They should take a cautious approach to resolving
differences in the context of the dialogue in order to
avoid any action that could complicate or exacerbate
the situation.
China commends the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif and
supports the continued efforts of the Mission to
implement the Council’s mandate.
We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force can
strengthen coordination and cooperation in order to
play a positive role in promoting the settlement of the
question of Kosovo.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the presence of Mr. Ivan Mrkić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, in today’s
meeting and share the ideas he has expressed. We have
carefully listened to Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
We thank Mr. Zarif for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2013/444) and the assessment of the
situation in the province.

The stabilization of the situation in Kosovo
remains distant. In the context of the implementation of
the agreement of 19 April between Serbia and Kosovo,
the international community, and especially the United
Nations, should not reduce the attention given to
the Kosovo settlement process. What is needed is to
genuinely leverage the capacities of UNMIK, taking
into account that the agreement has not eliminated the
province’s core problems and that its implementation is
limping along due to the failure of one side with regard
to its obligations.
A milestone in the implementation of the agreement
would be the holding of municipal elections in the
province. We welcome the efforts of Belgrade aimed at
holding elections. We must ensure the participation of
the greatest possible number of voters living outside of
Kosovo, including internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees.
It is necessary that the electoral process remain
status-neutral, even at the technical level. Both UNMIK
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), under resolution 1244 (1999), have the
mandate and power to prepare and monitor elections. We
note the importance of preventing —including through
the OSCE — possible sabotage by the Kosovo Albanian
authorities of the registration of Kosovo Serbs.
An nalysis of the situation attests to the fact that
Kosovo Albanian authorities, with the collusion of the
international presences, have essentially paralysed the
return to the province of more than 200,000 Serbian
refugees and IDPs, the restoration of their property
rights and the observance of internationally recognized
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Such a
distressing situation demands radical improvement.
We are seriously concerned about signals from
Pristina with respect to the downsizing in 2014 of the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), including of the unit that deals
with the investigation of cases identified by Council of
Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty with respect to
the illegal trafficking of human organs in Kosovo. That
Mission was deployed with the consent of the Security
Council, which authorized UNMIK to give it a number
of powers that EULEX cannot unilaterally transfer.
Because of the fact that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully valid, those powers, in international legal terms,
remain within the competence of UNMIK and cannot

13-4610215

S/PV.7026

be transferred to a third party, particularly to a selfproclaimed Pristina structure.
We also would like to remind the Council that it
empowered UNMIK to play the most active possible
role in assisting in the process of reaching a Kosovo
settlement. The Mission must seek to resolve problems
in such areas as the rule of law, the protection of the
rights of minorities, working out inter-communal
dialogues, gender issues and the protection of Orthodox
holy sites. To that end, it needs the appropriate human
and financial resources. We call upon the leadership
of the Mission to focus its efforts on implementing the
provisions of its mandate, even despite the impediments
that are imposed on it by the Kosovo-Albanian
authorities.
We are deeply concerned by the lack of assessment
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/444) of the
agreement reached by Tirana and Pristina in terms of
military cooperation, which governs issues concerning
the entry, withdrawal and temporary presence of the
armed forces of Kosovo and Albania on each other’s
territories. The document de facto provides Albanian
armed forces the right, on some allegedly legal basis,
to be stationed in the territory of Kosovo, which
fundamentally contradicts the provisions of resolution
1244 (1999). Our position is that under the Serb-Kosovo
agreements, the security of Serbs in the province is
guaranteed by the NATO-led Kosovo Force. Kosovo
armed forces or other units of any kind should not be
present in northern areas of the province
We anticipate that the dialogue mediated by the
European Union between Belgrade and Pristina at
a high political level will contribute to a long-term
settlement of the issues of Kosovo. However, the final
say in any case remains with the Security Council.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
continues to be binding in international legal terms on
any Kosovo settlement.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for the presentation of the quarterly
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2013/444).
Togo is pleased with the important work that
Mr. Zarif is doing together with the entire Mission team
to support the Kosovo authorities in the normalization
of relations with Serbia and, more generally, to ensure

16

the safety, stability and development of that country. I
would also like to thank the representatives of Serbia
and Kosovo for their statements.
On 19 April, Kosovo and Serbia finally reached
an agreement to normalize relations, demonstrating
that they are perfectly capable of finding peaceful
solutions to their disputes. Togo wishes to reiterate its
congratulations to both parties for agreeing to make
major concessions in order to reach that agreement.
Like any agreement, it is not necessarily ideal for all
segments of the populations concerned. Nevertheless, it
does have the merit of proposing a solution that makes
it possible to emerge from the crisis, which we hope
will enable the progressive resolution of the existing
differences between the two parties so that they can
respond to the challenges linked to the development
and well-being their populations.
In that regard, Togo welcomes the adoption, on
22 May, of the implementation plan of the agreement
of 19 April, which will, inter alia, make the necessary
adjustments to the existing legal framework so that they
can take into account the creation of the association
or community of Serbian municipalities in Kosovo,
aimed at carrying out the integration of the structures
of justice and Serbian police within the new entity and
initiating preparations for local elections. We also note
the concrete steps taken by each party to make the
implementation plan effective.
Moreover, we acknowledge the decision of the
Serbian Government to close the justice and police
structures still under its authority in northern Kosovo.
We also acknowledge the adoption by Kosovo of a
law granting amnesty to certain Kosovo Serbs and
modifying the budget so as to take into account the
financing of the association or community of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo. Likewise, we acknowledge
other measures for a smooth implementation of the
19 April agreement, such as the decision of the Kosovo
authorities to organize the upcoming local elections
on 3 November, particularly in northern Kosovo, after
which the association or community will be created;
as well as the exchange, on 17 June, between the two
parties of liaison officers responsible for facilitating
communication and monitoring the implementation of
the agreements.
With regard to the situation in northern Kosovo,
which has always been a Security Council concern,
we note that the report indicates a decline in acts of
violence and the overall improvement in security as
13-46102

S/PV.7026

political dialogue continues. We also welcome the
reports that Serbs in northern Kosovo have finally
made it known that they would not object to the
implementation of the 19 April agreement, indicating
that the parallel institutions of Serbia remain in place
until the new elections. We call on both parties to
pursue with determination the implementation of the
19 April agreement by adopting concrete measures
conducive to a genuine reconciliation between the
different communities living in Kosovo.
After the signing of an agreement, the
reconciliation work undertaken by Kosovo and Serbia
will take time. The reconciliation work will require
drawing on memories to research the disappeared and
educating the population concerned in order to root
out resentment and promote peaceful coexistence. It is
therefore crucial that the international community as
a whole, especially international organizations in the
field, continue supporting the efforts of Serbian and
Kosovo authorities so that the momentum of reforms
undertaken so far does not falter.
We welcome the efforts still being undertaken by
the European Union, UNMIK, the NATO-led Kosovo
Force, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which will play a particularly
important role in the preparation of local elections in
November, in which the local populations should take
part without exclusion.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today. I am also delighted to welcome to the Council
His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Foreign
Minister of Serbia.
Kosovo continues to make progress, both internally
and on the international stage, and is now recognized
by over half of the States Members of the United
Nations. The United Kingdom welcomes the European
Council’s decision of 28 June to open negotiations for a
stabilization and association agreement between Kosovo
and the European Union. The United Kingdom fully
supports the stabilization and association agreement
with Kosovo, which is the first milestone on the path
to eventual European Union (EU) membership. It also
supports the decision to open accession negotiations
with Serbia. Those decisions highlight the way in
which improved cooperation and progress in the EU-

facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
create opportunities and help yield progress in the EU
accession process.
Negotiations on the stabilization and association
agreement mark a new stage in Kosovo’s relationship
with the European Union, NATO and the United
Nations. To that end, we have encouraged those
countries that have not yet recognized Kosovo to do
so. It is important that the stabilization and association
agreement negotiations begin in the autumn and that
they be finalized in good time. The United Kingdom
hopes that Kosovo will work effectively with the
European Commission to ensure that the areas for
reform identified in the 2012 feasibility study are
addressed. Kosovo must now make even greater strides
in improving electoral reform, minority rights and the
rule of law.
As we have said before, the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia is integral to
both countries’ European Union accession paths. The
full implementation of the dialogue agreement will
be crucial to unlocking progress for both Kosovo and
Serbia. Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zarif has set out in detail some of the important steps
that have been taken, and I welcome them. Those steps
need to be consolidated and built upon, so I encourage
continued efforts by both the Serbian and the Kosovo
Governments in taking those difficult steps, and
urge them to reach early agreements on energy and
telecommunication.
Prime Minister Dačić and Prime Minister Thaçi
have shown great courage and political leadership thus
far. It is vital that the two Governments sustain progress,
continue to find compromise and work together to
overcome obstacles to implementation. Belgrade must
also continue to communicate the benefits of that
agreement effectively to the local communities in
northern Kosovo, and Pristina must continue to make
every effort to encourage the integration of Kosovo
Serbs in the north by demonstrating that it supports the
rights and cultures of all its minority citizens.
The continued assistance of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
implementation of dialogue agreements will be
indispensable. We support the important role of
EULEX, which will help integrate institutions in the
north under Kosovo’s jurisdiction. To that end, the
United Kingdom urges the authorities in Pristina and
Belgrade to cooperate fully with EULEX, particularly

13-4610217

S/PV.7026

by ensuring the freedom of movement for all EULEX
personnel in the north.
I welcome Kosovo’s commitment to providing
free, fair and democratic municipal elections on
3 November. We urge all those who have influence to
encourage wide participation in those elections. The
Kosovo Government should work constructively with
international organizations such as the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which will
play a crucial role in facilitating the elections.
The United Kingdom is also keen to see wider
electoral reform in Kosovo before the end of the
year. Kosovo-wide elections will be a significant step
towards the integration of all minority communities
across Kosovo. Another important part of the process
is inter-ethnic reconciliation. In that respect, making
progress on the issue of missing persons is crucial. The
United Kingdom welcomes the formation of a joint
Kosovo Government and civil society working group
on dealing with the past. We hope UNMIK and other
international organizations will continue to contribute
to that process.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to join others in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
On 28 June, Serbia and Kosovo took a further step
towards European integration with the decision by
the Council of the European Union to open accession
negotiations with Serbia and to authorize the start of
negotiations on the conclusion of a stabilization and
association agreement between the European Union and
Kosovo. The decision of the Council of the European
Union was the culmination of the efforts made by the
Serbian and Kosovo Governments since the beginning
of the dialogue facilitated by the European Union. The
commitment of both Governments to implement the
first agreement of principles for the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, concluded
19 April in Brussels, led to that historic decision.
The exchange of liaison officers, the establishment
of integrated border management and the gradual
dismantling of parallel structures in northern Kosovo

18

are just a few examples among many that attest to
the progress achieved in the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union. I welcome in that context the
crucial role that European Union High Representative
Catherine Ashton continues to play.
The implementation of the agreement of 19 April
should continue to strengthen the standardization
process. In that regard, we welcome the fact that, at
their meeting in Brussels the day before yesterday, the
two Prime Ministers, Mr. Ivica Dačić and Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, reiterated their commitment to the success of
the municipal elections of 3 November. It is essential
that the necessary conditions be in place to ensure a
good turnout for the elections, especially by Serbs
in northern Kosovo, so that the provisions of the
19 April agreement on the northern municipalities can
have their full impact. The Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe has an important role to
play, since, under the agreement, it is responsible for
facilitating the elections in the north. For its part,
the European Union is considering — with a view to
accepting — the invitation by the President of Kosovo
to deploy an election observation mission to assess the
conduct of the electoral process throughout Kosovo.
Moreover, the time remaining until the next session
of the dialogue facilitated by the European Union,
scheduled for 8 September in Brussels, will be utilized
to continue the negotiations on telecommunication
and energy in order to reach an agreement on those
important issues in a timely manner.
The normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo must absolutely be accompanied by further
reforms in Kosovo. We welcome, in that respect, the role
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
continues to play with regard to the implementation of
the normalization agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina and in the fight against organized crime and
corruption, the prosecution of war crimes and the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes, including
those related to allegations of organ trafficking. It goes
without saying that it is imperative that the Kosovo
authorities continue to work closely with the European
Union’s Special Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Samuel
Žbogar, and EULEX to continue building the rule of
law in Kosovo. At the same time, it is clear that full
normalization requires the irreversible dismantling
of parallel structures throughout Kosovo. The rule
of law that we all support must be based on a single
administration, and good faith efforts are needed to get
there.
13-46102

S/PV.7026

The recognition of Kosovo by more than half of
the States Members of the United Nations reflects the
positive trend in Kosovo since the establishment of
UNMIK, in 1999. Now, following the agreement of
19 April and given the normalization process that has
been undertaken between Belgrade and Pristina, the
time has come to take into account the new realities
in the international community’s approach to the issue,
including within the Security Council. We will probably
need to adapt, in the medium term, the international
community’s presence on the ground in Kosovo, as the
European Union and NATO have already done.
As the European perspective for Serbia and Kosovo
materializes in the coming years, it is clear that the
need for United Nations involvement in Kosovo will
decrease. We can only encourage the two countries
and their leaders to continue to show the decisiveness
necessary to bring about that common European future.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, Mr. Ivan Mrkić, and thank him and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj for their statements.
Azerbaijan’s position with regard to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence remains unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international basis
for a comprehensive settlement through a political
negotiations process. Azerbaijan takes positive note of
the developments that took place during the reporting
period following the 19 April agreement on principles
governing the normalization of relations. In that
connection, we also note the further agreement reached
on 22 May on an implementation plan for the 19 April
agreement, and the subsequent meetings in Brussels
to advance the work of implementation. We commend
both sides for their efforts to safeguard their important
achievements and encourage them to continue to remain
committed to reaching agreement on the contentious
issues through mutually acceptable solutions. That is
indispensable to greater stability and well-being in the
region.
We emphasize the extraordinary importance of
UNMIK’s presence and activities in Kosovo. It is

noteworthy that the Mission continues to work closely
with communities on the ground and to collaborate with
all other mandated international presences in order to
enhance the political dialogue’s prospects for success.
UNMIK should maintain and further develop its key role
in ensuring the coordination of all international efforts
within its status-neutral framework, as envisaged in
resolution 1244 (1999).
It is encouraging that the overall security situation
in Kosovo remained generally calm during the
reporting period, though stability is yet to be achieved
and incidents and tensions require serious attention
and prompt reaction. The voluntary return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo again showed few signs of
improvement during the reporting period. We commend
the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to monitor the process
and implement the necessary policies for facilitating
returns. In that regard, the question of security should
be given careful consideration.
The support of the international community for
both sides remains essential, particularly in terms
of building reconciliation and confidence. As the
Secretary-General noted in his report, the unresolved
legacies of the conflict, including unsolved cases of
missing persons and the bringing to account of all those
responsible for war crimes and other criminal acts,
should remain key priorities.
In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its contribution to consolidating peace and stability
in Kosovo and the entire region.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivan
Mrkić, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo,
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, for their statements.
The Security Council is meeting for the second
time since the historic agreement of 19 April between
Serbia and Kosovo, reached under the auspices of the
European Union. The agreement was quickly followed
by regular meetings between the authorities of the two
countries in order to ensure its implementation. The
substantial progress that has been made shows their
willingness to move towards normalized relations. We
note with satisfaction the measures taken by Kosovo
to grant substantial autonomy to the communities in

13-4610219

S/PV.7026

Kosovo with a Serbian majority; similarly, we welcome
the Serbian authorities’ closing of a number of police
stations in northern Kosovo, thereby putting an end to
the existence of independent parallel structures. We
call on the parties to maintain their commitment to the
Serb community in northern Kosovo in order to enable
it to take ownership of the process of normalization.
In that regard, the two parties should work together
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to ensure the success of the municipal elections
scheduled for 3 November, by promoting the broadest
possible participation of the Serbian community in
Kosovo. It is crucial that the elections be transparent.
Lastly, we call on the parties to arrive at an agreement
in Brussels on 8 September on the issues of energy and
telecommunication.
At the end of June, we reached a new milestone in the
European rapprochement of these two countries. First,
a decision was taken in principle to open EU accession
negotiations with Serbia; the first intergovernmental
conference will be held by January 2014 to enable Serbia
to achieve its European destiny. Secondly, the European
Council has approved the opening of negotiations aimed
at signing a stabilization and association agreement
with Kosovo. That first contractual link between the
young State and the European Union ushers in a new
phase for the European partners and is a tangible
symbol of a European future for Pristina. Such positive
developments require that the international community
act on them. We therefore call on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to adapt its presence to the situation on the ground in
Kosovo and in collaboration with the Kosovo authorities.
UNMIK continues to carry out important but residual
functions. It is also essential that the Kosovo authorities
cooperate actively with the Special Representative of
the European Union, Mr. Žbogar, and the European
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), which is carrying out
crucial work in implementing the agreements arrived at
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Lastly,
all the parties must respect the freedom of movement
of the soldiers and personnel deployed within the
framework of the Kosovo Force and EULEX.
France remains committed to the realization of
a sovereign, peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo, living in peace with its neighbours. We believe
that Serbia should become one of the pillars of stability
in the Balkans, and today we are again a little closer to
those two goals.

20

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing this morning. We also
thank Foreign Ministers Ivan Mrkić and Enver Hoxhaj
for their statements.
We admire the courage and foresight of the leaders
of Serbia and Kosovo and their commitment to working
for peace in the region. The situation is complex,
historical legacies are rife with mistrust and suspicion
and expectations are mismatched. And yet the two
sides choose to opt for dialogue, mediation and the
implementation of the agreements they have concluded.
We agree that the problems that have plagued
the region will not vanish overnight. That is why we
still need diplomacy and continued investment in the
efforts aimed at reconciliation. Progress is being made
in the follow-up to the normalization agreement and
implementation plan. Both sides have voiced complaints
today, but they also demonstrate the commitment to
forge ahead against difficult odds. There are strong
indications that the current process could pave the way
for the two countries to live side by side as peaceful
neighbours. In that regard, we would especially like
to express appreciation for the pivotal mediation role
played by the European Union and High Representative
Catherine Ashton. The decisions of the European
Council in June to open accession negotiations with
Serbia and stabilization and association agreement
negotiations with Kosovo are welcome developments.
Both Pakistan and the United Nations believe the
European Union remains an indispensable catalyst for
the process of normalizing relations between Serbia
and Kosovo.
We see the role of the United Nations as an
enabler, facilitator and impartial arbiter. The Kosovo
Assembly’s ratification of the normalization agreement
and approval of the amnesty law will definitely help
promote reconciliation. Amendments to the laws on
local self-government, the rights of communities
and the budget would help the implementation of the
Belgrade-Pristina agreements.
In the interest of peace and the progress of future
generations, all sides must reciprocate the spirit of
accommodation. The Kosovo Serb leadership should
participate in the management team to guide the
implementation of the 19 April agreement and the
creation of the future municipalities. Those efforts
should be supplemented by Pristina’s outreach and
assurances to the local population. It is important that
13-46102

S/PV.7026

the local Kosovo Serbs see themselves as stakeholders
in the process. Outreach efforts by the leadership of
Serbia to northern Kosovo Serbs are important. Leaders
on both sides should continue to work together to build
support for the implementation of the agreement among
their communities and constituencies.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/444)
notes that the overall security situation in Kosovo has
remained generally calm and that there has been a
decline in incidents affecting the minority communities.
That is good news and may well be early evidence of
a peace dividend for the region. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, under the
leadership of Special Representative Zarif, continues to
play a critical role in the stabilization of Kosovo. We
particularly appreciate its mediation and facilitation
efforts in northern Kosovo.
Recognition of Kosovo as a State is a key question.
One hundred United Nations States Members have
already done so. Pakistan recognized Kosovo late last
year.
The most important step towards normalization and
reconciliation will be formal inter-State communication
between Serbia and Kosovo. That is a difficult step and
we know the sensitivities involved, but it would ensure
full rapprochement. We wish Prime Ministers Thaçi
and Dačić success in the difficult road ahead. We are
confident that their commitment and dedication, and
the dedication of the people of the two countries, will
ensure sustainable harmony and peace.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I also welcome Foreign
Minister Ivan Mrkić and Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj
to the Council today.
We are pleased to note that Belgrade and Pristina
continue to move forward in their implementation of
the historic 19 April agreement on the normalization
of their relations. We commend the constructive role
and engagement of the European Union, in particular
of Ms. Ashton, in the reconciliation process. The
initial progress in implementing the agreement will
be particularly meaningful as it builds confidence in
the process and helps restore mutual trust among the
stakeholders.
In that regard, we urge the Governments of both
Serbia and Kosovo to use this opportunity to more
actively push forward the implementation of the the

agreement. The holding of municipal elections in
northern Kosovo will be a crucial benchmark in the
implementation process. We encourage Kosovo to step
up its efforts for the transparent and smooth holding of
the upcoming elections.
In order for the ongoing peace process to be
sustainable and irreversible, the root causes of ethnic
tensions and divides should be duly addressed. The
education of youth on tolerance and mutual coexistence
can play a crucial role in enhancing understanding and
respect for ethnic diversity. Unless all ethnic groups
and minorities are integrated into the peace process,
true reconciliation between the two neighbours will
remain elusive.
In that context, more vigorous efforts should be
made to eliminate the scepticism and resistance of the
ethnic Serbs in northern Kosovo. Their grievances
and concerns, if not properly addressed, will remain
severe impediments to achieving durable peace and
reconciliation. We call on both Serbia and Kosovo
to continue their utmost efforts so that the minority
Serbs in northern Kosovo can recognize the common
interest and share the future in the ongoing process of
implementation of the 19 April agreement.
Pristina should ensure full safety and security for
the ethnic Serb communities. Belgrade’s efforts to
assuage their fears and concerns will be critical as well.
We believe that there should be more efforts to
address the legacies of the conflict, such as cases of
missing persons and victims of sexual violence. Those
remaining cases could disrupt hard-won progress
and sow the seeds for future conflicts if justice is not
served. We call on the Governments of both Belgrade
and Pristina to redouble their efforts to heal the scars of
war and protect human rights in the region.
Finally, we commend Special Representative
Zarif and the staff of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo for their dedicated work.
Ms. Nassau (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Zarif for his presentation and for his
continuing efforts in supporting stability, security
and human rights in Kosovo. I also welcome Foreign
Ministers Mrkić and Hoxhaj and thank them for their
remarks.
Australia supports an ongoing transition in
Kosovo that provides for longer-term political stability
with inclusiveness for all parties and that effectively

13-4610221

S/PV.7026

integrates Kosovo within the region. The Security
Council’s role is to support practical progress towards
stability and security. That will eventually enable the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo to
complete its mandate.
We welcome the progress made to date by the parties
in fulfilling their obligations under the 19 April first
agreement on principles governing the normalization of
relations. We also welcome the 28 June decision by the
European Union to open accession negotiations with
Serbia by January 2014 and to launch negotiations for
a stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo.
The priority for both parties now is the
implementation of all 15 points of the April agreement,
fully and within the agreed timelines. To that end,
we welcome the establishment of liaison offices in
Belgrade and Pristina on 17 July and the placement
of a management team for the implementation of
the Brussels agreement in northern Mitrovica. We
welcome the Belgrade-Pristina working group’s efforts
to implement the agreement, particularly their focus on
policing and on election preparations.
With regard to the negotiations in the complex
areas of telecommunication and energy, we note that
progress on practical areas such as these can translate
into genuine confidence-building measures with a long
lasting impact on security and stability.
A robust framework for guaranteeing human
security, the rule of law, human rights and respect for
cultural heritage is essential to the long-term prosperity
of Kosovo and the welfare of its citizens. The local
elections in the northern municipalities on 3 November,
facilitated by the the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, will be a critical step towards
political inclusion for Serbs residing in northern
Kosovo within a sustainable and viable institutional
framework. We welcome efforts by the Governments
in Belgrade and Pristina to encourage all citizens
living in northern Kosovo to take full advantage of that
opportunity to build local democratic institutions that
have the potential to be credible and legitimate. We note
the steps that have been taken to date, including on the
difficult issue of amnesty, in facilitating the transition
of northern Kosovo’s security and political structures
into a coherent Kosovo-wide framework.
Australia also continues to encourage the safe and
viable return of internally displaced persons. Australia
is encouraged by the close cooperation among the

22

Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force (KFOR),
particularly in responding to security incidents in
ethnically mixed areas in northern Kosovo. Ensuring
security will continue to be vital for the success of the
elections.
Australia welcomed the visit to Kosovo by United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay
on 19 and 20 June. Australia is encouraged that she
noted continuing positive dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. We are pleased that High Commissioner
Pillay found that a good legal and institutional human
rights framework was in place. Important next steps
in building community confidence will be addressing
the weaknesses of rule-of-law institutions in Kosovo,
including ensuring the independence of the judiciary
and addressing the lack of execution of judicial
decisions.
Sustained efforts to improve inclusive education,
and human rights education in particular, will also
be vital for Kosovo’s future generations. Australia
welcome’s Kosovo’s commitment to protecting
religious and cultural sights. In that regard, we note the
ongoing transfer of responsibilities for the protection of
religious and cultural heritage from KFOR to the newly
established Kosovo police unit. It is essential that the
work of that new police unit retains the confidence of
Serbs throughout Kosovo. Australia condemns acts
of vandalism, desecration and theft from all sights of
cultural or religious significance. We commend the
establishment of a cultural heritage council in Prizren
on 2 July and hope that a similar council will soon open
in Rahovec/Orahovac.
Australia continues to support ongoing dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. The sustained
engagement of the international community will be
crucial to ensuring that agreements are faithfully
implemented. We continue to support measures
to address the sensitivities of local communities,
particularly in northern Kosovo, and stress the
importance of encouraging the development of strong
institutions to ensure a stable and peaceful Kosovo.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/444), which in many
respects is hopeful. That should encourage us to exert
even greater efforts in Kosovo. We are also grateful

13-46102

S/PV.7026

for presentations given by Minister Ivan Mrkić and by
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

minority communities to ensure the effective provision
of public and social services.

The Security Council will have to follow closely
the implementation of the 19 April agreement. This
is a critical moment in relations between the parties.
The support of the international community and its
commitment to Kosovo continue to be essential. We
hope that the parties will continue to do everything
within their reach to implement the agreement. The
Belgrade agreement with the Kosovo Serbs continues to
be important in that regard. Likewise, Pristina should
complement those efforts and conduct activities to
disseminate those agreements and provide assurances
to the local population.

There is a broad range of activities in which
UNMIK continues to use its capacity and resources
to help reduce tensions and incidents. That is why it
is important for UNMIK to continue enjoying all the
necessary support to strengthen its presence in Kosovo,
especially in the north.

We agree with the Secretary-General that, in order
to avoid tensions and achieve success, it is important
for Kosovo Serbs to see themselves as co-participants
in the process. Moreover, it appears to be positive
that in the north of Kosovo the frequency of incidents
related to the use of explosive devices has decreased
significantly. We note that there has also been a
decrease in the number incidents affecting minority
communities across Kosovo, in comparison with the
previous period. We also note that the application of the
integrated management agreement on crossing points
continues without major problems.
Despite that progress, the report also indicates
that there are persistent tensions in northern Mitrovica
with regard to the construction of houses for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) from Kosovo and Albania.
We are concerned that, according to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), in April and May there were only 36 cases
of IDPs returning to Kosovo, in comparison with 159
during the same period in 2012. According to UNHCR,
a lack of sufficient funding to assign either housing
and/or land continues to be one of the main obstacles
to voluntary return.
As we mentioned in the latest debate on this topic
(see S/PV.6979), we believe that he United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has a central role to play during this new phase of
implementing the 19 April agreement. We welcome
the fact that UNMIK is intensifying its efforts and its
cooperation with all the relevant parties when it comes
to major problems in the field. We support UNMIK’s
efforts to carry out mediation and facilitation functions
in northern Kosovo and to serve as a channel of
communication between municipal representatives and

Moving on to the work of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) special
investigative task force on the inhumane treatment of
migrants and organ trafficking, we note with interest
the information included in the report on EULEX
activities annexed to the Secretary-General’s report.
We follow its progress with attention.
We take very seriously the Secretary-General’s
comment on the importance of the international
community’s continued commitment to move towards
reconciliation and to help heal wounds created by
the conflict. We agree that the tasks of resolving the
legacy of the conflict must remain a priority, including
pending cases of missing persons and accountability
for war crimes and other crimes.
To conclude, we affirm the primacy of resolution
1244 (1999) as a legal framework applicable to
Kosovo, as well as the importance of full respect for
international law. We thank the Special Representative
for his continued efforts to promote reconciliation
among Kosovo’s communities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation of Mr. Ivan Mrkić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj.
I wish, first of all, to highlight the fundamental
role that the United Nations plays in Kosovo through
UNMIK, which is to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights and to cooperate with the
Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), while maintaining a
neutral position vis-à-vis the status of the territory and
operating under the auspices of the United Nations.

13-4610223

S/PV.7026

Argentina voted in favour of resolution 1244 (1999)
when it was a member of the Security Council previously.
We believe that it continues to be the international
legal basis applicable in Kosovo for achieving a
comprehensive solution through a cooperative political
process and effective negotiations on the basis of
good faith. Once again, we are pleased at the signing
of the first agreement on principles governing the
normalization of relations in the context of the process
of the high-level dialogue under the auspices of the
European Union. We trust that the agreement will
contribute to the stabilization of the situation through
compromise, confidence and dialogue. We hope that
meetings will continue to be held between the parties
in order to make progress in the implementation of
the agreement and accelerate the political resolution
of pending issues. In that framework, Serbia’s efforts
towards the normalization of relations deserve our
special recognition.
We encourage the parties to continue along the path
of progress in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999),
and we also encourage them to implement the letter of
the agreement by overcoming the wounds of the past in
a peaceful manner in a relationship of trust.
While we are encouraged by the fact that the
overall security situation in Kosovo was peaceful
during the reporting period, we should not fail to note
the security situation in northern Mitrovica, which
calls for coordinated action so that the problems there
can be appropriately resolved in order to prevent
future tensions. The important work of UNMIK is
particularly prominent when it comes to providing full
support to political processes, giving special attention
to issues related to the agreement of 19 April. Once
again, we encourage the finding of specific practical
solutions aimed at preventing tensions and ensuring
that UNMIK continues to play its indispensable role
in the field to prevent conflicts and conduct mediation
and facilitation, as noted by the Secretary-General in
his report.
We are very pleased with the progress made in
the reconstruction and protection of cultural and

24

religious heritage, which is one of UNMIK’s priorities,
aimed at ensuring the continuity of ongoing activities
that contribute to genuine reconciliation between
communities. Argentina believes that it is extremely
important for there to be full respect for the human
rights of displaced persons returning to their places of
origin, so that they can have access to their substantive
rights and not be the subject of discrimination. It is
fundamental to continue working on ensuring the
return and permanent reintegration of internally
displaced persons, particularly by facilitating their
access to housing, basic services and jobs, as well as
through the issuance of documents on their civil status
and the avoidance of incidents heightening insecurity.
UNMIK’s technical assistance is of great
importance, as is continuing to give priority to efforts
aimed at erasing the traces of the legacy of conflict,
which include ongoing cases of disappeared persons, as
well as efforts to promote and protect all human rights.
Impunity must not be allowed to be a response to major
violations of human rights. We highlight UNMIK’s
work in its support of the rule of law, especially
cooperation with all interested parties when it comes to
the major problems in the field. As appropriately noted
by the Secretary-General in his report, it is also key
for the international presence in Kosovo to continue
strengthening mutual cooperation with a common
end of assisting in the establishment of appropriate
conditions for the next stages of application of the
19 April agreement.
Finally, we wish to highlight the work done by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

13-46102
