S/PV.9211

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9211th meeting

Wednesday, 7 December 2022, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. Cisneros Chávez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2022/898)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-72729 (E)
*2272729*

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2022/898)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/898, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: I would like to thank the Security
Council members for the opportunity to speak with
them today. They may recall that the last time I briefed
the Council (see S/PV.9129) I told them that we might
have some good news when I came back in December,
and for more than a year now, positive news has been in
short supply in the Sudan. Since the military takeover
of 25 October 2021, the country has found itself in a
multidimensional political, economic and security
crisis. The dynamics have continued for more than a
couple of weeks, however, in spite of hopes that the
Sudan may find a way out of the crisis and embark
on a more sustainable new transitional phase. Let me
explain those dynamics.
Last Monday, 5 December, the military leadership
and a broad range of civilian actors signed up to a
political framework agreement. It was supposed to lay
2/17

07/12/2022

the ground, after a further round of talks on substance,
for a final political accord and the formation of a new
civilian Government, leading the country towards
recovery and democratic elections over a two-year
transitional phase. I would like to commend the efforts
by all the Sudanese sides. The military and civilian
stakeholders have come a long way from the coup
one year ago, and from the military’s announcement
in July that it would withdraw from politics, to the
latest developments.
On 24 October, the trilateral mechanism, that is,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, received
a document from the military leadership with their
comments and amendments to the draft constitutional
document, which had earlier been prepared under the
auspices of the Sudanese Bar Association’s steering
committee. That represented a significant first break.
Concurrently, the civilian signatories to the draft
formed a coalition to engage collectively in talks with
the military. That coalition and the military then agreed
on a two-phase political process to return to a civilianled transition. The first phase has now been concluded
with the signing of the political framework agreement.
The second phase is about to begin, and the events of
the past two days are the reason that I am not in New
York today but talking to the Council from Khartoum.
Encouragingly, both the civilian and the military
stakeholders have become more transparent about
preliminary understandings and have increased their
efforts to reach out to other actors and to the public.
A final political agreement, once reached, should
result in a civilian Government that should be in a
better position to address the security, humanitarian
and economic situations, pave the way towards building
a democratic State based on human rights, the rule of
law and gender equality, and provide a future for the
young men and women of the Sudan. It will also enable
a resumption of peace talks with movements that have
yet to make peace with the Government and for the
restoration of broad-based international support to
the Sudan.
The fact that we are approaching the end of the
year makes this an opportune moment to reflect on
the challenges of the past 13 months. The coup and the
subsequent political impasse plunged the country into a
state of uncertainty and insecurity. Tensions escalated
into violence in areas that had previously been calm.
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9211

More than 900 people have reportedly been killed
and many more injured in violent conflict since the
beginning of this year. In the past month there were
significant clashes in Blue Nile, West Kordofan and
Central Darfur. The resurgence of large-scale violence
demonstrates the increasing fragility at the State level,
exacerbated by the continued Government vacuum.
The local authorities simply lack the capacity and
resources to protect civilians where the root causes of
fundamental grievances have yet to be addressed.

use of force. In the latest incident on 24 November,
two protesters were killed in Omdurman, bringing
the total death toll among protesters since the coup to
121, mainly in the capital. In addition, more than 8,000
people have been injured. As I have stated repeatedly
before the Council, it is incumbent on the authorities
to respect the right to peaceful assembly and to refrain
from the excessive use of force, even when provoked.
Equally important is to ensure proper due process for
defendants facing trial.

Since my previous briefing to the Council on the
Blue Nile in September, a state of emergency has been
imposed in that region. While the levels of violence
have subsided, the situation remains precarious.
Intercommunal violence also occurred in Lagawa
locality, in West Kordofan, in mid-October, killing at
least 19 people and displacing 65,000 people. In central
Darfur, the past two months have witnessed intense
fighting between the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA), led
by Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, and the Rapid Support Forces.
The latest episode of violence in Jebel Marra occurred
in November and resulted in the deaths of 13 civilians
and the displacement of 5,600. The SLA leader, Abdul
Wahid Al-Nur, confirmed to me during my recent visit
to Juba that he would “neither attack nor escalate”. Let
me urge all sides to at least commit to that principle.

In that context, the visit to the Sudan last month by
the new United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Mr. Volker Türk — his first field visit since
assuming his duties — is testament to the unwavering
commitment of the United Nations to upholding human
rights in the Sudan. I thank the Sudanese authorities for
facilitating Mr. Türk’s visit.

Across the Sudan, the conflict has displaced more
than 260,000 people since the beginning of the year.
These are human-made catastrophes, often caused
by disputes over access to resources and seemingly
exacerbated by political manipulation in more than a few
cases. And all of that is compounding natural disasters
and growing humanitarian needs. Humanitarian
partners estimate that about 15.8 million people — one
third of the population — will need humanitarian
assistance in 2023. That is an increase of 1.5 million as
compared to 2022 — the biggest in a decade. In 2022,
the number of flood-affected people surpassed that of
last year and reached 349,000 across the country. High
inflation continues to reduce households’ purchasing
power, with people unable to meet their basic needs.
While the United Nations and partner organizations
managed to aid 9.1 million people in need from January
to September, the 2022 humanitarian response plan is
funded at only 41.3 per cent.
The human rights situation remains concerning.
Protests against military rule have continued and
largely remained peaceful. However, security forces
have more often than not acted or reacted with excessive

The meaningful participation of women and
young people is a critical factor for the success of the
political process and the transition. The women’s rights
group, a diverse group of non-partisan women from
different regions, continues to engage with all parties
to ensure women’s rights in any future agreement.
The group continues to call for women’s meaningful
participation in the process at a minimum of 40 per cent
across delegations. I am encouraged that the women’s
rights group has gained broader acceptance and
that some of women’s demands were included in the
framework agreement.
In recent months, the trilateral mechanism has
exerted substantial efforts to encourage Sudanese
stakeholders to participate in the political process.
That includes meetings with resistance committees
and other civil-society actors. In mid-November, the
trilateral mechanism visited Kassala to listen to various
stakeholders, officials, civil society, women, young
people and tribal leaders from the east of the Sudan,
which arguably is the country’s most marginalized
and least represented region. Last week, the trilateral
mechanism travelled to Juba to meet with the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N) leader,
Abdelaziz El-Hilu, and SLA leader Abdul Wahid
Al-Nur to inform them about the political process and
hear their views.
While the signing of the framework agreement is
an important breakthrough, critical contentious issues
still need to be addressed in the final agreement. Those
issues include security sector reform and the merger of

22-727293/17

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

forces, transitional justice, the implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement, the status of the dismantling
committee and the country’s east. We would also deem
it useful to have an exchange in this second phase
about the economic and developmental priorities of the
new Government. UNITAMS and the United Nations
country team have already begun to coordinate with
the international community on the ground here to
ensure the provision of a package of support for a new
transitional period.
While progress on the political track is encouraging,
it can still be derailed by challenges and spoilers. As the
Sudan gets closer to reaching a final political agreement,
those who do not see their interests advanced by a
political settlement may escalate attempts to undermine
the process. A sufficiently inclusive process can help
safeguard against their influence. Concerted advocacy
from the international community is also needed to
encourage constructive positions on the part of those
who are not, or do not want to be, part of the process, as
well as those who have yet to join it.
In conclusion, let me once again commend those
Sudanese who two days ago took the courageous step of
agreeing on and signing up to the political framework
agreement. That was a truly Sudanese-owned and
Sudanese-led process. The framework agreement
now offers a path for realizing the aspirations of the
Sudan’s young people, women and men. However,
working together with the United Nations, the members
of the Security Council and the larger international
community in support of those efforts can help the
Sudanese to move forward on the path they have chosen.
The President: I thank Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his briefing today and the continued herculean
efforts of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan at our meeting today.
First, I would like to welcome the signing of
the political framework agreement as an important
step towards a return to a civilian-led transitional
Government in the Sudan. The efforts by all the parties
involved to agree on a genuinely civilian-led transitional
4/17

07/12/2022

governance arrangement are commendable, but there is
much more to be done. We now urge all the Sudanese
parties to urgently unite behind a final agreement to
form a civilian-led Government. The United Kingdom
condemns the killing of two further protesters in the
reporting period and calls for the security forces to
exercise maximum restraint and respect the right to
peaceful protest.
Secondly, we should be clear that the consequences
of a delay in reaching a final agreement would be severe.
Approximately one third of the Sudan’s population
is projected to be in need of humanitarian assistance
in 2023. A concerted effort to finalize negotiations
is essential in order to address the Sudan’s urgent
humanitarian and economic challenges. A civilian-led
transitional Government can put the country on the
road to recovery and allow for the full resumption of
international support. The United Kingdom is working
with partners to coordinate significant economic
support for a civilian-led transitional Government once
it is formed.
Thirdly, as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Perthes told us, the security situation across
the Sudan also remains fragile. We reiterate our deep
concern about the significant violence in the Blue Nile
and West Kordofan states.
We urge the Sudanese authorities to implement the
security arrangements of the Juba Peace Agreement,
engage with the impacted communities to restore peace
and fulfil their responsibility to protect civilians.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom commends the
compromises made by all parties to agree on the initial
political framework. We call for an inclusive dialogue
on the outstanding issues to commence without delay
and support a strong role for UNITAMS, along with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, in facilitating those Sudanese-led
negotiations. The United Kingdom is committed to
supporting the Sudan’s journey to democracy and to the
realization of the Sudanese people’s calls for freedom,
peace and justice.
We hope the Council will be able to give collective
public expression to the latest developments in a press
statement shortly.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
Perthes for his update and his tireless efforts, as well as
those of his team — together with the Intergovernmental
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union (AU).
Norway welcomes the signing this week, in
Khartoum, of the political framework agreement,
an important agreement made possible through the
leadership and ownership of a broad group of Sudanese
actors and with the effective facilitation of the AUIGAD-United Nations trilateral mechanism. This is a
truly homegrown solution.
We also thank the Special Representative for the
update on second phase of the political process. We call
on all stakeholders to maintain the momentum that has
been created. The trilateral mechanism will have an
important role to play in the facilitation of the second
phase. It is essential that the outcome of the second
phase be a Sudanese solution.
Women and young people must also have a
meaningful and constructive role in the process going
forward. Any agreement resulting from a non-inclusive
process will lack credibility with the Sudanese people
and the international community.
We now need all hands on deck to prepare for the
day after, both in the Sudan and at the international
level. The next civilian transitional Government must
receive timely and relevant support, especially against
the backdrop of the economic crisis, which is having
an alarming impact on food security and livelihoods.
People in marginalized and war-affected areas are
particularly vulnerable. We must scale up humanitarian
action to meet emerging needs and prevent an even
more dire situation next year.
Norway remains concerned about the continued
use of excessive force against protesters and civilians
in the Sudan. That must stop now. For an inclusive
and democratic transition to succeed, a conducive
environment must be ensured. People have the right
to assemble peacefully, and the Sudanese authorities
have an obligation to ensure that this right can be
exercised without fear of repercussions. It is also the
Government’s responsibility to protect all civilians and
to allow — and facilitate — full, safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance.
Finally, as this is my last meeting on the Sudan
during our current tenure in the Council, allow me to
end my statement with the following reflection.
It is important for the Security Council to support
African solutions. The developments in the Sudan

S/PV.9211

during the past 14 months would have been a prime
opportunity to do so. While we have seen a clear
and decisive approach from the AU, the Council has
not been able to speak with one voice in support of
the tripartite mechanism and the political process.
Instead, with its silence, it sent unclear signals to the
parties, making progress difficult. Supporting African
solutions cannot only be a figure of speech; it must
translate into action. The Security Council should seize
this opportunity to rally behind the AU and IGAD and
express its full support to the tripartite mechanism and
the political process.
Norway stands behind the Sudanese people in their
aspirations to move towards a democratic transition
and elections.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative Perthes for his briefing, and we welcome
the presence of the representative of the Sudan in
today’s meeting.
Ireland welcomes the breakthrough in the political
process towards a new democratic transition in the
Sudan. We commend the Sudanese people on taking
this important step on the road back to a hopeful future,
and we very much appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in supporting and facilitating
that progress.
We have seen the damaging consequences of last
year’s coup on all aspects of Sudanese life — from
politics and security to the economy. For the Sudan to
recover from this setback, the military must now live up
to its commitment to hand over power to a civilian-led
Government. It must create a conducive environment
for the next stage of the political process. In practical
terms that means that the military and security services
must stop the use of force against protesters, halt
unlawful detention and ensure the right of peaceful
assembly and association.
The release of high-level political prisoners earlier
this week was a critical confidence-building measure.
However, other ordinary Sudanese people who simply
called for the return to democratic transition remain
in detention. Their freedom would truly be a sign that
this agreement marks the beginning of a return of the
people to power. A lasting political agreement requires
the buy-in of the people of the Sudan — not just in
Khartoum, but throughout the country.

22-727295/17

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

It cannot be just another elite bargain. The
Sudan has seen enough of those after over 30 years
of dictatorship and war. The years since the 2019
revolution have seen a widening trust gap. That must be
addressed during this second phase of the negotiations.
Youth, civil society, women and the community-level
resistance committees have played key roles in the
Sudan’s journey towards democracy.
Women were missing from the room on Monday.
The commitment of 40 per cent participation by women,
set out in the new accord, must be realized. They must be
at the negotiating table, in decision-making bodies and
in all areas of public life. We encourage all stakeholders
to meaningfully engage in the political process and to
put aside vested interests and entrenched positions.
A spirit of consensus is now needed to deliver for the
people of the Sudan.
As we just now heard from Mr. Perthes, there
are a number of vital issues that need to be resolved
in the coming weeks. In particular, accountability
and transitional justice will be crucial to lasting
peace. As the accord acknowledges, that must deliver
justice for the victims of both current and past crimes
in the Sudan. The important work done by Sudanese
experts during the previous transitional period can
be a useful starting point. The Sudan can also draw
upon United Nations expertise and lessons from other
countries — such as Colombia — that have found ways
to deliver victim-centred justice. As the United Nations
High Commissioner said after his recent visit to the
Sudan, human rights and justice have to be at the core
of that transition.
The political crisis has distracted the authorities
from delivering on their responsibility to provide
security in the Sudan. It has also emboldened some
actors to take advantage of the crisis in order to
seize resources and positions. The rise in subnational
violence has been alarming. A return to a civilianled Government and security sector reform is key to
resolving conflicts such as those we have seen in Blue
Nile, Darfur and Kordofan.
Finally, we remain very worried about the
humanitarian situation. It continues to deteriorate
and is made worse by the economic crisis, the effects
of climate change and hunger that is exacerbated by
conflict. Ireland and the European Union will continue
to support the Sudan in alleviating this humanitarian
crisis. Indeed, this month Ireland made an additional
6/17

07/12/2022

contribution to humanitarian partners in the Sudan. We
will continue to stand with the Sudanese people as they
emerge from the shadow of the coup.
In addition, Ireland supports the proposal for a
press statement welcoming the political agreement, as
mentioned by the representative of the United Kingdom.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Kenya and my country, Ghana.
I thank Special Representative Volker Perthes
for his briefing. I welcome the participation of the
representative of the Sudan in this meeting.
Even as we meet, the Sudan continues to experience
significant economic, security and political challenges.
However, we welcome the signing of the political
framework agreement between civilian political forces
and the military institution on 5 December, which is
an important first step in returning the country to the
democratic transition process. We commend the political
progress being made in the light of the ongoing dialogue
among the various political stakeholders in the Sudan.
The Sudanese people have shown resilience, and we
believe that, with the support of the Security Council,
through the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), as well
as the leadership of the African Union (AU) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the assistance of the international community, they
will overcome the present political, economic, security
and humanitarian challenges.
Based on the contents of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/898), the A3 would like to focus
its statement on the following four issues: the
political, security and economic situations and the
UNITAMS mandate.
On the political situation, the A3 notes with
appreciation the progress made so far in the drafting of
a new constitution, spearheaded by the Sudanese Bar
Association. We commend the inclusive manner in which
the draft constitution was developed by a committee
composed of various political party groupings, civilsociety organizations and prominent academics and was
signed by the Forces for Freedom and Change-Central
Council, the Original Democratic Unionist Party, the
Popular Congress Party and Ansar Al-Sunna, as well as
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9211

a range of civil-society organizations, women’s groups
and professional associations.

resulting in localized losses due to floods and soaring
prices of agricultural inputs, including fuel.

We
commend
the
trilateral
mechanism,
consisting of the United Nations, the AU and IGAD,
for its continued efforts in supporting the Sudanese
stakeholders in fostering a political dialogue leading
to the signing of the political framework agreement.
The A3 appeals to the signatories to continue with
their efforts to broaden the support base, particularly
working with non-signatories to build consensus and
address the remaining issues.

The A3 continues to join the appeal by the
Secretary-General for exceptional modalities to support
vulnerable communities and protect human and social
capital through continued international assistance for the
Sudan so as to alleviate the suffering of the vulnerable,
particularly women and children. The A3 wishes to
draw attention to the fact that the Sudan continues to
receive new refugees from neighbouring countries, and
that compounds the current socioeconomic challenges
being experienced by the country.

Furthermore, we urge the Sudanese authorities,
which have a fundamental responsibility for creating
an environment conducive to viable inclusive political
dialogue, to embrace the progress made by releasing
all political detainees as a critical confidence-building
measure in that regard.
On the security front, the A3 remains deeply
concerned that, despite the signing of a cessation
of hostilities agreement on 3 August, there has been
a recurrent outbreak of intercommunal violence
in Darfur, leading to general insecurity, as well as
intercommunal clashes, armed conflict and criminality,
in Blue Nile state. Such clashes could undermine the
ongoing political dialogue and peace efforts. The A3
is gravely concerned about the recurrent and deliberate
destruction of farms during the rainy season, which
exacerbates the already dire economic situation in the
Sudan. We call on the Government of the Sudan to
investigate those incidents of insecurity and criminal
activities and hold the perpetrators accountable.
While we welcome the steps taken by the
Government of the Sudan to respond to the situation,
more efforts are needed, including the expeditious
implementation of the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians. We call on all parties to remain faithful
to their commitments, including the implementation of
the Juba Peace Agreement.
The A3 notes with concern the dire economic
situation in the Sudan and the global food crisis, which
has pushed the prices of staples beyond reach for many
already vulnerable Sudanese. As noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the prices of sorghum and millet rose
by between 10 and 35 per cent in August, reaching new
record highs, and the 2022 harvested area and yields
are likely to be affected due to climate change, as the
Sudan has witnessed below-average early-season rains,

The A3 again urges the international donor
community and international financial institutions to
reconsider the temporary suspension of aid to the Sudan
and continue their support programmes and projects
to sustain the lives and livelihoods of the civilian
population. We commend the efforts of international
humanitarian donors, which continue to extend vital
assistance to the people of the Sudan.
The role of UNITAMS in supporting the democratic
transition process and creating conditions for advancing
socioeconomic development in the Sudan cannot be
underestimated. We take note of the achievements of
UNITAMS highlighted in section III of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, and we pledge our support to the
Mission in implementing the four objectives.
We take note with appreciation of the continued
efforts of engagement between UNITAMS and the
Sudanese authorities, as well as other stakeholders, with
a view to facilitating the expeditious implementation
of the identified plans and programmes. We also
reiterate that all programmes and initiatives should be
determined based on the needs and priorities identified
by the Sudan.
In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms its solidarity with
the people of the Sudan and calls for a Sudanese-led
solution to the political impasse to achieve sustainable
peace, security and greater economic development.
The A3 also supports the press statement, submitted
by the United Kingdom, in respect of the signing of
the Sudan political framework agreement on Monday,
5 December.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his comprehensive briefing.

22-727297/17

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The United States welcomes the announcement by
the Sudanese parties of an initial political framework
agreement. That is an essential first step towards
re-establishing the Sudan’s democratic transition.
There is now a credible path to a final agreement that
would take the Sudan out of its current political crisis.
We commend the parties’ efforts to garner support
for the framework agreement from a broad range
of Sudanese actors and their plans for an additional
phase for continued inclusive dialogue on key issues
of concern. But time is of the essence. We urge all
Sudanese actors to engage in dialogue in good faith and
to establish a civilian-led transitional Government as
soon as possible. We fully support the role of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in facilitating the next phase
of dialogue and concluding negotiations.
The United States reiterates the need for the
Sudanese Government, including the military and
security services, to fully respect the freedoms of
association, expression and peaceful assembly. The
Government and the military must also fulfil their
responsibility to protect the population and hold those
responsible for violence against civilians accountable.
We call on the Government to create a more
conducive environment for negotiations by releasing
political detainees, ceasing violence against protesters
and reversing the recent administrative decisions that
undermine the Sudanese Bar Association and other
professional organizations.
The United States condemns the actions of spoilers
inside and outside the Sudan attempting to restrict
political space and undermine the Sudan’s stability
and democratic transition. Similarly, we condemn
the recent violence in Darfur and Blue Nile states, to
which the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral just referred, which exacerbates the dire
humanitarian situation and erodes the gains of the
Juba Peace Agreement. That violence demonstrates the
urgent need to implement the Agreement, including
security sector reform, robust international monitoring
and reporting mechanisms, the full deployment of the
security keeping forces in Darfur and comprehensive,
inclusive and transparent transitional justice processes.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We thank Special
Representative Perthes for his update and welcome the
representative of the Sudan to this meeting. Albania
8/17

07/12/2022

commends the work of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) in
supporting the Sudan and its people and supports a
stronger role for UNITAMS.
We remain concerned about the political, security,
human rights and humanitarian situation in the Sudan.
The signing on 5 December of a political framework
agreement by a broad representation of political forces
and the military component in the Sudan is very much
welcomed and commended. We hope that it can lead to
a credible civilian-led Government. In that regard, we
reiterate our full support to the work of the trilateral
mechanism in further accelerating that process. We also
urge all other stakeholders to build on that momentum,
engage in constructive dialogue and bridge the gap
between the opposing parties. That will be essential
to completing the transitional tasks that will enable
the Sudanese people to choose their future through
elections. We welcome the role played by Sudanese
civil society and its meaningful contribution to the
intra-Sudanese discussions. We commend Sudanese
women for their commitment to peace and human rights.
We also welcome the visit of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights to the Sudan in November and support
his statement that human rights must be at the core of
the transition.
We remain concerned about the situation in Darfur.
The reported renewed large-scale violence in Blue Nile
state is alarming and must stop. The current situation
in Darfur and across the country demonstrates the
urgent need to implement the Juba Peace Agreement,
considering that two years have passed its signing. In that
regard, accountability for violence against civilians and
for sexual and gender-based violence and human rights
violations is essential to implementing the Agreement
in a manner that improves the lives of the Sudanese
people. Humanitarian needs also remain very high and
are unfortunately projected to grow over the next year.
We therefore call on the Sudanese authorities to provide
unhindered humanitarian access to all affected and to
ensure the safety of the humanitarian workers who are
risking their lives to help those in need.
Now is the right time to take advantage of the
momentum and build on it by agreeing on the formation
of a civilian-led Government that can restore democracy
in the country. It will be vital for the Council to
continue monitoring the political situation in the Sudan
and to speak with one voice. In that context, we stand
ready to support a press statement to welcome recent
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9211

developments, as mentioned by the representative of
the United Kingdom.

Authority on Development to bring the political
deadlock in the Sudan to an end.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Perthes for his informative briefing, and
of course for his work on the ground. I welcome the
delegation of the Sudan to this meeting.

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Perthes for his updates, including on
the efforts of the trilateral mechanism, in the light
of the common understanding reached on the draft
constitutional document, which led to the signing of a
political framework agreement earlier this week. We
look forward to a press statement from the Council in
that regard. I also welcome Ambassador Mohamed to
our meeting today.

I would like to start by commending Sudan for the
latest developments on the political front. We welcome
the Sudanese Bar Association’s draft transitional
Constitution and hope that the current discussions
among civilian political forces in that regard will help
to form the basis for a broader political settlement.
We also hope that the signing on 5 December of a
political framework agreement between the civilian
and military components will open an avenue for closer
and more fruitful cooperation. We appreciate the active
participation of several civil-society representatives in
the Bar Association’s drafting committee and hope it can
lead to a truly inclusive and nationally owned dialogue.
Despite recent positive developments, we remain
concerned about the recurring intercommunal violence
in both West Kordofan and the Blue Nile region, which
has led to hundreds of deaths and the displacement of
thousands of women, men and children. While we are
aware of the limited resources available, we call on the
Sudan’s authorities to increase their efforts to protect
civilians in those areas, enhance accountability and
guarantee conditions conducive to the safe return of
displaced persons.
The recurring violence highlights the importance
of addressing the root causes of conflict in the Darfur,
Kordofan and Blue Nile regions. Mobilizing support
from international partners is urgent if financial
assistance to the Sudan is to be resumed in order to
ensure the provision of basic services and generate
new economic opportunities. Tackling socioeconomic
constraints and reducing poverty are fundamental
steps towards sustainable peace. Another key step in
that direction would be the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement without further delay. We encourage
the Sudanese authorities to work towards a bolder and
speedier implementation of the Agreement.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize my delegation’s
support for the trilateral mechanism’s crucial work,
as stated in previous meetings of the Council. We
commend the critical facilitation efforts made by the
United Nations Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan, the African Union and the Intergovernmental

In the context of our discussion, I would like to
focus on three important issues.
First, the United Arab Emirates welcomed the
signing of a political framework agreement, to regional
and international acclaim. We hope that it opens a new
chapter for the Sudanese people to continue on their path
towards the security and prosperity they seek. The next
phase therefore demands building on that momentum
in order to ensure a sustainable political agreement,
by redoubling efforts to bridge differences among
the various actors and address outstanding issues,
especially as time is of the essence. In that regard, we
want to stress the importance of the continued inclusion
of women in consultations to make sure that their
needs and priorities are taken into account during the
transitional period and beyond. We further stress the
importance of opting for the language of dialogue and
wisdom, which is in the best interests of our brother
people of the Sudan.
Secondly, we stress that the success of the
transitional period in the Sudan requires a resumption
of programmes by international financial institutions
and international partners in order to continue their
support for the Sudan’s economy and prevent it from
collapsing at this critical stage, especially considering
the current problems of hyperinflation, high
unemployment and accumulated external debt. That
support will be increasingly needed in the light of the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, with communities
still experiencing difficulties in accessing basic
commodities and dealing with serious damage caused
by the recent severe floods in some areas.
Thirdly, my country has followed with concern the
recent tribal clashes in West Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. The Sudan has taken a number of measures to
calm the situation, including through the work of its

22-727299/17

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

fact-finding committee. We stress that if the tensions
are to be contained and renewed clashes prevented,
the Sudan’s local efforts must be continued and built
on. Similarly, with regard to the situation in Darfur,
the local reconciliation agreements have demonstrated
their effectiveness in continuing to support stability
there. The valuable contributions of the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee have also had a significant impact
on progress in implementing the transitional security
arrangements for Darfur in accordance with the Juba
Peace Agreement. In that context, we stress the need for
the international community to provide the necessary
support to the Sudan to complete the implementation of
all the Peace Agreement’s provisions.
In conclusion, we sincerely wish the Sudan every
success as it completes the transitional period and meets
the aspirations of its people for stability and prosperity.
In turn, we will continue to follow the work of the
trilateral mechanism and engage with the Sudanese
parties in that important process.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Volker Perthes for the briefing on the
developing situation in the Sudan. We also take note of
the briefing by our colleague from Ghana, Ambassador
Carolyn Oppong-Ntiri, on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) over
the past 90 days (see S/PV.9210). We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, Al-Harith Idriss Mohamed, at this meeting.
We note that, in Khartoum on 5 December, the
military leadership of the Republic of the Sudan and
a number of parties and civil society associations that
make up part of the Central Council faction of the
former ruling coalition — the Forces for Freedom and
Change — signed a political framework agreement
governing the country’s transitional administration.
The document provides for the formation of a
civilian Government headed by a Prime Minister,
a new convocation of Sudan’s highest collegial
authority — the Supreme Sovereign Council — and a
transitional legislative assembly, with the participation
of various political elements on the basis of quotas;
the start of the drafting of a new constitution; and the
extension of the transition period by two years, to be
followed by the holding of general elections. We view
the achievement of those agreements as an important
step towards creating a stabilizing effect on the internal
political situation in the Sudan. We expect it to enable
10/17

07/12/2022

the resumption of international donor assistance to the
country, which would help resolve the serious issues
that have increased in the social and economic areas.
We currently need to focus on the implementation
of the signed agreement. To that end, we must continue
to work diligently with all influential political forces
and ethnic and religious groups in the Sudan, including
those that did not sign the agreement. That will create
the conditions necessary for moving forward the
political process, which is aimed at achieving broad
national agreement. We are convinced that the Sudanese
people can independently resolve the problems facing
them without external interference. We call on the
tripartite mechanism, which consists of the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to continue its efforts to
support all Sudanese political process and the drafting
of a constitution to unite all key political forces of
the country.
We once again call on the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
led by Mr. Perthes, to act strictly in accordance with the
mandate set out in relevant Security Council resolutions
and to afford each of its components equal attention.
At this stage, it is particularly important to intensify
efforts aimed at boosting donor assistance, which the
concluded framework agreement makes particularly
urgent. We believe that it is hypocritical to attempt
to link the resumption of international assistance
to the transfer of power to a civilian Government in
the country.
We note the stabilization of the situation in Darfur
in recent months. We believe that credit in that regard
is due to the country’s military leadership for promptly
addressing flare-ups and implementing important
initiatives in the region, commensurate with its own
capacities and resources, involving reconciliation and
the normalization of people’s lives. We trust that the
national and local authorities will continue to take the
necessary measures promptly in order to prevent the
escalation of intercommunal violence.
Today’s quarterly briefing is the last one before the
next review of the Sudanese sanctions regime in the
Security Council, which will take place in February
2023. We remain convinced that the current situation in
Darfur warrants a review of the sanctions restrictions
imposed on the Sudan 17 years ago. The sanctions have
not only lost their significance, but they no longer serve
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a political process, and they have also constrained the
work of the Sudanese Government in the region and
affected people’s lives. We hope that next year the
Security Council will be able to address and resolve the
issue through constructive dialogue.
In conclusion, we hope that the friendly country
of the Sudan will successfully overcome its current
challenges and embark on the path of sustainable
development. We reiterate our unwavering commitment
to assist that process in every way.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his briefing and welcome the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan at today’s meeting.
China welcomes the signing of the political
framework agreement by Sudanese parties last Monday,
which marks a major step for the Sudan towards
breaking the political impasse and returning to the
political transition. That is an encouraging development.
We appreciate the coordinating role of the trilateral
mechanism, which consists of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and we call on the non-signatory political
forces to join the agreement as soon as possible. It is our
belief that all the Sudanese parties can take advantage
of the current positive momentum, remain engaged in
dialogue to reach a solution to outstanding issues and
bring the political transition back on track.
No country can achieve a political transition
overnight. It must rely on the painstaking exploration
and persistent efforts of its own people. The Sudan is no
exception. The international community should uphold
the Sudanese-led and Sudanese-owned principle of
supporting all Sudanese parties in steadily advancing
the political transition through continued dialogue
and consultations. Pressuring the Sudan by cancelling
economic aid and debt relief is nothing short of
collective punishment for the Sudanese people, instead
of helping them to solve their problems. Such a practice
would lead to serious economic and humanitarian
consequences and therefore must be rejected.
The recent intercommunal violence in Blue Nile
and West Kordofan states is worrisome. The Sudanese
Government deployed security forces to the affected
areas in a timely manner, which helped the disputing
communities to reach ceasefire agreements, and took a
series of steps to stabilize the situation. Those efforts
deserve acknowledgement. Intercommunal conflict is

S/PV.9211

a perennial plague for the Sudan, with many violent
clashes involving land disputes and livestock-rustling.
The Government needs to enhance security, promote
development and take other steps to address the claims
of the various communities in relation to resource
allocation, defuse intercommunal tensions and strive to
eliminate the root causes of conflict.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/898), the recent situation in Darfur has been
relatively stable, with a drop in large scale-violence,
which would not be possible without the sustained
efforts of the Sudanese Government. The Security
Council sanctions on the Sudan are no longer relevant to
the developments on the ground. The sanctions hinder
the Sudanese Government’s ability to carry out security
operations and effectively protect civilians in Darfur,
and therefore should be modified in a timely manner
until they are definitively lifted. The Council’s inability
to develop benchmarks for modifying the sanctions on
the Sudan over the past two years is regrettable. Council
sanctions must not be used as a political tool to exert
pressure on the Sudan. When we discuss the renewal of
sanctions in February 2023, China urges the penholder
to make substantive improvements to the text so that
the Council can set clear and realistic benchmarks for
modifying sanctions without further delay.
Given the impacts of torrential rain, floods and the
global food and energy crisis, the Sudan’s economic and
humanitarian situation remains extremely fragile, with
one third of its population in need of humanitarian relief.
The 2022 humanitarian response plan for the Sudan is
funded only to 41 per cent of its requirements, which
falls far short of meeting the Sudan’s humanitarian
needs. China calls on the international community to
increase its assistance to the Sudan and welcomes the
convening of a meeting of the Friends of Sudan under
the auspices of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan. We look to the Mission
to strengthen its work in helping the Sudan’s economic
development and peacebuilding.
As a good friend and partner of the Sudan, China
is committed to assisting the country’s development
and benefiting its people. China recently signed a new
bilateral economic and technical cooperation agreement
with the Sudan. The Omdurman China-Sudan
Friendship High School renovation project has been
completed with Chinese assistance. In collaboration
with UNICEF, China has also implemented a maternal
and child health-care project in the Sudan benefiting

22-7272911/17

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

more than 70,000 people in West Darfur. We will
increase our strategic and operational alignment with
the Sudan and continue to assist it to the best of our
ability with a view to enabling peace and development
there as soon as possible.
Mr. Cisneros Chávez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Representative Perthes for his briefing.
I would like to commend the signing of the civilianmilitary framework agreement on 5 December. We
hope that this first step will lead as soon as possible to
the formation of a civilian transitional Government that
will help lay the foundation for the holding of elections.
In that regard, we acknowledge and support the efforts
of the trilateral mechanism and other partners to restore
the process of a transition to democracy in the Sudan.
The framework agreement has the support of a large
number of Sudanese political actors and groups. We
call for any outstanding issues to be resolved through
peaceful and inclusive dialogue and for the political
forces that have not yet signed the agreement to join it.
In order to revitalize the political process and help
stabilize the Sudan, we believe that we should prioritize
security-sector reform, the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement and transitional justice. We urge the
key actors to work in coordination with the trilateral
mechanism to that end. As we have said before, women
were one of the driving forces behind the revolution
in the Sudan, and it is therefore critical that they have
a voice in the decision-making at all levels and all
stages of the political process. The proposed quota of
at least 40 per cent of seats in the Government and the
legislature for women will undoubtedly contribute to
greater inclusion, and we call for the necessary measures
to be taken to ensure that this goal can be achieved.
We are concerned about the outbreaks of violence
in Blue Nile and West Kordofan states in recent months.
The hostilities have spread to new areas and have
increased in intensity. We reiterate our deep concern
about the serious violations of children’s rights, as well
as the incidents of sexual and gender-based violence
that continue to be reported. We urge the authorities
to address the root causes of violence, redouble their
prevention efforts, promote reconciliation at the
community level and protect the civilian population,
and we therefore call for expediting the implementation
of the national plan for the protection of civilians.
Furthermore, as the High Commissioner for Human
Rights stressed during his recent visit to the Sudan,
12/17

07/12/2022

the protection of human rights and accountability are
essential aspects that we must continue to work on. For
example, in the case of Darfur, relative stability will not
be sustainable unless progress is made in establishing
commissions and mechanisms to address issues of
transitional justice, the return of internally displaced
persons and the restoration of property rights, among
other issues.
We welcome the fact that despite some
administrative hurdles, the Permanent Ceasefire
Committee is finally operational. We hope that it will
continue its work together with the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan,
in line with its mandate.
One of the pending issues is that of addressing the
serious economic and humanitarian crisis facing the
country. It is projected that one third of the population
will need humanitarian assistance by 2023. We call
on the Government to ensure unrestricted and secure
access for humanitarian workers and organizations.
During Mexico’s term as an elected member of the
Security Council, the situation in the Sudan has been
marked by the suspension of constitutional order and its
serious implications for the stability of the country and
the entire region. We therefore believe it is essential that
the Security Council speak with one voice in support of
the political process.
In conclusion, we hope that the recently signed
agreement will lay the foundation for an inclusive and
democratic process that can lead to the peace for which
the Sudanese people have fought so hard.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative Volker Perthes
for his briefing. I also welcome the participation of
the Sudan in this meeting today. I would like to stress
three points.
We welcome the signing on 5 December of a
framework agreement between the military and a large
part of the civilian opposition, which demonstrates a
spirit of compromise in the work of overcoming the
political crisis. It must now be implemented in order
to make rapid progress on the outstanding issues,
particularly security reform, transitional justice, the
management of the Juba Peace Agreement and the
designation of a timeline for the elections, which make
up the second part of the negotiations. The signing
should also be followed by the appointment of a
civilian Government as soon as possible. We note the
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

provisions on the transfer of power to civilians and the
participation of women in public life. The authorities
must ensure conditions conducive to the political
process by guaranteeing the right to peaceful protest
and ending impunity for perpetrators of violence
against protesters.
We encourage all Sudanese political forces to
support this process. The Sudan needs to resolve its
political crisis and return to a path of transition in order
to respond to its economic and humanitarian emergency.
The European Union (EU) is supporting the Sudanese
population, in particular in the areas of education and
human rights, with €48 million in assistance. A package
of €140 million aimed at supporting health care and
agriculture and combating food insecurity should be
adopted very soon. Lastly, the EU is also providing
€78 million in humanitarian assistance. Establishing
a functioning Government is also essential to stop the
spiral of intercommunal violence, specifically through
the deployment of the joint force and the reintegration
of combatants. In that regard, we encourage all armed
groups that have not signed the Juba Peace Agreement
to join the peace process without delay.
Re-establishing a credible democratic transition
is what the Sudanese people aspire to and aligns
with the commitment made by the military to
leaving the political scene once the conditions for the
establishment of a civilian Government are met, and
is ultimately essential to restoring the confidence of
the international community. In that regard, I want
to emphasize that France will continue to support
the efforts of the Sudanese people in this difficult
period, both within the EU and through international
institutions and the African Union, if the return to a
democratic transition, with a well-defined timeline for
elections, is effectively assured.
We commend the assistance from the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, which we have consistently
supported. The cooperation between the authorities
and the tripartite mechanism must continue during
the upcoming period with a view to implementing in
good faith the letter and the spirit of the framework
agreement that has just been signed.
I call for the swift adoption of the press statement
that is being circulated on this subject.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.

S/PV.9211

I join others in thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Volker Perthes for his detailed
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
The political transition process that began four
years ago continues to face obstacles on the ground.
However, recent developments, including on the draft
Constitution, are encouraging. We also welcome the
signing of a political framework agreement in the
Sudan. The efforts of the Sudanese authorities to create
a conducive environment by way of an annulment of
the nationwide emergency and the release of political
detainees have helped to ease tensions. The Sudanese
stakeholders need to consolidate the gains made so far
and move towards an inclusive political agreement.
We reiterate that a Sudanese-led and Sudanese-owned
inclusive and credible political dialogue remains
critical to the efforts to find a lasting solution. We
hope the stakeholders will continue to address the
issue of security-sector reform and accountability, as
well the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement.
We encourage the trilateral mechanism, consisting of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to
work closely with the stakeholders to facilitate the
political agreement.
We take note of the implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement, particularly regarding the
transitional security arrangements in Darfur. The
Permanent Ceasefire Committee has continued its
work on ceasefire violations. The reduction in violence
in the Darfur region is an encouraging sign. In the
coming months, we hope that efforts will be made to
expedite the deployment of the joint security-keeping
force. The intercommunal violence in West Kordofan
and Blue Nile, owing to complex factors, particularly
over land disputes, can be tackled effectively only by
prioritizing reconciliation and addressing the politicaland security-related issues.
On the economic front, the suspension of a
significant portion of international donor assistance,
together with the pause in engagement by international
financial institutions, has severely impacted the
inflows of overseas development assistance. The
funding shortfalls are also impacting the activities of
humanitarian actors and their ability to meet growing
needs. The support of the international community to
humanitarian appeals needs to be scaled up.

22-7272913/17

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, I would like to say that India enjoys
long-standing friendly relations with the Sudan and its
people. Over the years, India has assisted the Sudan
through several projects through concessional lines of
credit, capacity-building and humanitarian assistance.
The constructive support of the international
community is critical as the Sudan and its people move
towards a stable, secure and prosperous future.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), for his briefing and
for his new approach of optimism, rather than one of
pessimism, as was the case in the past. I wish him every
success in all of his efforts, including in the tripartite
mechanism in his capacity as Head of UNITAMS.
There is great optimism that a political agreement
will be reached among the Sudanese parties in order to
put the country back on the democratic path and ensure
the gains that the Sudanese people aspire to, namely,
freedom, peace and justice, which are the values and
the slogans the young people of the Sudan have been
working for. That optimism has prevailed since the
signing of the political framework agreement last
Monday. Without going into too much detail, I would
also like to commend and thank all the delegations
here for their statements in support of the transition
process and calling for urgent international support
for maintaining what has been achieved so far. I would
like to focus on the following points regarding the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/898).
In the context of important developments, the report
indicates that there are significant data and evidence
pointing to progress in ending the Sudanese political
crisis by forming a new, third, civilian Government that
enjoys consensus supported by a broad political base.
The Sudan has been undergoing an exceptionally
complex phase since the December 2018 revolution,
and the Secretary-General’s remark is appropriate,
as intentions now exist and efforts are being made to
reach consensus between civilian and military forces to
broaden the path towards democratic transition.
14/17

07/12/2022

That is supported by what was confirmed by the
President of the Transitional Sovereignty Council,
Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan, in his
statement before the General Assembly (see A/77/
PV.8), by the commitment of the military component
not to participate in politics, to transform the army into
an institution subject to the Constitution and the values
of elected democratic institutions and to prevent its
politicization, or being ideological, and its commitment
to purely military professionalism to ensure the Sudan’s
unity and territorial integrity.
The forces of the revolution, the transitional
forces and the military component have already
signed — on Monday, 5 December — the political
framework agreement, sponsored by the tripartite
mechanism consisting of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. The agreement will remain open for all
political components to sign it in order to open the way
for the formation of a civilian caretaker Government to
restore the path of the new transition and the drafting of
the transitional constitution.
In order to strengthen that agreement, we call on the
Secretary-General to use his international experience
in his capacity as head of multilateral diplomacy
and based on his political background and previous
experience with the Sudan. We call on him to personally
lead efforts to support Sudanese political reconciliation
and secure the path of democratic transition amid
the challenges he knows well, by helping the Sudan,
thereby continuing the qualitative support of the United
Nations for the requirements of political transition in
order to be distinct from other processes related to
political support and building peace. We need his help
to lift the United Nations sanctions imposed on the
Sudan, urge international financial institutions to fulfil
their pledges to support the Juba Peace Agreement,
make special efforts to persuade the rest of the armed
movements that did not join the peace process to do
so, and support Sudanese democracy along the bumpy
path until it reaches its end and achieves its desired
goal of holding free and fair elections at the end of the
transition period. We need him to undertake personal
good offices endeavours to build trust among all
Sudanese military, civilian, revolutionary and women
and youth components.
With regard to the situation in Darfur, which
Mr. Perthes referred to in his briefing and was
mentioned by representatives in their statements, the
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

report confirms that it is relatively stable due to the local
and tribal reconciliation efforts that took place during
the month of June in West and South Darfur under the
supervision of the Vice-President of the Transitional
Sovereignty Council, Lieutenant General Muhammad
Hamdan Dagalo.
As for the clashes that took place in the Blue Nile
and West Kordofan regions, which were mentioned by
delegations and referred to in the report, I would like to
clarify the following.
During the clashes between Hausa tribes and
some ethnic components in the region in October,
local Government forces in Blue Nile resorted to crisis
management by separating the conflicting parties,
controlling the situation and establishing security, along
with the intervention of civilian leaders, including the
Sultan, who sought to calm the angry groups.
The Defence and Security Council also issued a
number of decisions to control the chaos and protect
and provide relief to those affected, as societal effects
are dealt with through reconciliation, reparations and
moving the wheel of criminal justice against violators.
Reinforcements were sent from joint forces, including
the army and rapid support forces, to enhance security
in Blue Nile, and in-kind support convoys were sent to
the areas affected by the events in the region.
Regarding the renewed conflict in the Lagawa
locality, in the state of South Kordofan, in October,
we can attribute that to the armed opposition
movements investing in tribal conflicts, which
contributed to widening its negative repercussions.
The conflict was contained with the intervention of the
civilian administrations and the deployment of joint
Government forces from the centre to secure the city
and restore activity in the markets in preparation for the
return of the displaced. That conflict is mainly due to
the ethnic polarization created by a popular movement
wing of Abdelaziz El-Hilu, as the armed forces accused
the popular movement of violating the ceasefire signed
in 2019.
The Government has facilitated the work of
humanitarian organizations to reach affected areas. We
have already explained the background of those events
that were not mentioned in the current report.
With regard to the points mentioned about the
security situation, we can refer to the following reasons:
disputes over land ownership and conflicts rooted in

S/PV.9211

climate change. That is based on specialized reports of
the United Nations. The Sudan has been significantly
exposed to climate change, causing disturbances in
local communities, displacement from villages, change
in rainfall rates, unusual storms, a negative impact on
water resources, energy and agriculture, soil erosion and
the effect of drought through increased transpiration, a
decline in soil moisture and a decrease in soil fertility.
All that has led to the exacerbation of conflict
between farmers and pastoralists due to environmental
degradation, which in turn affects the security situation
of local communities and its repercussions on efforts to
reduce poverty and the reversal of economic growth.
Those factors also led to an increase in the number
of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Human rights
and the local communities caught up in that nexus are
impacted by the spiral of climate change, the lack of
resources and the effect on community security systems.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights has
insisted on the importance of building trust among
Sudanese stakeholders. The human rights situation
will improve with the resolution of the political crisis,
the enactment of legal reforms and the implementation
of the peace agreements, in addition to ensuring the
protection of civilians and facilitating the return of
IDPs. In the report, the Secretary-General thanks
the Sudanese authorities for facilitating the High
Commissioner’s visit to the Sudan, which is a member
of the Human Rights Council in Geneva.
Turning to violations against children, we would
like to shed light on the practical measures adopted
by the transitional Governments since December in
that regard. In 2019, the law on the armed forces was
amended after the December revolution. Those forces
are committed to respecting the plan of action signed
with the United Nations in March 2016. The transitional
Government is working to implement the National Plan
on the Protection of Civilians and is committed to
implementing the national plan for child protection in
conflict zones and raising awareness to protect them
from violations in armed conflict. That is being done
thanks to the collaboration between the Government
and the United Nations with regard to the security
forces and the signatory movements to the Juba Peace
Agreement. Human rights protection units have been
set up within all units of the armed forces, and orders
are published periodically, in cooperation with the
National Council for Child Welfare. The Sudan is also
participating in all child-related functions organized by

22-7272915/17

S/PV.9211

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Office of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict.
In order to increase capabilities and awareness,
peacekeeping forces in El Fasher in Darfur organized
a training workshop in September on the peace
agreement, the military law, the criminal law and women
and children’s rights. Another workshop was held in
October on peacebuilding, the role of local communities
in peace and the relationship between the military and
civilians, in addition to addressing hate speech and the
role of the peacekeeping force in Darfur in promoting
social peace. In November, another workshop was
held on rehabilitating and integrating movements that
are signatory to the security arrangements under the
auspices of the National Commission for Peace.
One hundred and forty additional vehicles were
provided to enable the security force to carry out its
task in establishing security and protecting civilians.
Implementing the protocol on security arrangements
is a prerequisite for sustained peace and creating the
environment conducive to the return of IDPs and
refugees, in addition to implementing the remaining
protocols of Juba Peace Agreement and strengthening
peace in Darfur. A complete budget was prepared for
the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee, as was also
mentioned by certain delegations in their comments,
sectoral committees and field teams, and it contains the
necessary requirements.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, it is critical
given the information issued by the United Nations
on the significant food shortage. Millions of people
are affected by it and by climate change, thereby
affecting living and security conditions. The SecretaryGeneral’s report also indicates the number of refugees
in neighbouring countries.
The conflict in Lagawa led to the displacement of
some in the region, but the voluntary return of some of
the population has begun. Currently, the area is calm,
schools have reopened and contacts have been made
with volunteer organizations to provide humanitarian
aid.
In the Blue Nile, as a result of tribal violence,
thousands of displaced people are facing tragic
conditions, such as a food gap and a lack of medicine
in the governorates of Ad-Damazin and Er-Roseires,
where they live in camps north of Damazin amid
deteriorating health conditions and are being housed in
schools. There are a number of camps for the displaced,
16/17

07/12/2022

including the Hausa tribe, Al-Dabiba and Shamar
camps, and Al-Ban Jadid camp in Wad Al-Mahi and
Roseires governorate, where the Funj tribe resides. The
large wave of displacement led to the interruption of
education and a failure to harvest crops during this
year’s agricultural season, which leads to a widening
of the food gap in the state. In that context, we ask the
United Nations Development Programme to intervene
to assist the displaced and refugees in Blue Nile, South
Kordofan, White Nile and eastern Sudan, areas that
host 60 percent of the refugees in Sudan.
The high number of refugees in the east of the Sudan
has had a negative impact on the prosperity of the local
people who host them. We must therefore strengthen
basic sanitary and emergency services. One third of
children in the Sudan suffer from acute malnutrition.
We must therefore restore hospitals and health-care
centres. We welcome the support that the Sudan received
from the United Nations in October, but there is a nearly
40 per cent shortfall in humanitarian assistance. The
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Martin Griffiths, allocated $46 million to the Sudan this
year through the Central Emergency Response Fund,
$6 million of which is intended to address the impact of
floods. An additional $43.5 million will be earmarked
through the humanitarian fund for the Sudan in order to
meet urgent humanitarian needs.
Returning to the last part of the report, on the four
objectives of the Mission, as well as conclusions and
observations of the Secretary-General, we would say
the following.
We welcome the positive observations, particularly
in paragraph 66, namely, on the positive political
momentum. The Secretary-General calls for benefiting
from the opportunity that has emerged as a result
of the political dialogue through the Sudanese Bar
Association and to transform the draft constitution into
an inclusive basis for reaching a political agreement
and enhancing civilian-military reconciliation. He
also urges the civil component to reach an agreement
with the military component under the auspices of the
tripartite mechanism. That agreement should ensure the
participation of women, young people and the resistance
committees in that process. We also welcome his
appeal to the international community to leverage the
trilateral mechanism to facilitate a political agreement
and achieve stability in the Sudan.
22-72729

07/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In paragraph 67, on national ownership of the
inclusive political process, that is the most useful
way to reach an agreement among the parties on their
respective roles and functions during the transitional
period, with the aim to tackling the complex issues at
the core of the current crisis.
He also calls on the international community to
urgently mobilize political and financial support for the
transitional Government in order to address the grave
challenges faced by the Sudan.
The Secretary-General also commends the
reduction in tribal violence as a result of the efforts
and measures taken by the Government, as well as the
increased protection for IDPs in the Zamzam camp,
who have been able to reach their farms — which is
something encouraging.
In conclusion, I would like to call on the
international community to provide financial support
for the implementation of all provisions of the Juba
Peace Agreement, knowing that all the security
arrangements and the related process of demobilization
and reintegration of forces of armed movements is a
very costly process, and a complicated one in terms of
its organizational, logistical and financial aspects. We
thank friendly countries that continue to support such
efforts. In that connection, we reiterate the important role
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, and we hope to see more improvements.
Turning to the economic situation, the transitional
Government adopted economic and financial measures
on freeing the exchange rates and on support for
basic foodstuffs, while also addressing the Sudan’s
external debt. Those measures were necessary to
review the Sudan’s economic structure. We continue
to work towards increasing production in the Sudan
and improving the balance of trade and creating
conditions conducive to attracting investment, which

S/PV.9211

will inevitably benefit from the promising potential of
Sudan. In order for those economic reforms to achieve
their desired goals, we look forward to the resumption
of cooperation programmes and development
assistance from bilateral partners keen on the success
of the transition in Sudan, as well as from international
financial institutions, in order to mitigate the effects
of reforms and reduce the burden of the external
debt, which the Sudan has qualified for by taking the
necessary steps in accordance with Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative and completing the tackling
of inherited economic distortions.
The international community has to shoulder its
responsibilities and provide humanitarian assistance
to hundreds of thousands of refugees hosted by the
Sudan from neighbouring countries. We also urge the
Secretariat and the Council to conduct a comprehensive
strategic review of the work of the Mission given the
many developments that have taken place in the Sudan
over the past two years and the obstacles that hindered
meeting the desired hopes and aspirations desired when
the Sudan initially requested its establishment, and we
commend its successes achieved.
Finally, I would like to stress that our partners
during the transitional period will continue to work
with us in order to ensure its success. We are committed
to dialogue, which is the inevitable way of addressing
the political challenges in the Sudan. We also reiterate
our commitment to work with the United Nations and
the international community to address the challenges
that might hinder the transition process and hamper the
achievement of our main objectives.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussions on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-7272917/17
