OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2473rd

MEETING:

NEW

7 SEPTEMBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2473)
Adoption of the agenda

.. ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... . .... ... ...

1

.. ... ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... .. ... .... . .... ... ...

1

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Observer for the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 5948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Canada to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
IJnited Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15951) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.2473

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

::
,‘.‘(

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Record of the Security Council. The date of the
.document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolkions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2473rd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

7 September

(Guyana).

1. Adoption
2.

at 3.30 p.m.

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15951)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional

1983,

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [247&h 20
2472nd meetings], I invite the representative of Canada
and the Observer for the Republic of Korea to take places
at the Council table. I invite the representative of Canada
and the Observer of the Republic of Korea to take places
at the Council table. I invite the representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Colombia, Egypt, the Federal
Republic of Germany, Italy, Japan, Liberia, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria, the
Philippines, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Spain and Sweden to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2473)

of the agenda

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15947);,
I
Letter dated 1 September 1983 froin the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15951)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. PeiIetier (Canada)
and Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea) took places at the Council
table; Mr. Joseph (Australia), Mr, Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Miss Dever (Belgium), Mr. Albrin Ho&in
(Colombia), Mr. Khalil (Egypl). Mr. Jelonek (Federai Republic of
Germany), Mr. La Rocca (Italy), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mrs.
Jones (Liberia), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Syed Ar# (Malaysia) Mr. Harland (New Zealand), Mr.
Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Moreno Salcedo (Philippines),
Mrs. Martinho (Portugal), Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr.
de PiniPs (Spain) and Mr. Amneus (Sweden) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Bulgaria, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fiji, the German Democratic Republic,
Guatemala, Ireland, Kenya, and Singapore in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of Article
31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15949);

At the invitation of the President, Mr. GarvaIov (Buigaria), Mr. Zumbado JimPnez (Costa Rica), Mr. Knipping
Victoria (Dominican Republic), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador).
Mr. Radrodro (Fiji), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Repub1

--

lie), Mr. DefprPe Crespo (Guatemala), Mr. McDonagh (Ireland), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya) and Mr. Koh (Singapore) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

could then be monitored by the United States RC-135
reconnaissance plane, which was in the general area at
one point in time. It is difficult for us to believe that the
Governments
of the Republic of Korea and the United
States of America and the management of the Korean Air
Lines would be prepared to jeopardize the lives of innocent men, women and children on such a mission.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to document S/15957, which
contains the text of a letter dated 6 September from the
representative of Greece to the President of the Council.

9. Two other hypotheses have been put forward by others to explain how the Korean aircraft could have been
shot down by the Soviet Union. One hypothesis is that the
Soviet Union could have mistaken it for a reconnaissance
aircraft, such as the United States RC-135. The mistaken
identity hypothesis is difficult to accept because the
Korean aircraft was a Boeing 747, which has a very distinctive silhouette and because it was visually sighted by
the Soviet interceptors. The other hypothesis was put forward by the representative of Sweden in his statement to
the Council yesterday. He said:

4. The first speaker is the representative of Singapore. I
invite him to take a place at the Council ,table and to
make his statement.
5. Mr. KOH (Singapore): The conduct of the Soviet
Union during the past week reminds one of a person who
has done something wrong but who cannot summon the
courage to admit his wrongdoing and to accept responsibility for his action. Instead of promptly admitting that it
had shot down the Korean civil aircraft, apologizing for
its action and offering to pay compensation, the Soviet
Union has resorted to one excuse after another in order to
exonerate itself from blame.

“It is a well known fact that the Soviet Union has
severe rules of its own for the protection of the State
boundary, enabling Soviet units to use force even
against civilian aircraft. Such rules and instructions are
not in accordance with generally accepted norms of
international law relevant to civilian transportation.”
[Ibid.. para. 80.1

6. The statements issued by TASS described the Korean
aircraft as an “unidentified plane”. How can the Korean
aircraft be unidentified when the name and logo of the
Korean Air Lines were painted on it? How can it be unidentified when Soviet interceptors
came within two
kilometres of the plane and the pilot of a Soviet interceptor aircraft was heard to have said that he was going
round the Korean aircraft and moving in front of it?

If the Swedish hypothesis is correct, the Korean aircraft
was shot down in accordance with Soviet standing rules
and instructions. If this was the case, then we must join
the representative of Sweden in pointing out to the Soviet
Union that its rules and instructions are contrary to international law, and to the specific rules governing international civil aviation. Annex 2 of the Chicago Convention
on International
Civil Aviation,* to which the Soviet
Union is a party, contains the rules of the air. These rules
set forth the procedures to be used when intercepting a
foreign aircraft not properly within the airspace of the
intercepting country. The procedures include radio communications, the rocking of wings and the irregular flashing of lights. The rules of the air do not include the
shooting down of civilian aircraft. Attachment
A to
Annex 2 of the Chicago Convention2 states that the interception of civil aircraft should be avoided and should be
undertaken only as a last resort. If undertaken, the interception should be limited to determining the identity of
the aircraft and providing any navigational guidance
necessary for the safe conduct of the flight. It states very
clearly that intercepting aircraft should refrain from the
use of weapons in all cases.

7. The statements issued by TASS, as well as by our
colleagues, Messrs. Troyanovsky
and Ovinnikov,
in the
Council [247&h, 2471st and 2472nd meetings], claimed
that the plane did not have navigation lights. This claim
would appear to be contradicted by the transcript of the
recording we heard yesterday, 6 September [2471st meeting]. We heard the pilot of a Soviet interceptor aircraft
informing his ground control that the air navigation lights
of the Korean aircraft were burning and its strobe light
was flashing. Soviet statements have claimed that the
Korean aircraft did not react to radio signals of the Soviet
interceptors; that it did not respond to signals intended to
take it to the nearest airfield in the territory of the Soviet
Union and that it did not respond to warning shots and
tracer shells fired along the flying route of the plane. It is
difficult for us to know whether these things were, in fact,
done or not. If they were, they were not contained in the
communications between the pilots of the Soviet intercepter aircraft and their ground control which we heard
yesterday.

10. There are some troublesome questions about this
case, the answers to which we do not know. We do not
know why the Korean aircraft, equipped with very sophisticated navigational
equipment and computers,
had
departed from its scheduled route and intruded into
Soviet airspace. We do not know whether American and
Japanese air controllers knew that the Korean aircraft
had deviated from its authorized route and intruded into
Soviet airspace and, if they did, why they did not warn the
Korean aircraft. Whatever the answers to these questions
may be, they do not, however, affect the legal fact that the

8. The Soviet Union has suggested that the intrusion by
the Korean aircraft into Soviet airspace was not accidentai but was deliberate. It was suggested that there was a
conspiracy between the United States and the Republic of
Korea to use the Korean aircraft to carry out an espionage mission. In his statement on 6 September [ibid.], Mr.
Troyanovsky
suggested that the Korean aircraft could
have been sent deliberately into Soviet airspace in order to
test the reactions of the Soviet air defence system which
2

.

Soviet Union had no legal right, under international law,
to shoot down the Korean civil aircraft. What the Soviet
Union has done is clearly contrary to international law
generally, and to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation3 in particular.

17. Mr. ALBAN HOLGUiN
(Colombia) (interpretation
from Spanish): First of all, I wish to express to the President and the members of the Council my delegation’s
gratitude for having been permitted to make known its
views on the issue for which the Council has been convened and to congratulate you, Sir, for the intelligent and
brilliant manner in which you are presiding over these
debates.

11. For these reasons, my Government, therefore, supports the five demands made by the Observer of the
Republic of Korea in his statement to the Council on 2
September. First, he demanded that the Soviet Union
offer a full and detailed account of what had actually
happened. Secondly, he demanded that the Soviet Union
offer its apology to the Republic of Korea, to the countries of which the passengers were nationals and to the
families ‘of the deceased and pay compensation for the
losses suffered. Thirdly, he demanded that the Soviet
Union punish all those who are directly responsible for
the tragedy. Fourthly, he demanded that the Soviet Union
give unimpeded access to the crash site to the representatives of the International
Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) and to the Government of his country. Fifthly, he
demanded that the Soviet Union give credible guarantees
against the recurrence of the use of force against unarmed
civil aircraft [247Oth meeting, paras. 17 to 2Z].

18. I am firmly convinced of the effectiveness of the
debate that are taking place in this body, for they make it
possible to consider different views in the quest for peace
and international understanding.
19. The facts, as we have learnt them, are that a Korean
Air Lines passenger aircraft strayed from its normal
course and penetrated several kilometres into the airspace
of the Soviet Union, as a result of which Soviet military
aircraft, after having followed the passenger aircraft for a
long time, decided to destroy it, resulting in the death of
269 persons who, like thousands of persons the world
over, had decided to board a plane on that day.
20. My Government
would like to convey to the
Government and people of Korea, as well as to the families of the victims, their peoples and Governments, its
sentiments of consternation and sorrow over what has
taken place.

12. The tragedy which has occurred has raised two other
questions in our minds. First, it makes us wonder whether
the structure of Soviet military command is subject to the
control of the civilian leadership in Moscow. Secondly, it
makes us wonder whether the person or persons in the
Soviet Union whose finger or fingers are on the nuclear
button, have steady nerves and could be relied upon, in a
crisis, to avoid making a bad judgement.

21. This is a fact which can undoubtedly be described as
a serious crime against mankind, for it is a violation of the
basic rules on which the civil aviation system is based on
whose respect depends the possibility for this kind of
transport to exist. Colombia was a pioneer country in civil
aviation, and we are particularly sensitive to any violation
of the norms governing it.

13. We appeal to the Soviet Union to admit its responsibility for its illegal destruction of the Korean civil aircraft
and to accept the consequences of its action. We also
appeal to the Soviet Union and to other countries not to
turn this tragedy into a new bout of East-West confrontation. It would be a great pity if the positive trend in the
relations between the two super-Powers which we have
witnessed during the past few months were to be completely wiped out.

22. All the laws of civil aviation are based on the principle that the lives and safety of passengers are more important than any political or economic interests of States.
Hence we have various forms of mutual assistance to aircraft and the co-operation of Governments to diminish
‘the risks inherent in air travel. As was so very well put by
the representative of Sweden [2471st meeting], those principles are valid even in cases where aircraft penetrate
areas restricted for reasons of security, and, even in a case
of conflict, respect for human life should take precedence
over the protection of territory.

14. There is therefore much at stake in this debate. We
must do justice to the 269 men, women and children who
have lost their lives. We must reaffirm the validity of the
legal rules governing international
civil aviation and
demand that the Soviet Union bring its domestic rules
and instructions into conformity with international law.
We must also try to contain the damage done by the
Soviet action to the international political situation.

23. It is difficult to believe that it was the Soviet Government which ordered the shooting down of the passenger
aircraft or that it had established security arrangements
that made it impossible to implement principles so deeply
rooted in the international community. It is precisely the
Convention for the suppression of unlawful acts against
the safety of civil aviation, concluded at Montreal in
1971: which in its Article 1 states that: “Any person commits an offence if he . . . destroys an aircraft in service or
causes damage to such an aircraft which renders it incapable of flight”. I wish to add here that one of the three
States depositories and guarantors of that Convention is
specifically the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

15. Mr. President, at this difficult moment the Council is
fortunate to have at its helm a man of your intelligence,
knowledge and diplomatic skills. Under your able leadership, we hope that the Council will conclude its consideration of this question by the adoption of a course of action
which would be both just and wise.
16. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Colombia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
3

,
:_

24. It is likely that the military commander of the area,
acting without humanitarian criteria, without appropriate
information and without political power, decided on his
own to eliminate a possible threat that he believed to be
serious and ordered the aircraft shot down. With a huge
arsenal made available to him, he decided to cut short the
&es-of 269 :defenCeless persons.
:,
,’ :,

32. Mr. RADRODRO
(Fiji): First, Sir, I should like to
thank you and the other members of the Council for giving my delegation the opportunity to take part in this
debate. We congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of September and are confident
that your proven ability and skill will be of great value in
the present deliberations of the Council.’

25., By that act, in’ addition to a crime, a political mistake was made in placing arms-and arms of advanced
technology-in
the hands of persons who did not have a
clear concept of their duty vis-d-vis mankind. That is a
dangerous game that can lead to deadly consequences.
Today it is an. aircraft; tomorrow it may be a city, a
people or a continent which falls victim to the mistake
made by a person who at a certain moment decides the
classification of a threat directed at a country. To what
extent are nuclear arms handled by such weak controls?
Into what terrible situations may the international community be dragged by that system? Therefore, my country
has always supported ‘initiatives, to achieve the control,
reduction and limitation
of’ arms and .has fostered
improvement of relations among States by means of dialogue and negotiation.

33. Permit me also, Sir, to pay tribute to your predecessor, the representative of France, who presided with great
skill and ability over the work of the Council during the
month of August.
34. My delegation is compelled to add its voice to this
debate and to join others in condemning the Soviet
Union’s action in the’ incident that is now before the
Council. That incident represents, in our view, a new low
as a wanton act of violence.
35. The tragic episode involving the Korean jet air liner
has been minutely detailed before the Council by various
sources over the last two days of its debate. The Soviet
Union has at ,least admitted that its tighter plane shot
down the Korean air liner.
36. There is no doubt that this Soviet action is contrary
to the basic norms of international behaviour. There is
also no doubt that the Soviet Union’s action violates the
laws governing international civil aviation. For our part,
we regard the evidence produced as irrefutable.

26. We fervently. hope that the Soviet Union will give
detailed information on the events and will make it possible to investigate the facts, as they occurred. No State can
legitimately refuse to allow the compilation of such information, which alone will make it possible to continue to
have ,open .skies for: all aircraft and enable passengers to
travel.freely, without the fear of armed aggression.

37. Whatever may have been the circumstances, the
shooting down of a civilian aircraft carrying so many passengers and serving no military purpose cannot be justitied. The destruction of the aircraft, with the consequent
loss of lives, represents, in our view, a gross violation of
international law and the basic tenets of humanity.
.,
38. There are well-established State practices, in addition to the well-defined principles of the ICAO, which
govern situations where a State’s airspace is violated. It
would be incredible for the Soviet Union to suggest that in
this incident, in order to protect its sovereignty over its
airspace, it was necessary to retaliate in the manner in
which it did.

27. ‘Such events must not recur in the future, and to this
end the Council must spare no effort. Only a thorough
and complete investigation of the facts will make it possible to lay down clear and practical foundations which will
be the rules of the game of commercial aviation, respected
by all States.
,’
28. In this connection, we unreservedly support the
Spanish proposal [2472nd meeting] that a specialized,
apolitical body such as the ICAO be charged with investigating the facts and establishing the causes.

39. The right of all States to enforce respect for the sovereignty of their airspace, like the enforcement of all rights
and laws, is governed by the principle of “proportionality” in international law. The Soviet action in shooting
down the civilian aircraft is clearly a violation of that
basic pririciple.

29. ,’ This incident has undoubtedly not only led to grave
&f&n
‘but also strained relations between States. But
if the&meetings of the Council’lead to reasonable measures which1 contribute, to restoring trust between peoples,
to .d&ente, to “a ‘diminution of conflict .and to .moi-e ,security and safety in the air, the sacrifice of these human lives
will perhaps not have been completely in vain.
/’

40. As yet, the explanation provided by the Soviet
Union as a rationale for the tragedy has been inadequate
and unsatisfactory. Its action to prevent the immediate
mounting of air and sea rescue operations is also to be
deplored.

30. In the meantime, we express our grave concern in
the face of this open grave in the immense ocean brought
about by a lack of understanding of the basic rules of
universal coexistence.
,j, , 4..
,’
!
”
3 1. ’ The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Fiji, whom i invite to-take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

41. The entire incident has precipitated in many parts of
the world, including our own, a deep sense of shock and
revulsion. The maximum
retaliatory option that was
adopted by’the Soviet Union has shocked many and is in
4

the flying object indicating that it was a civilian aircraft
and also did not use any name or description which could
even indirectly indicate that he was aware of the fact that
the plane before him was a civilian aircraft with passengers aboard. Thus the tape we have seen here does not
confirm the accusation made by the United States but is
accidentally in full conformity with the statement made
by the Soviet Government, which says, inter alia, “the i
Soviet pilots, in stopping the actions of the intruder
plane, could not know that it wasa civilian aircraft.” .-V&L
jara. 3.1

our view a completely unwarranted action. The utter disregard for the loss of lives and the attitude of indifference
underlined by the incident has, quite rightly, evoked a
very strong sense of revulsion.
42. The whole incident is appalling and unjustifiable.
My delegation therefore supports the call for a full
account by the Soviet Union of what happened. This is
the very least it owes to the international community.
43. We support totally the call for united international
action, be it here or in any other appropriate United
Nations forums, with the objective of preventing any
further recurrence of such a tragic event. At the same
time, my delegation joins the call for a full and comprehensive investigation of the incident.

50. We have learned from the Soviet statement that the
South Korean jet liner had been repeatedly warned about
its presence over the Soviet Union’s territory and that all
the warnings were ignored. Regrettably, the plane con:
tinued its flight inside the territory of the Soviet Union
and also flew over. important military installations. The
United States denies the statement of the Soviet,. Union;

44. Mr. NATORF (Poland): At the very outset, Sir, I
should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
post of President and to wish you success in your responsible activities. My delegation knows very well your-personal contribution to the Security Council’s work, and
highly appreciates your diplomatic skill and experience,
which are well known in the United Nations system.

51. Let us consider which of the presented versions’ of
events is ‘logical, most likely and could therefore be
regarded as a true one.
52. Can we assume to be probable the version of events
according to. which the Soviet Union, which allegedly
wanted ruthlessly to shoot down the civilian plane,
needed not less than two and a half hours to do so? Anyone who thinks logically and is not biased will have no
doubts that during those critical two and a half hours
there were repeated efforts to establish contact with the
plane that violated the Soviet Union’s airspace with the
precise aim of preventing the serious incident. This, the
only logical explanation of the facts, has been confirmed
in the statement delivered to the Council by the Soviet
‘j
Union.

45. I should also like, Sir, to extend my congratulations
to your predecessor, the representative of France.
46. The Polish delegation has listened with great attention to all the statements relating to the incident involving
the South Korean air liner which violated the airspace of
the Soviet Union. Two delegations-those
of the Soviet
Union and the United States-have submitted to the
Council two different versions of the events which led to
the tragic deaths of 269 people aboard the South Korean
airliner. From the very beginning United States officials
have maintained that the United States is in possession of
exhaustive information regarding the course of the incident and its circumstances. On this basis, the United
States directed accusations against the Soviet Union in the
Council, declaring that it would submit supposedly irrefutable evidence of Soviet responsibility for the deaths of
the innocent passengers.

53. Yesterday Mr. Troyanovsky rightly questioned the
possibility of damage to all the navigational equipment in
the South Korean air liner that allegedly prevented it from
making contact with the Soviet interceptor. I should like
to point here to another serious doubt concerning the
inability to establish such contact.

47. Yesterday, we witnessed the presentation of that
alleged evidence on monitor screens. Apart from the fact
that no proof has been submiited to the members of the
Council that that tape was really connected with the incident under discussion, we have a number of further basic
doubts.

54. The United States Secretary of State, Mr. Shultz,
said at a press conference that .Soviet planes had had to
know what kind of aircraft they were dealing with, as they
had established visual contact with it. But could that have
been oniy one-way visual contact? Is it indeed”to:be
doubted that the South Korean pilots did not see’ the
Soviet planes that were over an extensive peribd of time
giving them warning signals of various kinds? And if they.
saw the Soviet planes, why did they not follow the genrally accepted rules that apply to such cases? They seemingly had some serious reasons to do so, evidently more
important for them than care for the safety of the passengers on board the South Korean aircraft.
, ‘,

48. First, why has the Security Council been shown only
a small part of the monitoring, while the American side
asserted that it had known the development of the events
from the very beginning?
49. Secondly, the main point of the accusation made by
the United States delegation was the fact that the Soviet
interceptors allegedly knew without any doubts that they
were dealing with a civilian aircraft with passengers
aboard and that this very type of plane was shot down by
the Soviet pilot with full premeditation. But according to
the tape, the Soviet pilot did not use any word related to

55. The American version of the incident gives rise to
more such questions and doubts. We can see but one
explanation for them, the one contained in the statement
by the. Government of the USSR: United States inteliigence services had used the Korean aircraft, with pas5

sengers on board, evidently for intelligence purposes. It is
worth quoting here an opinion of Major-General Keegan,
retired former Chief of Air Force Intelligence, who said in
i?ke New York Times 2 September:

South Korean air liner. We think that all those who sincerely regret this tragic incident should do their utmost to
create conditions that would prevent the repetition of
such incidents in the future and, first of all, refrain from
using this sad case for the further deterioration of the
international atmosphere and avoid creating even more
serious consequences.

“I have never failed to be surprised at how careless
the Koreans are, despite the risks of flying near Soviet
airspace. Despite all that the Soviets have there, the
Koreans continue to fly too close. The Koreans continue to bruise the Soviets on this. What happened
today they invited. They should have flown much
farther away, over Japanese airspace.”

62. We are deeply concerned that a number of delegations that have spoken in this debate, probably under the
influence of the emotions caused by the human tragedy as
well as under the pressure of the American propaganda
machinery, have acted on the principle “First pronounce
judgement: then establish the facts and circumstances of
the event”. In some statements justifiable concern over
the influence of this incident on the already grave state of
international relations was visible. Is it so difficult to realize and to foresee that the only possible result of the consideration of this issue by the Council in the hysterical
atmosphere that has been created will be a further deterioration of the international situation? Do the contents and
tone of the statements of the United States representatives
and their closest friends create any doubts in this regard?
There are three basic elements in the foreign policy of the
United States under its present Administration
that are
being implemented with great persistence: first, there is
the ruthless anti-communist
crusade; secondly, there is
the increasing of international tensions and the hampering of international co-operation;
thirdly and finally,
there is the inventing of all kinds of justifications for the
escalation of the American military build-up. It is appalling that even the human tragedy of the incident we are
discussing was fully premeditated by the United States,
which is exploiting it to the full for the realization of those
purposes.

56. Of course, the South Korean Observer, who has
been asking so many questions recently, could give us an
answer to at least one question: was it just a case of a lack
of caution, or rather a conscious participation of South
Korea in carrying out certain schemes by the protecting
super-Power?
57. It is also interesting to note that the United States is
only gradually revealing some additional information
which it had possessed from the very beginning-for
example, about the parallel flight of an American RC-135
. spy plane and its participation in the incident. The United
States did this only after the USSR exposed the presence
of special United States planes in the area of the incident.
58. Striking and appalling is the arrogance of the Americans and of the representatives of some other countries
who groundlessly accuse the Soviet Union of distorting
the truth about the incident at a time when no one can
question the information submitted by the USSR. While
listening to those allegations, I recalled another case in
some way similar to the one we are considering today and
which happened more than 20 years ago. But it was
United States presidential authority involved in the denial
of the fact of intelligence reconnaissance flights over
USSR territory. We all remember the compromising of
American policy after revelation of all the facts connected
with the downing of the U-2 spy plane and its pilot, Powers, over the territory of the Soviet Union.

63. In conclusion, I should like to express the hope that
emotions will calm, that sober minds will prevail and that
sooner or later, even in the United States, a higher concern for peace and for the avoidance of atomic disaster
will prevail over primitive anti-communist
and narrow
imperialist interests.

59. Do we not face today a similar situation in some
respects, except that it is far more tragic in its consequences?

64. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Ecuador, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

60. Some of the speakers indulged too freely in much
invective and many epithets in their statements. We have
heard a lot about barbarity and tyranny not belonging to
civilized societies, the ruthless breaking of customs and
rules of international law, and so on and so forth. On the
other hand, from the very beginning of the discussion of the
incident, the American Administration,
has supposedly
been aiming at punishing the would-be perpetrators of the
human tragedy. Is it in keeping with the best traditions of
the so-called free, democratic and civilized world first to
pronounce sentence and then quickly proceed to its execution, even long before the case has been properly judged and
before all credible’information
about the development of
events has been gathered and duly presented?

65. Mr. ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador)
(interpreration from
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, and the members of the Council for having given Ecuador the opportunity to participate in this debate. I should like to greet you in your
capacity as President of the Council; you are the representative of a young Latin American country and a most
respected diplomat with great experience of the responsibilities inherent in various United, Nations bodies.
66. We would also like to salute the distinguished performance of the representative of France, Mr. de La Barre
de Nanteuil, last month in carrying out his lofty responsibilities as President.

61. The Polish delegation expresses its deep regret over
the death of the innocent passengers who were aboard the

67. Ecuador, a founding member of the world Organization, believes in it and supports it as an .instrument for
6

peace, law and peaceful coexistence. We therefore believe
it the duty of all States-whether Members of the United
Nations or not-and
particularly of the permanent
members of the Security Council, who enjoy the privilege
of the rule of unanimity, to strive to maintain peace and
refrain from the use of force or from engaging in acts of
violence that can jeopardize the precarious stability in
which mankind is at present living with such anxiety.

73. Our admiration goes also to your predecessor, Mr.
Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil of France, who has further
distinguished himself by diligent effort and the excellent
manner in which he directed the Council’s work during
the month of August.
,
.‘,
74. The safety of international civil aviation concerns us
all. More than a decade ago, in February 1973, it was
Egypt which, for obvious reasons, at the nineteenth
extraordinary session of ICAO, raised the question of the
shooting down by Israeli fighters, on 21 February 1973, of
a Libyan civil aircraft over Egyptian territory with the
loss of Libyan, Egyptian, Sudanese, Syrian, Lebanese,
French, German, Polish and American innocent victims
[see S/Z0893].

68. My country has expressed its categorical condemnation of the unparalleled and totally unjustifiable military
action taken by a major Power against a commercial passenger aircraft, for we believe that deed to be an infringement of the basic principles of human coexistence and a
violation of the civil aviation conventions to which the
Soviet Union is a party.

75. Today, Egypt cannot remain silent in the face of the
no less tragic loss of 269 lives of those who perished with
the Korean aircraft over Soviet territory and -which,
according to the latest text of the statement issued by the
Soviet Government, has violated the State frontier of the
Soviet Union in an area “where a most important base of
the strategic nuclear forces of the USSR is located”
[2472nd meeting, para. 33. Other sources have contended
that “when the plane was hit, it was very close to the edge
of Soviet airspace and virtually over international
waters”. We are prompted to take part in the deliberations of the Council both by humanitarian considerations
.and out of concern for the safety of international civil
aviation. We fully understand the deep and sincere feelings that that tragic incident has evoked. We share those
feelings, and our condolences go to the bereaved, and our
understanding to the countries whose nationals were the
innocent victims.

69. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ecuador, Mr.
Luis Valencia *Rodriguez, stated in this connection that
“no argument whatsoever can serve to justify the attack
upon a commercial aircraft engaged exclusively in carrying
passengers, even though it may have been flying on the
wrong route or have gone off its course”. Ecuador therefore comes to this highest body, which is the depository of
the trust of peoples, because States Members have conferred upon it the primary responsibility for the maintenance not only of international peace but of international
security as well under the terms of Article 24 of the Charter
of the United Nations. That safety and security is today
threatened by a new attack against peaceful civil air travel
carried out against a commercial passenger ,aircraft of the
Republic of Korea and entailing the irreparable loss of 269
innocent persons, to whose kin we wish to express our
condolences.

76. In the wake of such tragic events, passengers on
international civil aviation flights will naturally fiel captives of actual or potential danger emanating from action,
overreaction or even counteraction to a subjectively presumed threat. We should all work to dissipate those negative feelings. Equally, the atmosphere of mutual
suspicion, distrust and increased tensions cannot be
excluded from the underlying causes. It is therefore not
unrelated to the issue now before us to express our earnest
hope that all peace-loving nations will continue to explore
and follow the path leading to the relaxation of international tension. No country can reasonably cast doubt on
the value of the well-established procedures that are
meant solely to ensure the safety of any civil aircraft
which, through human error, may go astray into the airspace of another country. In the midst of this debate we
were somewhat reassured by the fact that no delegation
questioned the validity of the international procedures,
however strongly sovereign rights may have been
invoked. In fact, one cannot fail to detect a certain uneasiness that, we should like to believe, stems from the acceptance of the. imperative necessity for all to respect
meticulously those procedures.

70. A thorough investigation must be conducted by the
appropriate United Nations bodies and, in particular, by
ICAO in order to determine where the responsibilities lie
in this case, to establish and provide full and appropriate
compensation and reparations and to help restore international confidence in the basic norms of law and coexistence, which are all the more necessary in our crisis-ridden
world. Indeed, it is the duty of all countries to contribute
to a reduction rather than a sharpening of tensions and to
the promotion of greater international co-operation. This
is truly indispensable but it can flourish only in a climate
of understanding and of respect for the peaceful coexistence of peoples.
71. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt, whom I invite to take a place at theCouncil table and to make his statement.
72. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt): Notwithstanding the sad and
tragic incident of which the Council is seized today, my
delegation would like to begin by expressing its belief that
your well-known clarity of thought and strength of character, Mr. President, will ensure the exemplary conduct of
the Council’s deliberations on a painful, difficult and sensitive issue which perhaps-and
understandably so-has
triggered some impassioned and strong language.

77. The loss of the lives of innocent and defenceless
people anywhere and for whatever reason or pretext
should always evoke deep revulsion, profound shock and
sincere sorrow. Our margin of tolerance of violence
7

should never be allowed to be reduced to the level of
solcalled rationalization or to be glossed over by misplaced political considerations under whatever circumstances anywhere.

rity and guarantees needed to protect those 269 lives
could not be overcome.
86. It is the view of my delegation that the Soviet Union,
which seems to be coming closer to recognizing its
actions, must pay compensation for the material and
human losses caused on the night of 31 August.
Moreover, ICAO, in co-operation with all interested parties, must investigate the circumstances of the tragedy. In
turn, the Soviet Union must guarantee it access to information and to the appropriate sites in order to strengthen
guarantees that similar incidents will never again happen
anywhere in the world.

78. We have listened carefully to successive revelations
on this tragic incident; we continue to do so. Egypt will
continue to follow very closely the deliberations on this
question here at the United Nations, at other international meetings and in other competent ‘international
organizations. We sincerely hope that fully. revealed facts
will pave the way for a safer international civil aviation to
pursue ‘its normal -and legitimate course.
79. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

87. In our view, this debate provides an opportunity to
strengthen international security and to promote peace
and understanding among nations. We believe that this
loss of life demands better communication
and cooperation in order to prevent a disaster which could have
infinitely greater ramifications. We believe that everyone
must shoulder his responsibilities under established principles and law. All of us must try to make confrontation
give way to understanding. In that connection it is encouraging to note that this misfortune has not raised an obstacle to the continuation of the negotiations between the
two greatest nations on Earth. It is only by improving this
understanding and enhancing communication
and cooperation for international peace and security that we will
honour the unjust death of the passengers of the Korean
Air Lines plane.

80.

Mr. ZUMBADO
JIMENEZ
(Costa Rica) (interprethtio$ from’ Spanish): I am pleased, Sir, to congratulate

you most cordially on your presidency of the Council. I
am convinced that your well-known skills are a guarantee
of success in your important task. -,
81. On behalf of my delegation, I am also happy to
congratulate the representative of France on his performance as President of the Council during the past month
of August.
,82. Costa Rica and most States do not know the exact
circumstances surrounding the tragedy of Korean Air Lines
flight 007. The Council is faced with an extremely complex
situation which involves principles of sovereignty, considerations of security, internationally accepted regulations of
civil aviation and aspects of a technical nature-all against
the background of the lives lost in a senseless tragedy.

88. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
89. Mr. KURODA
(Japan): My delegation is .grateful
for the opportunity to speak for the third time since the
debate on this item began last week. We do so in response
to the statement made by the representative of the Soviet
Union yesterday, 6 September [247Zst meeting], in which
he criticized Japan for not taking appropriate measures of
alert before the Korean aircraft was shot down.

83. Costa Rica is, however, concerned-&d
this is ‘the
reason for our participation in this debate-over the consequences of this grievous blow to international peace and
security.
84. We believe that the system of international secu&y
rests on good faith and the credibility of the principal
protagonists. In this connection, all nations must be concerned over the attempt made on their own credibility by
the Soviet Union. Its weight in today’s world and ensuing
responsibilities demand that its words be endowed with
the necessary credence. To deny one’s own actions always
weakens confidence. Men and nations understand and, to
some extent, forgive a mistake. ‘Men and nations are all
fearful of those who always claim to be in the right, denying their own actions.

90. In response to the questions raised by the Soviet
representative, I should like to state the position of the
Japanese Government.
..
91. Japanese air traffic control authorities usually rely
upon air traffic surveillance radar and communications
from the pilot of a civilian aircraft to determine whether
that aircraft is flying according to its flight plan. However,
Japanese surveillance radar visibility is limited to the airspace over and around Japan and, for an aircraft flying at
an altitude of over 20,000 feet, even the Yokotsudake
radar station at Hakodate, Hokkaido, which is located
closest to NAKKA-that
is, 42023’ north, 147028 eastsome 270 kilometres east-south-east of Kushiro, can cover
only as far as 42014’ north, 145O13’ east, in other words
some 150 kilometres south-southeast of Kushiro. It was
thus impossible for any Japanese air traffic surveillance
radar station to ascertain that the Korean Air Lines jet
liner was flying off course.

85. We also believe that international security is based
on communication
and co-operation among nations,
irrespective of their ideological choices. The world is surprised at the lack of co-ordination, communication and
co-operation surrounding the death of those aboard the
Korean aircraft. Civilian and military air navigation controllers from at least three nations tracked that flight for
at least two and a half hours; yet the obstacles to co;
operation between all these services in providing the secu8

92. The only way to ascertain the actual location of an
aircraft which cannot be seen by air traffic surveillance
radar is to rely upon communcation from the pilot, and
standard practice is to assume that the communication
from the pilot is correct. The record of radio transmissions between the pilot of Korean Air Lines flight 007 and the Japanese air traffic control authorities-namely,
Tokyo International Air Control at Narita-after
that aircraft entered Japanese air control jurisdiction over the
broad expanses of the North Pacific, as released by the
Civil Aviation Bureau, Ministry of Transport, is as follows: At 1709 Greenwich mean time (GMT), that is, 0209
Japanese standard time (JST):

west over Sakhalin approximately
100 miles north of
Wakkanai, but there was no w+ that the Air SelfDefense Forces could have known a that time that this
aircraft was Korean Air Lines flight 007. The Air SelfDefense Forces were not follow&
Korean Air Lines
flight 007 by radar all the wti
flight 007 was. in
communication
with ” Narita Air Traffic Control, r but’
rather suddenly they picked up thar &craft.on their radar
at 0312 when it entered the airspax over Sakhalin, and
even then it was sighted as an u&kntified
aircraft.
95. It was only the after-the-fact iacgration and analysis,
of radar and the communication reco& which.revealed the
possibility that Korean Air Lines fright 007 had strayed
from its route and flown into Sakha&n airspace.

“KE-007 [call sign]: Korean Air 007. Over NIPPI.
“1707. Level 330 [flight level 33,000 feet]. Estimating
NAKKA 1826. 132.0 [132,000 pounds fuel remaining].
Minus 49 [outside temperature -49OC]. 320 Diagonal 45
[north-west winds at 45 knots]. Requesting selcal
check.
“RJAA
selcal).

Dokyo

International

Air Control]:

96.

97. First, it was not until 0327 that Narita Air- Traffic
Control became aware of any irregularity regarding
Korean Air Lines flight 007, so even if Narita had- immediately contacted the Air Self-Defense Forces and had
been able to deduce that the unidentified aircraft which
had flown into the airspace over Sakhalin was indeed
Korean Air Lines flight 007, this was already after the said
aircraft had been shot down by the Soviet Union at 0326
hours, 21 seconds.

(Send.

“KE-007: Check. Korean Air 007. Selcal okay.”
At 1815 GMT:
“KE-007: Korean Air 007 requesting 350 [a flight
level of 35,000 feet].
“RJAA: Roger. Stand by. Call you back.”

98. Secondly. JaDan was in no oosition to warn Korean
Air Lines flight 007, since we had no way of knowing that
the aircraft had strayed from its route between the time it
left Anchorage and the time it was shot down near”Kaiba
Island off the coast of Sakhalin.

At 1820 GMT:
“RJAA: Korean Air 007 clearance. Tokyo ATC
clears Korean Air 007. Climb and maintain flight level
350.

99. Thus, it can only be concluded that the Soviet charges
are completely groundless and that this Soviet attitude represents an attempt to shift to Japan part of the blame which
the Soviet Union must rightly bear for this incident.
-._-100. The Government
of Japan hereby strongly
demands that the Soviet Union promptly retract these
charges and respond in good faith to this incident.

“KE-007: Roger. Korean -Air 007 climb maintain
flight level ,350. Leaving 330 this time.
,,
“RJAA: Tokyo roger.”
At 1823 GMT:
“KE-007: Tokyo Radio Korean Air 007 level 350.
“RJAA: Korean Air 007 Tokyo roger.”
At 1827 GMT:
“KE-007: KE-007
noisy and weak].”

Hmmmmmm

[signal

This data points to the following conclusions:

101. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Guatemala, whom I invite to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
.,
102. Mr, DELPREE CRESPG (Guatemala) (inrc&-&~
rion from Spanish): Sir, may I be permitted, first of all, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for the month. of September. We are absolutely certain
that’ under your leadership the Council will be able to
adopt the appropriate decisions on the difficult matters
with which it has to deal.

becomes

93. As may be seen, communication
between Korean
Air Lines flight 007 and Tokyo International Air Control
at Narita was normal until the start of unintelligible transmission from Korean Air Lines flight 007 at. 1827 GMT,.
that is, 0327 Japan standard time. Narita fully expected to
receive the pilot’s report that he had passed NAKKA
some 270 kilometres east-south-east of Kushiro at 0326
Japan standard time, and it was’not until 0327 that there
was any suspicion that there might be trouble, such as
radio failure, with Korean Air Lines flight. 007 near
NAKKA.
-

103. Furthermore, we wish to congratulate the represen-’
tative of France for the very effective manner in which he
presided over the debates of the Council last month.
:
:
).,, ,’
104. The international community learned with indigna-‘
tion, consternation and astonishment ‘of the news of the
criminal downing on 1 September of a defenceless corn-

94. For approximately 17 minutes, from 0312 to 0329,
the Air Self-Defense Forces radar station at Wakkanai,
Hokkaido, sighted and recorded an aircraft flying south9

’

mercia! aircraft of Korean Air Lines carrying
sengers and 29 crew members on board.

240 pas-

105. The aircraft, as we a!! know now, was flying over
the
.~ territorv < of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
near the Island of Sakhalin.
106. To the families and Governments of the Korean,
North American, Chinese, Japanese, Filipino, Thai, Australian, Swedish, Indian and Canadian nationals who died
in this tragedy, the people and Government of Guatemala
extend heartfelt condolences.
107. This incident, which took the lives of women and
children, victims of outright scorn for human life, must be
thoroughly
investigated by competent bodies of the
United Nations, particularly
ICAO. The delegation of
Guatemala urges a!! parties directly involved in this incident to co-operate fully in order to determine precisely
what happened so that similar acts may be averted.
108. According to the information at our disposal, this
air liner was downed by the Soviet Union. My Government categorically condemns this unfathomable, deliberate and premeditated act of violence.
109. The delegation of Guatemala, like others that have
preceded us, hopes that the Soviet Union will offer
detailed information on what took place. Furthermore,
we believe that it must punish appropriately those who
participated in this deliberate, criminal act.
110. Moreover, the delegation of the Soviet Union must
offer guarantees that no incidents of this kind will happen
again.
111. International law guarantees the safety and security
of civil aircraft in al! circumstances. The downing of the
Korean Air Lines aircraft was not only totally unjustified,
but also a premeditated, incongruous and reprehensible
act from al! standpoints.
112. The international community,
and the Security
Council in particular, cannot fail to condemn this act, which
constitutes an affront to the conscience of mankind.
113. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Ireland. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

116. I should like. first. to express our sympathy to the
Governments whose citizens were killed and-to the families which have suffered bereavement. We are shocked,
as the world has been shocked, by the dimensions of this
tragedy.
117. On 2 September the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ireland issued a statement expressing deep regret at the
tragic loss of life. He also indicated his grave concern, in
view of the circumstances pointing to the likelihood that
the loss of life was not an accident but rather the result of
deliberate destruction. It is now clear, in fact, that the
aircraft was deliberately destroyed.
118. The Irish delegation has carefully followed the
deliberations of the Council with particular reference to
the information and explanations that have so far been
provided. Although we have listened closely to the successive statements and explanations made by the representatives of the Soviet Union, we fee! that we are still without
a satisfactory explanation.
119. We cannot accept that the shooting down of that
unarmed civil aircraft which diverged from its designated
flight path was a tolerable action. Where security interests
are concerned, in situations involving unarmed civil aircraft, our view is that the burden of exercising restraint
rests squarely on the State whose military aircraft are
engaged in interception. It is a matter of concern, too,
that the delay in making information available may have
hindered search-and:rescue
efforts.
120. International civil aviation is of benefit to a!! the
nations of the world. A!! nations thus have a shared interest in ensuring that civil flights can be conducted in safety.
There is an immediate need for fuller and more candid
information about the circumstances in which the aircraft
was destroyed. This is necessary in order to enable the
international community to take steps to ensure against
any repetition.
121. The event has broader implications for international relations and efforts to promote international security and reduce tension. Trust and confidence are essential
elements in international co-operation.
Neither can be
developed or sustained unless States are willing and seen
to be willing to engender confidence and foster trust, not
only by their actions but also by the clarity and adequacy
of the explanations offered for their actions.

114. Mr. McDONAGH
(Ireland): I wish to thank you,
Sir, and through you, the members of the Council for
giving my delegation the opportunity of addressing the
Council on the important question now before it. I should
like also to offer you my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency and wish you every success in your
onerous task.

122. In this regard, the action of the Soviet Union and
the attitude which the Soviet Government has adopted
in attempting to justify that action have serious implications. The view of the Irish Government on this point was
made clear by the Minister for Foreign Affairs in another
forum today. He said that the Soviet Union would promote confidence and a sense of security by giving an adequate account of its actions in regard to the Korean air
liner and by indicating its intentions with regard to an
investigation of the incident and to the making of recompense to those who have suffered directly as a result of the
tragedy.

115. The Irish delegation has asked to participate in this
debate because it considers that the shooting down of a
Korean Air Lines civil aircraft raises issues that have implications for a!! nations involved in international civil aviation and for the conduct of international relations generally.
10

123. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Dominican Republic. I invite him to-take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

132. Tragedies such as the one that we are considering,
which took the lives of 269 people, profoundly moving
the conscience of mankind, must never happen again.

124. Mr. KNIPPING
VICTORIA
(Dominican Republic) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like, first, to
convey to you, Sir, my satisfaction and that of my delegation at seeing you presiding over the Council’s debates for
the month of September. Your presence at the helm of
these debates guarantees that they will be conducted with
impartiality,
moderation, equanimity and wisdom. We
will surely benefit from your great skill and recognized
judiciousness. May I also avail myself of this opportunity
to thank you,and, through you, the members of the Council for giving me an opportunity to take part in the,debate
on this important issue.

133. It has been a constant part of the history of the
Dominican people to view peace as the highest of all
social values. Peace must be the main goal of the international community in its organized form. In this context,
we are extremely concerned that the incident involving the
Korean commercial aircraft may cause a deterioration in
the efforts being made to achieve detente, disarmament
and peace. Such efforts, today more than ever, must be
redoubled for the benefit of an international society living
in such a turbulent world.
l34. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Kenya, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

125. In addition, I congratulate your predecessor, the
representative of France, on the most competent and elegant manner in which he presided over the Council’s
debate last month.

135. Mr. WABUGE (Kenya): At the outset, Sir, let me
welcome and congratulate you as the representative of a
notable non-aligned and Commonwealth country on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of September. The issue before .the Council is really sad and serious.
It needs a personality of experience, caution and extreme
calmness-qualities
that you have so far demonstrated.

126. I shall begin by reiterating our heartfelt sympathy
to the families of the victims who died in the wake of the
shooting down of the commercial air liner of the Republic
of Korea, as well as to the Government of that country.
127. Owing to its grave implications,
this incident
affects not only the parties directly involved but also the
entire international community.

136. I should also take this opportunity to pay tribute to
your predecessor, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil, of France.
137. My Government associates itself with those countries whose representatives preceded me in expressing
their profound revulsion and indignation over the shooting down of a Korean commercial air liner, causing the
deaths of the 269 innocent passengers and crew on board,
comprising both old and young, men and women, and
even children.

128. There is in the international legal ,order a body of
universally recognized general principles that are part of
the common legal heritage of mankind. The observance
and recognition of those principles constitute the legal
basis and spiritual foundation of peaceful and civilized
coexistence among peoples. It is therefore natural for the
international community to react with indignation when
those principles are violated and trampled underfoot.

138. Granted that the Korean air liner had violated strategic Soviet airspace, the Soviet authorities should have
refrained from shooting it down. Rather, they should
have forced it to land and demanded an explanation. Had
this been done the whole world would understand the
Soviet Union’s concern.

129. The right of innocent passage in peacetime through
the territory of a State is a generally accepted and universally recognized principle. There is therefore no justification whatsoever for the attack upon an unarmed civilian
commercial aircraft carrying out its normal duty of transporting passengers, even though it may happen to be off
course or lost.

139. Given the circumstances under which the Korean
civil air liner was shot down, the incident is all the more
regretable since this is not the first time, nor will it bd the
last, that a civilian air liner has violated alien airspace due
to technical or weather conditions. My Government feels
that full observance of, and adherence to, the Chicago
Convention on International Civil Aviation3 is an absolute prerequisite to avoid the recurrence of such an
incident.

130. A situation such as the one involving the commercial aircraft of the Republic of Korea not only endangers
the safety and security of international civil air transport
but seriously undermines the basic foundations of human
coexistence.
131. My delegation believes that the international community has not yet received from the Soviet Union clear,
detailed information about this grievous incident. The
proposal made to the Council by several countries that
the Secretary-General conduct an exhaustive investigation of the facts and inform the Council of the outcome is
therefore an initiative which we support and find opportune. We also believe that in this task the SecretaryGeneral should have the valuable co-operation of ICAO.

140. Kenya strongly believes in the value and sanctity of
human lives. Consequently, it deplores and condemns this
inhuman act, which deprives so many families over the
globe of their loved ones.
141. In the name of humanity, the world is entitled to
know all the facts related to this tragic incident. The international community should therefore demand a tho11

’

thorough, independent investigation of this incident by
impartial, competent international organs.
142. My Government expects all parties concerned to
co-operate fully with the independent investigating body
in its task. This will restore the lost credibility of the international civil aviation order.
“’ : ”
143. Finally, my Government conveys its profound sorrow and condolences to all the families of. the victims and
to the Government of the Republic of Korea.
144. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
145. Mr. GARVALOV
(Bulgaria): Mr. President, allow
me to thank the members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to,participate in the deliberations. I also avail
myself of’this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of September. We are well aware of your hi&professional
qualities and experience and the high standard of representation that you give. to your friendly country.
146. I should also like to thank the representative of
France, your predecessor in the Chair.
147. The incident involving the South Korean aircraft.
which violated and intruded deep into the Soviet Union’s
a.@pace, is no doubt a tragic one. The most logical question as to the whole incident is, however, why did it
‘happen? How did it happen that a civilian aircraft on a
routine international
flight strayed off its course and
rudely violated the State frontiers of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics? Obviously, there is no likelihood of
any malfunction of the sophisticated equipment of a Boeing 747. An article published in 7&e New York Times on 3
September simply excluded the possibility of any such
malfunction, given the highly sophisticated computerized
navigational
systems operating aboard that aircraft.
Furthermore, as was revealed by United States mass
media, this civilian aircraft was equipped with an additional radar system that enables pilots to follow coastlines
and other terrain features. Was it then a simple deviation
from the routine course, or a pre-set course which was
selected to make the aircraft fly into Soviet territory over
areas of high strategic importance?
.l48. Why did the South Korean aircraft refuse to
respond to all signals, actions andcommunications
of the
Soviet air defence system, including the Soviet interceptor
planes which warned it. of its intrusion? Why did the
authorities in charge of the flight, who knew of the aircraft’s intrusion deep into Soviet territory, not try to
establish contact with the Soviet authorities or at least
alert the plane of its violation? Why was the Council,
yesterday [ibid.],- given the edited version of the conversations of the Soviet pilots, whereas nothing was revealed
about the contents of the communications between the
South Korean pilots and the gound and air traffic control
which monitored the aircraft throughout the flight? And
why the unexplained behaviour of the pilots of the South

Korean aircraft who were supposed to know the exact
whereabouts of the plane at any given time, as well as
their obligations to comply with established procedure in
case of a violation of sovereign airspace, in this particular
case that of the Union of Soviet -Socialist Republics?
149. There is obviously only one answer to all these
questions, and th& answer is quite simple-the
South
Korean plane was deliberately used for intelligence activities. This is borne out by the presence of a United States
spy plane which, at the time the intruder aircraft entered
the airspace of the Soviet Union, was in the same area
near the Soviet border and at the same altitude. What is
most striking is that at the beginning there was official
American silence about the presence of a United States
plane flying for a certain amount of time parallel to the
South Korean airplane and allegedly on a routine mission. One can only guess what the real tasks of that spy
plan were, but certainly its presence at that time and place
was no mere coincidence. It had a direct bearing on the
fate of the South Korean aircraft.
: ..
150. The world is now aware of the Soviet Government
statement of 6 September [ibid]. There is no doubt whatsoever that the Soviet authorities made every possible
effort to prevent such an incident, even without knowing
that it involved a civilian aircraft. What is still needed,
however, is a clear answer from those who pre-planned
this major intelligence operation, using the South Korean
plane and directing it into Soviet airspace, thus deliberately exposing innocent people to mortal danger. The hysterical campaign of slander that is being whipped up at
present here in the United States is not caused by sincere
humanitarian concern. We have no doubt whatever that
the purpose of this transparent provocation and the subsequent disinformation is again to step up new anti-Soviet
propaganda campaigns. Furthermore, it is no accident
that this provocation is being carried out at so tense a
moment in present international relations. A conspicuous
example in this respect is the haste with which the United
States Administration
linked the deaths of innocent
people to the endorsement of the MX missile programme.
In other words, the instigators of this incident are trying
to create another justification for their political course
based on a position of strength, the aim of’which is to
aggravate international relations, to step up their military
preparations and to intensify confrontation
with the
Soviet Union. The passengers of the South Korean air
liner were sacrificed as a result of this sustained policy of
provocation, subversion and confrontation.
1511, The Bulgarian delegation expresses its sympathies
to the families of the innocent people who lost their lives.
152.. It is, however, the concerted view of my delegation
that the Council is being dragged into a discussion with
obvious propaganda purposes. If anyone is to be held
responsible for the incident, it is those who orchestrated
this tragedy and decided, even before the plane took off,
to sacrifice it for unacceptable political reasons.
153. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite
12

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

issue of 77re Christian Science Monitor the following statement appears:

154. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): May I
at the very outset, Sir, congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for the month of September. We
are sure that, with your diplomatic skill and experience,
you will successfully fulfil this responsible task.

“outrage over the Soviets’ shooting down of the South
Korean air liner may well increase congressional support for defence spending and for Reagan’s proposed
MX missile programme.
: -’
“me incident] has lifted some of the pressure that
was on Reagan from both Congress and West Europeans to make further concessions to the Soviets in the
two sets of arms control negotiations now under way in
Geneva.**

155. At the same time, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic would like to express its thanks to
your predecessor, the representative of France, for his
activities. Allow me also to express my gratitude to you,
Sir, and to the members of the Council for giving me this
opportunity to explain my country’s position regarding
the question under consideration.

161. Now, while talking here about moral standards and
humanity, the United States is once again stirring up the
situation in the Middle East and is preparing new crimes
to be committed against the people of Palestine and other
Arab peoples. This vast, mendacious propaganda campaign is being used as a means of diverting attention from
the aggressive United States policy pursued in Central
America and the Caribbean and directed particularly
against Nicaragua and Cuba. The United States wants to
divert attention of the concerned world public from the
acts of aggression and crimes committed by the South
African racists against the front-line States, especially
against Angola and Mozambique.

156. My delegation has followed the debate on the incident concerning the South Korean air liner very closely.
The facts prove definitely that this aircraft’s provocative
intrusion into USSR airspace-an intrusion having strategic importance-represents
a deliberate, pre-planned
spying action with far-reaching political and military
intentions. In preparing and carrying out this provocation
a satanic play was staged cold-bloodedly
taking into
account the possible sacrifice of innocent people.

162. Taking these facts into account it becomes clear
why the initiators of this debate here in the Council did
not answer the question of how it could happen that the
South Korean aircraft, despite being equipped with the
most modern computerized navigational facilities, deviated
from its course and did not react to radio and other signals and warnings. The spy order obviously included deviation from course and a prohibition against following the
orders given by the Soviet air-defence forces. It was no
mistake, no technical or human failure, but cold-blooded
calculation,

157. In recent days, in the United States and several
other Western countries, an unparalleled anti-Soviet campaign has been launched, rousing the people with lies,
slander and hysteria put forward to discredit the USSR
and its social order and to disparage socialism and social
progress throughout the world. While doing so the initiators of the campaign withhold the fact that those United
States agencies that deliberately sent the aircraft on a spy
mission far into the national territory of the Soviet Union
are fully responsible for the incident.
158. The gross violation of the Soviet Union’s State
border and airspace and the inflammatory campaign instigated against the USSR are essential parts of the United
States policy of confrontation and super-armament and
of its crusade against socialism, social progress and world
peace. The hostile acts undertaken by the United States
and its closest allies are aimed at poisoning the international atmosphere and at preventing steps and measures
to improve international relations.

163. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic condemns vigorously this most striking abuse of peaceful civil aviation for military and political purposes and
regrets the death of so many innocent people. It is beyond
all doubt that the United States is fully responsible for this
tragic incident and the resulting consequences.
164. The present meeting of the Council should therefore contribute to making the United States stop its peace
threatening military manoeuvres along the borders of
sovereign States and to cease exposing civil aviation to
danger by its provocations.

159. The anti-Soviet campaign launched by Washington
takes place at a time when questions vital to mankind are
on the agenda and when the solution of one of the most
important questions is at stake-namely,
the question of
whether the arms race will be stopped and the threat of
nuclear world war removed, or whether that threat will
keep growing. The campaign is being used to justify the
‘United States Administration’s
all-round arms build-up
and its intended deployment of new nuclear mediumrange missiles in Europe which would provoke a new
threat to peace in Europe and the whole world.

165. It is, furthermore, high time that the States
refrained from violating the sovereignty of other countries
in clear contradition of international law and concentrated instead on the prevention of a nuclear war, thus
avoiding an unthinkable catastrophe for mankind, and on
agreeing upon effective measures towards arms limitation
and disarmament.
166. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
Observer of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to make
his statement.

160. This political background is revealed even by the
mass media of that country. Thus, for example, in today’s
3

involves human lives, a question which is essentially
moral and legal in nature-one would have thought that
they would do other than dare to defend the crime committed by the Soviet authorities.

I 167. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea): Mr. President,
thank you for allowing me to intervene once again at this
point. The representatives of Poland, Bulgaria and East
Germany made statements this afternoon during the
course of discussions of the Security Council: statements
in which they tried to defend the shooting down of the
Korean Air Lines plane by Soviet military authorities.
Their statements shed no new light on this tragic incident,
no new information and no moral insight. They faithfully
followed the line taken by the Soviet Union. But what is
most distressing is that, while it is well known that these
countries always, without single exception, follow the
Soviet line on every international political issue, at least
on this civil aviation issue-which is not a political issue,
which is not an East-West issue, but a question which

The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

NOTES
’ International
Civil Aviation
Organization,
Rules of the Air, Annex
2 to the Convention
on International
Civil Aviation
(Eighth edition,
July 1986).
* Ibid., Supplement
A, chap. 2.
3 United Nations,
Treufy Series, vol. 15, No. 102.
’ Zbid.,vol.
974, No. 14118.

.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

90-60205--December

1991-2.050
