S/2022/46

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 January 2022
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the fourth report
on the situation of children and armed conflict in Iraq and covers the period from
1 August 2019 to 30 June 2021.
The report addresses the effects of conflict on children in the country,
highlighting trends and patterns of the six grave violations committed against
children, and contains information, where available, on perpetrators. It also outlines
information on the progress made in addressing grave violations against children,
including through dialogue with parties.
Lastly, the report provides a series of recommendations addressed to al l parties
to the conflict aimed at ending and preventing grave violations against children and
strengthening child protection in Iraq.

22-00824 (E)

150222

*2200824*

S/2022/46

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, prepared pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, covers the period
from 1 August 2019 to 30 June 2021. It is the fourth report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict in Iraq to be submitted to the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The report serves to highlight trends
and patterns of grave violations committed against children by parties to the conflict
in Iraq, and provides details of the progress made towards ending and preventing such
violations since the previous report (S/2019/984) and the adoption by the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict of its conclusions on the situation of children
and armed conflict in Iraq (S/AC.51/2020/4). It also contains an outline of the
progress and challenges in establishing dialogue with parties to the conflict. Where
possible, perpetrators of grave violations are identified. In annex I to the most recent
report on children and armed conflict (A/75/873-S/2021/437), Da’esh 1 was identified
under section A, on parties that had not put in place measures during the reporting
period to improve the protection of children, as being a party that recruited and used
children, that killed and maimed children, that committed rape and other forms of
sexual violence against children, that abducted children and that engaged in attacks
on schools and hospitals. The Popular Mobilization Forces were listed under
section B, on parties that had put in place measures aimed at improving the protection
of children, as being a party that recruited and used children.
2.
The information contained in the present report was verified by the country task
force on monitoring and reporting in Iraq, co-chaired by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. The
outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and related response
measures, including restrictions on movement, exacerbated existing challeng es in
documenting and verifying grave violations against children. Therefore, the
information presented in the present report does not represent the full extent of grave
violations committed against children in Iraq during the reporting period, and the
actual number of grave violations is likely to be higher. Where incidents were
committed earlier but verified only during the reporting period, that information is
qualified as relating to an incident that was verified at a later date.

II. Overview of political and security developments
3.
Since the previous report (S/2019/984), the security situation has stabilized
across the country; however, Da’esh has continued to conduct frequent asymmetric
attacks against civilians and the Iraqi security forces, albeit on a significantly smaller
scale.
4.
In October 2019, Iraq witnessed large-scale public protests demanding
substantial political, economic and social reforms that rapidly spread and escalated,
turning violent as protesters attempted to cross into the former International Zone and
were met with a forceful response from the Iraqi security forces. Between 1 October
2019 and 26 January 2020, protest-related violence resulted in hundreds of dead and
thousands of injured protesters. Although the scale of the demonstrations started to
diminish in late 2019, public protests continued throughout the reporting period,
albeit on a smaller scale and with reduced levels of violence.
__________________
1

2/12

Following the adoption of resolution 75/291 by the General Assembly, Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) is now referred to as Da’esh in documents originating from the United Nations
Secretariat.
22-00824

S/2022/46

5.
On 1 December 2019, the Council of Representatives accepted the resignation
of the then Prime Minister, Adil Abd Al-Mahdi. On 7 May 2020, the Prime Minister,
Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, who had been designated to form a Government on 9 April,
received a vote of confidence from the Council of Representatives. The government
programme was also approved during that legislative session.
6.
The outbreak of the global COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020 exacerbated an
already vulnerable protection environment for children, especially for children living
in camps and children in detention. The Government took a number of steps to address
the COVID-19 pandemic, including through the creation of a crisis cell, on 26 January
2020, tasked with overseeing the implementation of precautionary measures and
responses to contain community transmission. Initial measures included a nationwide
curfew and a stay-at-home order, the suspension of commercial flights and the closure
of land borders, with only essential trade allowed. By June 2021, some measures to
address the COVID-19 pandemic remained in place, while efforts continued with a
view to encouraging the Iraqi public to enrol for vaccination, after Iraq received its
first COVID-19 vaccines in March 2021.
7.
In parallel, a strategic dialogue between Iraq an d the United States of America
was launched on 11 June 2020. The next day, the United States Department of State
and the Government of Iraq issued a joint statement in which it was noted that the
“discussions covered security and counterterrorism, economic s and energy, political
issues, and cultural relations”. In the statement, the United States noted that “in light
of significant progress towards eliminating the [Da’esh] threat, over the coming
months the [United States] would continue reducing forces from Iraq”.
8.
During the reporting period, military operations to counter Da’esh were carried
out in Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates and to reinforce
the border with the Syrian Arab Republic against possible Da’esh incursions.
9.
Between October 2020 and March 2021, the closure by the Government of 16
camps for internally displaced people in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Karbala’, Kirkuk,
Ninawa and Salah-al-Din Governorates, as well as the reclassification of two formal
camps as informal sites, resulted in the departure of 9,443 households (46,940
persons) from those camps to non-camp settings in Iraq. In early 2021, the
Government paused the closure of camps in Iraq, with two formal camps, Nahiyat
al-Amiriyah camp in Anbar Governorate and Jad‘ah 5 in Ninawa Governorate,
remaining open and hosting approximately 26,000 persons, including 5,453 children,
many of them families with alleged Da’esh affiliations. In addition, 25 camps for
internally displaced persons hosting 184,470 persons, including 86,641 children,
remained open under the administration of the Kurdistan Regional Government. On
16 March 2021, the Government’s national plan for the return of displaced people and
reconstruction was endorsed by the Council of Ministers.
10. The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017), continued to support domestic
efforts to hold Da’esh accountable by collecting, preserving and storing evidence in
Iraq of acts that could amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
committed by Da’esh in Iraq. On 7 May 2021, UNITAD report ed that it had finalized
an initial case brief addressing the legal characterization of the crimes committed
against the Yazidi community (see S/2021/419). In a briefing on 10 May, the Special
Adviser and Head of UNITAD denounced executions, slavery, sexual slavery and
crimes against children as horrific and as proof that children were directly and
deliberately being targeted by Da’esh. He stressed that Yazidi children were
profoundly impacted and announced that the Team had established that there was

22-00824

3/12

S/2022/46

“clear and convincing evidence that the crimes against the Yazidi people clearly
constituted genocide”. 2

III. Update on the main actors involved in the armed conflict
in Iraq
Iraqi security forces
11. The Iraqi security forces include the Iraqi police, under the Ministry of the
Interior, and the Iraqi armed forces, including the Iraqi Army, under the Ministry of
Defence. Since the Government declared the military defeat of Da’esh in December
2017, the Iraqi security forces have continued to implement a counter-terrorism
campaign, including by conducting large-scale clearance operations in areas formerly
controlled by Da’esh, defusing improvised explosive devices and exposing Da’esh
hideouts, tunnels and weapons caches. Military operations were concentrated in areas
where Da’esh remained active, including Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk and Salah
al-Din Governorates.
12. The Popular Mobilization Forces are an integral part of the Iraqi security forces
as an independent military formation under the direct command of the Prime Minister.
Throughout the reporting period, the Popular Mobilization Forces continued to carry
out security operations, sometimes jointly with the Iraqi armed forces, in areas where
Da’esh was active.
International coalition to counter Da’esh
13. The international counter-Da’esh coalition, comprising 84 members, committed
to, among other things, tackling the financing and economic infrastructure of Da’esh,
preventing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters across borders and supporting the
restoration of essential public services in areas retaken from Da’esh. 3
14. In June 2021, at a ministerial meeting, the coalition members affirmed the
continued need to sustain pressure on Da’esh in Iraq and to counter Da’esh global
networks through the coalition’s five lines of action: stabilizing liberated areas,
preventing the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, tackling Da’esh financing,
providing political-military consultation, and countering Da’esh messaging efforts.
In addition, it addressed the root causes of support for Da’esh “through targeted
justice and accountability assistance to local communities and survivors” of atrocities
committed by Da’esh. 4
15. Since March 2020, the international counter-Da’esh coalition has transferred
responsibility for several of its bases to the Iraqi security forces in Anbar, Baghdad,
Kirkuk and Ninawa Governorates.
Other actors engaged in the fight against Da’esh
16. The Kurdistan Regional Government’s security institutions also engaged in the
fight against Da’esh, including the Kurdish Peshmerga (the armed forces of the
Kurdistan Regional Government), the Peshmerga Zeravani (the military police) and
the Peshmerga Asayish (the internal security forces). Progress continued to be made
__________________

Text of the briefing available at un.org/sites/www.unitad.un.org/files/general/sa_khan_6th_
briefing_sc_as_delivered_en_0.pdf.
3
See https://theglobalcoalition.org/en.
4
United States Department of State, “The Global Coalition To Defeat ISIS”, 28 June 2021.
Available at www.state.gov/the-global-coalition-to-defeat-isis/.
2

4/12

22-00824

S/2022/46

on cooperation between the Iraqi armed forces and the Peshmerga forces in that
regard.
17. As noted in the previous report, the Sinjar Resistance Units remained active in
the Sinjar district (Ninawa Governorate) and the People’s Defence Forces of the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (HPG/PKK) continued to conduct operations in Iraq.
18. Da’esh continued to conduct predominantly small-scale, asymmetric attacks
against civilians and the Iraqi security forces. The attacks involved the t argeting of
infrastructure and livelihoods, including burning crop fields and destroying electricity
transmitters, with the aim of limiting stabilization in areas formerly occupied by the
group, in particular in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and S alah al-Din
Governorates.
Other actors
19. Throughout the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Turkey continued
to report military activity, carried out under the name Operation Claw, against
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) positions in northern Iraq.
20. In a new development, self-proclaimed, previously unknown armed groups were
verified as the perpetrators of grave violations against children during the reporting
period. For example, an armed group calling itself the “Companion of the C ave” first
came to light when it claimed responsibility for an attack in Baghdad, on
17 November 2020, in which one girl was killed. Similarly, an armed group calling
itself the “Guardians of Blood” first appeared when claiming responsibility for an
incident of denial of humanitarian access that had occurred in Ninawa, on 26 August
2020. No further claims are known to have been made by those groups.

IV. Grave violations against children
21. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 3 17 grave violations
against 254 children (195 boys, 51 girls, 8 sex unknown), representing a significant
decrease compared with the previous report (2,114 grave violations), although the
latter covered a four-year period and included the peak period of military operations
against Da’esh. The country task force verified violations against 84 children in the
second half of 2019, 82 in 2020 and 88 in the first half of 2021. Killing and maiming
remained the most verified violation, affecting the largest number of children (249),
with explosive remnants of war (121) and improvised explosive devices (46) being
the leading causes of child casualties and amounting to 67 per cent of the total number
of casualties. Denial of humanitarian access was the second most ver ified violation,
with 62 verified incidents.
22. When perpetrators of grave violations could be identified, most violations were
attributed to Da’esh (65). Additional violations were attributed to the Iraqi security
forces (58), the Popular Mobilization Forces (10), Operation Claw (8), the
Companions of the Cave (1) and the Guardians of Blood (1). The majority of grave
violations (238) were verified in areas previously under Da’esh control, including
Kirkuk (96), Salah al-Din (52), Ninawa (52), Diyala (42), Anbar (19) Governorates,
followed by Muthanna (12), Basrah (11) and Baghdad (10) Governorates, among
others.
23. While still being the main violation verified during the reporting period, the
killing and maiming of children was at the lowest verified leve l since the start of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism in Iraq in 2009. This could be linked to progress
made in countering Da’esh. The majority of child casualties (174) could not be
attributed to a specific perpetrator, as the contamination of areas with explosive
22-00824

5/12

S/2022/46

remnants of war left behind from decades of conflict, which resulted in 167 child
casualties, remained of serious concern.
24. In addition, 39 grave violations against children that had occurred in previous
reporting periods were late-verified during the period under review by the country
task force. Those violations included abductions (21), rape and other forms of sexual
violence (12), recruitment and use (1) and killing and maiming (5), and were
attributed to Da’esh (36) and the international counter-Da’esh coalition (3). The
violations affected 26 children (9 boys, 17 girls), of whom 13 children (1 boy, 12
girls) were affected by multiple violations, with abduction and sexual violence being
the most prevalent double violations. Twelve of those incidents involved girls who
had been abducted in separate incidents in August 2014, when Da’esh launched
deadly attacks against communities living in Sinjar district (Ninawa Governorate).
All those girls had been abducted and taken to locations outside Iraq and had been
victims of multiple forms of sexual violence.

A.

Recruitment and use
25. The recruitment and use of children (1) has decreased considerably since the
previous report (296). The country task force verified the recruitment and use of one
boy by the Popular Mobilization Forces. The 15-year-old boy was the victim of two
violations: he was recruited, in 2018, and later killed, in May 2020, while being used
by the Popular Mobilization Forces in a military operation. The country task force
also late-verified the recruitment and use by Da’esh of one Yazidi boy, who was
3 years old at the time of the incident in 2015. Despite his young age, the boy was
taken to the Syrian Arab Republic and trained in the use of weapons in a manner
consistent with the recruitment methods of Da’esh. In 2017, the child managed to
escape and was later reunited with his family in Iraq.
26. In addition, the country task force received allegations of the recruitment and
use of 29 children between 2018 and 2020 in Sinjar (Ninawa Governorate); however,
the allegations could not be verified.
Deprivation of liberty of children for their alleged association with armed
forces or armed groups
27. A total of 1,091 children (1,048 boys, 43 girls) were held in detention by Iraqi
security forces on national-security-related charges, including for their alleged
association with armed groups, primarily Da’esh, compared with 778 children at the
end of June 2019. As at June 2021, 35 of those child ren were of foreign origin. Most
of the detained children were boys aged between 15 and 18 years; some children were
as young as 9 years old. Children detained on such charges continued to face
challenges in gaining access to legal, social and other services, with instances of
prolonged pretrial detention and of mistreatment being reported. In some cases,
children were held with adult detainees.
28. The country task force continued to engage with countries of origin for the
repatriation of foreign children in Iraq. A total of 627 children (313 boys, 314 girls)
were repatriated from Iraq to their countries of origin. Separately, in May 2021, the
Government of Iraq conducted an initial repatriation to Iraq of Iraqi families from the
Hawl camp in the Syrian Arab Republic, representing 382 individuals, including 245
children (121 boys, 124 girls).

6/12

22-00824

S/2022/46

B.

Killing and maiming
29. The country task force verified the killing (98) and maiming (151) of 249
children (193 boys, 48 girls, 8 sex unknown), 82 of whom were killed or maimed in
the second half of 2019, 79 in 2020 and 88 in the first half of 2021. There was a
significant decrease in the numbers of children killed or maimed (249) in comparison
with the previous report (1,722), owing to a conflict of lower intens ity and an
improved security situation.
30. Incidents of the killing and maiming of children were attributed to Da’esh (61),
followed by Operation Claw (7), the Iraqi security forces (6), the Companions of the
Cave (1) and unidentified perpetrators (174). Some 78 per cent of all child casualties
were verified in areas previously under Da’esh control and where Da’esh remained
active, with most instances being verified in Kirkuk (63), followed by Salah al -Din
(49), Ninawa (38), Diyala (34) and Anbar (11) Governorates, as well as Muthanna
(12), Baghdad (10), Basrah (11) and Karbala’ (4).
31. Of the total number of child casualties, 67 per cent (167) were caused by
explosive remnants of war (121) and improvised explosive devices (46) left over from
previous conflicts. The predominantly affected areas were locations that had
previously been under Da’esh control. In most cases, children were harmed while
herding livestock in the surrounding areas of villages or while playing, by
accidentally triggering the devices when they picked them up or stepped on them. For
example, in December 2019, five boys aged between 6 and 7 years were killed while
playing outside a primary school, in Salah al-Din Governorate, when they touched a
device, causing it to explode.
32. Ground engagements (74) and airstrikes (8) were the second and third main
causes of child casualties, with most incidents being verified in northern Iraqi
governorates and attributed to Da’esh (61), Operation Claw (7), the Iraqi security
forces (6), the Companion of the Cave (1) and unidentified perpetrators (7). For
instance, in October 2020, five children (four boys, one girl) were maimed by
shrapnel after missiles were launched by Da’esh in Jalawla’ district (Diyala
Governorate). In addition, five child casualties were late-verified and attributed to the
international counter-Da’esh coalition (3) and to Da’esh (2).

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
33. Incidents of sexual violence against children continued to be underreported,
with none verified by the country task force as having occurred during the reporting
period.
34. The United Nations late-verified 12 cases of rape and other forms of sexual
violence against Yazidi girls that had been committed by Da’esh in August 2014 in
Sinjar district (Ninawa Governorate). With the support of Iraqi civil society and the
Iraqi security forces, the survivors, who had been taken out of Iraq, returned to the
country during the reporting period, with nine girls returning in 2020 and three girls
in the first half of 2021. Where possible, survivors were reunited with family
members, receiving case management and psychosocial support, referrals to health
services and access to livelihood services to support the reintegration process.
35. It should be noted that gender restrictive norms and practices significantly
hamper access to services, including legal services, by survivors of rape and other
forms of sexual violence. The situation is compounded by stigmat ization and fear of
retaliation, rendering survivors even more vulnerable should they decide to report
such violations. For instance, concerns remained about displaced girls living in formal

22-00824

7/12

S/2022/46

and informal camp settings who were vulnerable to sexual violence owing to the
confined living conditions, restrictions on movement and the lack of access to
services, civil documentation and livelihoods. Since March 2020, COVID -19-related
restrictions on movement have further exacerbated a dire protection situation for
internally displaced persons, increasing their vulnerability to negative coping
mechanisms, including the early and forced marriage of girls.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
36. The country task force verified no attacks on schools and one attack on a health
centre. On 26 May 2020, a day-care health centre (primary health-care unit) was
partially destroyed in Safr, Mawat district (Sulaymaniyah Governorate) during
Operation Claw. The attack took place at night and no civilians were injured as a
result of the operation. As at June 2021, the day-care centre remained non-functional.
Military use of schools
37. The country task force verified the military use of 45 schools – 4 during the
second half of 2019, 27 in 2020 and 14 during the first half of 2021 – by the Iraqi
police (35), the Iraqi Army (6), the Popular Mobilization Forces (3) and the
Peshmerga (1). All the schools were located in areas previously under Da’esh control:
37 schools in Kirkuk, 4 in Ninawa and 4 in Salah al-Din Governorates. By June 2021,
nine schools had been vacated by the Iraqi police (8) in Kirkuk and the Popular
Mobilization Forces (1) in Ninawa, while 36 schools continued to be used by the Iraqi
police (27), the Iraqi armed forces (7), the Popular Mobilization Force s (1) and the
Peshmerga (1).

E.

Abduction
38. The country task force verified the abduction of four children (one boy, three
girls), one of whom had been abducted in 2019 in Kirkuk and three (one boy, two
girls) had been abducted in 2020 in Salah al-Din (1) and Diyala (2) Governorates. All
those abductions were attributed to Da’esh. In May 2020, Da’esh elements entered
the house of the mukhtar (mayor) in Samarra’ district (Salah al-Din Governorate) and
abducted a 15-year-old boy after killing three men and injuring one woman. The boy
was released shortly afterwards.
39. In addition, the country task force late-verified the abduction of 21 children
(7 boys, 14 girls), with 18 of those abductions (6 boys, 12 girls) occurring between
2014 and 2016. All the abductions were attributed to Da’esh. Of those children, 12
were victims of at least one additional violation during the time of their abduction,
with rape and other forms of sexual violence against 10 girls, while recruitment and
use affected 2 boys. For example, four children (one boy, three girls) were abducted
by Da’esh in August 2014 in Sinjar district (Ninawa Governorate), with the youngest
victim just 3 years old at the time of his abduction.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
40. The country task force verified 62 incidents of denial of humanitarian access:
1 incident in 2020 and 61 in the first half of 2021. The incidents were attributed to
the Iraqi security forces (52), the Popular Mobilization Forces (9) and the Guardians
of Blood (1) and were verified in Kirkuk (32), Ninawa (14), Anbar (8), Diyala (6) and
Salah al-Din (2).

8/12

22-00824

S/2022/46

41. The lack of a unified authorization mechanism for non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) hampered the movements, activities and operations of
humanitarian actors throughout the reporting period. From the end of 2019 to October
2020, the Government suspended the national mechanism responsible for authorizing
access for NGOs, thereby increasing bureaucratic impediments and effectively
limiting humanitarian operations. In November 2020, it launched a new online
national access authorization mechanism for NGOs, which has contributed to
overcoming the long-standing problems of obtaining access letters. The outbreak of
the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated the restrictions on humanitarian access. As a
result, until mid-2020, there were delays in delivering humanitarian assistance to
more than 850,000 internally displaced persons living in or outside of camps,
including approximately 385,000 Iraqi children in need of assist ance.
42. Some 87 per cent of the denials of humanitarian access (54) in the first half of
2021 were concentrated in three Governorates: Kirkuk (32), Ninawa (14) and Anbar
(8). All such incidents occurring during that period related to bureaucratic restric tions,
attributed to the Iraqi security forces (52) and the Popular Mobilization Forces (9),
which limited or slowed down the movement of humanitarian personnel and goods,
thereby hampering humanitarian operations. There were also instances of denial of
passage at checkpoints. For example, in Kirkuk Governorate, 32 incidents involved
members of the Iraqi security forces at checkpoints in Hawijah district not
recognizing Government-delivered access authorizations and demanding that NGOs
obtain local permits.

V. Progress and challenges in ending and preventing grave
violations against children
43. The United Nations continued to engage with the Government of Iraq to
strengthen the protection of children as well as for the purpose of finalizing and
adopting an action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children by the
Popular Mobilization Forces. It is also envisioned that the draft action plan will
provide support for the reintegration of children who have been released from armed
actors. Discussions are ongoing on the draft action plan, which will also strengthen
the existing national child protection framework.
44. The interministerial committee on grave violations of the rights of the child,
created in November 2017, remained active, albeit to a limited extent owing to the
political, security and COVID-19-related situation. Its responsibilities included
awareness-raising, building the capacities of parties to the conflict on child
protection, supporting legal reform processes and documentin g grave violations
against children. The committee fully resumed its work in April 2021.
45. The country task force continued to support the Federal Government as well as
the Kurdistan Regional Government to harmonize domestic legislation with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and other international treaties to which Iraq
is a party. In June 2021, after its endorsement by the Council of Ministers of Iraq, a
bill on child protection, in which the involvement of children in armed conflict is
criminalized, was submitted to the Council of Representatives of Iraq for its first
reading. Similarly, during the same period, the draft child rights act for the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq, criminalizing the recruitment or conscription of children under the
age of 18 into military or paramilitary services or armed groups in combat and support
roles, was finalized and validated for submission to the Council of Ministers of the
Kurdistan Regional Government for its endorsement and subsequent submission to
the Parliament of the Kurdistan Region. A child protection policy for the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq, in which the services and capacities for protection of children from
22-00824

9/12

S/2022/46

violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect are specified, is awaiting the endorsement
of the Council of Ministers.
46. On 1 March 2021, the Council of Representatives of Iraq passed the Yazidi
Female Survivors Law, thereby creating a reparation and rehabilitation framework for
women and girl survivors of Da’esh crimes from Yazidi, Turkmen, Shabak and
Christian minority groups. Under the Law, the crimes committed by Da’esh against
these women and girls have been recognized as crimes against humanity and
genocide, and future amnesties have been excluded. Some gaps remain, however,
including the need to expand the definition of survivor to include men and boys, as
well as other minority communities. In addition, the Law does not address the status
of children born of rape by members of Da’esh.
47. The country task force supported the provision of juvenile justice services for
children in conflict with the law, including children in detention for alleged
association with parties to the conflict, including Da’esh. Services provided included
specialized legal aid for children, advocacy on alternatives to detentio n, access to
psychosocial support and aftercare reintegration.
48. The country task force supported the Government, the Supreme Judicial Council
and countries of origin to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of foreign children
detained in Iraq for their alleged affiliation with Da’esh. Support was provided to the
Government of Iraq and to countries of origin to ensure that repatriation activities
adhered to the principle of the best interests of the child and to develop specialized
child protection programmes aimed at facilitating the children’s full reintegration.
Between August 2019 and June 2021, 625 children (312 boys, 313 girls) were
repatriated to eight countries. The COVID-19 pandemic halted repatriation activities
between March 2020 and February 2021, as Iraqi airspace had closed and restrictions
on travel and movement had come into effect. This had a notable impact on children
who had to spend another year in detention in Iraq. In March 2021, the repatriation
of children to their countries of origin resumed, with 156 children (83 boys, 73 girls)
being returned to two countries.
49. Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the country task force
advocated the release of children from detention, including pretrial detention, to
reduce overcrowding in detention facilities and to minimize the risk of COVID -19
transmission. Since March 2020, the Government has released 767 Iraqi children (701
boys, 66 girls) from detention, among them 48 boys convicted of security -related
charges, including an alleged association with Da’esh.
50. The country task force provided training on child protection to international and
national NGOs in order to strengthen the monitoring and reporting of grave violations
against children. The task force held five training sessions for 144 participants (80
men, 64 women) of the Iraqi national child protection network, which included
representatives of civil society and national and international NGOs. In addition, the
task force collaborated with the international NGO Justice Rapid Response, which
provided a four-month training programme for 24 members of the task force (11 of
them women), thereby reinforcing its peer network on strengthening the child
protection framework in Iraq.
51. The country task force continued to partner with local organizations to support
the reintegration of children formerly associated with parties to the conflict and
children at risk through a community-based reintegration and security programme.
The programme reached 658 children and adolescents (630 boys, 28 girls) in Najaf,
Karbala’, Ninawa and Kirkuk Governorates. Reintegration and social cohesion
activities included mental health and psychological services, legal advice and
consultation, and facilitating access to education, vocational training, life skills and
case management support.
10/12

22-00824

S/2022/46

52. More than 711,390 persons, including 504,068 children (264,095 boys, 239,973
girls) received explosive risk ordinance education through in -person and remote
information sessions.

VI. Observations and recommendations
53. I am encouraged by the overall decrease in grave violations against children in
Iraq since my previous report, in particular the significant decrease in the recruitment
and use as well as the abduction of children, and in attacks on schools and hospitals.
54. I remain concerned, however, that grave violations against children continue to
be committed. I call upon all parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and inter national
refugee law and to immediately end and prevent grave violations in Iraq.
55. I am particularly concerned about the continuing incidents of killing and
maiming of children, notwithstanding a decrease in their number, and about the
impact on children of the contamination of Iraqi territory by explosive remnants of
war and improvised explosive devices, which are the leading cause of child casualties.
I urge all parties to immediately take all preventive and mitigating actions necessary
to avoid and minimize harm and better protect children, including in the conduct of
military operations and from the risks and effects of explosive remnants of war and
the use of explosive weapons, including in populated areas. I call upon the
Government of Iraq to fully implement international legal instruments on antipersonnel mines and explosive remnants of war, particularly the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti -Personnel Mines
and on Their Destruction and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects (Protocol V). I further call upon the Government to continue
promoting mine clearance, mine risk education, victim assistance and stockpile
destruction, including prior to any movement of internally displaced persons back to
contaminated areas. The United Nations will continue to support the Iraqi autho rities
in this regard.
56. I am troubled by the significant increase in the number of children detained by
Iraqi security forces on national-security-related charges, including for their alleged
association with armed groups, primarily Da’esh. I call upon the Government of Iraq
to release children held on such grounds. I reiterate that children formerly associated
with armed forces and groups should be treated primarily as victims and that
alternatives to detention should be pursued in accordance with inter national law and
in line with international standards on juvenile justice. I call upon the Government to
continue to engage with the United Nations in this regard and to provide child
protection actors with access to the children concerned.
57. When children are suspected of having committed criminal acts, I reiterate that
due process and fair trial standards must be adhered to, with appropriate consideration
given to age and gender. Any prosecution of children should respect internationally
recognized standards of juvenile justice. I further call upon the Government of Iraq
to establish the minimum age of criminal responsibility, in line with the principles of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
58. I welcome the collaboration of the Government of Ir aq with the United Nations
to strengthen the protection of children and the ongoing dialogue on an action plan to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children by the Popular Mobilization
Forces. I encourage the Government of Iraq to expedite the adoption of the action plan.

22-00824

11/12

S/2022/46

59. I commend the Government’s efforts to address the needs of the survivors of
atrocities committed by Da’esh and welcome the passing of the Yazidi Female
Survivors Law. I encourage the Government to continue engaging with the United
Nations on the implementation of the Law, including by ensuring a survivor-centred
approach and by paying particular attention to the needs of children. I further
encourage the Government to consider similar provisions to address the needs of other
minorities and of boy and men survivors of Da’esh atrocities.
60. I welcome the steps taken by the Government and the progress made concerning
the bill on the protection of children in Iraq, under which the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict will be criminalized in line with the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, which has been ratified by Iraq, and I call for the bill’s swift adoption. In
addition, I note that a child rights act is being drafted for the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq, pursuant to which the recruitment or conscription of children under the age of
18 will be criminalized, and I encourage its quick enactment.
61. I commend the Government of Iraq for the initial repatriation of Iraqi families,
including 245 children, from Hawl camp in the Syrian Arab Republic, and I am
encouraged by the increasing number of children repatriated from Iraq to their
countries of origin, as well as by the progress made in developing specialized child
protection programmes to address children’s specific needs and to ensure their full
reintegration. I reiterate my call upon all concerned countries of origin that have not
yet done so to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of their c hildren, consistent with
the principle of non-refoulement and with respect for family unity and the best
interests of the child. I urge States Members of the United Nations to continue to
search for solutions towards the voluntary repatriation and reintegr ation of children,
including those with alleged links to Da’esh and other groups designated as terrorist
by the United Nations, being held in camps or detained in Iraq, under the Global
Framework for United Nations Support on Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq Third
Country National Returnees, adopted in 2020.
62. I call upon all parties to allow and facilitate safe, timely and unimpeded
humanitarian access in order to provide assistance to children and to ensure the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and assets.
63. I call upon the Government to develop and implement a national reintegration
programme for children affected by armed conflict, with the support of the United
Nations and other actors.
64. I welcome the contributions of donors in support o f the United Nations and the
Government in implementing national programmes to enhance the protection of
children in Iraq. I call upon the donor community to reinforce its efforts to provide
additional financial support, in particular for explosive risk or dnance education and
reintegration programmes for children, as well as to continue to support United
Nations access to decontamination efforts and ammunition management efforts.

12/12

22-00824
