A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/26
5 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 82
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/50/603)]
50/26.

Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955, by which it
established the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation, and its subsequent resolutions on the subject, including resolution
49/32 of 9 December 1994, in which, inter alia, it requested the Scientific
Committee to continue its work,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, 1/
Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee continuing its
work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future
generations resulting from the levels of radiation to which mankind and the
environment are exposed,
Conscious of the continuing need to examine and compile information
about atomic and ionizing radiation and to analyse its effects on mankind and
the environment,
1.
Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation for the valuable contribution it has been making in the

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session,
Supplement No. 46 (A/50/46).
96-76441

/...

A/RES/50/26
Page 2

course of the past forty years, since its inception, to wider knowledge and
understanding of the levels, effects and risks of atomic radiation and for
fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and independence of
judgement;
2.
Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its work, including
its important activities to increase knowledge of the levels, effects and
risks of ionizing radiation from all sources;
3.
Endorses the intentions and plans of the Scientific Committee for
its future activities of scientific review and assessment on behalf of the
General Assembly;
4.
Also requests the Scientific Committee to continue at its next
session the review of the important problems in the field of radiation and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
5.
Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue
providing support for the effective conduct of the work of the Scientific
Committee and for the dissemination of its findings to the General Assembly,
the scientific community and the public;
6.
Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered to the
Scientific Committee by Member States, the specialized agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and non-governmental organizations, and
invites them to increase their cooperation in this field;
7.
Invites Member States, the organizations of the United Nations
system and non-governmental organizations concerned to provide further
relevant data about doses, effects and risks from various sources of
radiation, which would greatly help in the preparation of future reports of
the Scientific Committee to the General Assembly.
82nd plenary meeting
6 December 1995
