S/2016/948

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 November 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 9 November 2016 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to the letter dated 18 October 2016 from Ambassador Vitaly Churkin,
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
agreed to send a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola
during the period from 10 to 14 November 2016. The members of the Council have
agreed on the terms of reference of the mission, which are attached hereto (see annex ).
Ambassadors François Delattre (France) and Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins
(Angola) will co-lead the mission.
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Mr. Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins (Angola)
Mr. Shen Bo (China)
Mr. Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta (Egypt)
Mr. François Delattre (France)
Mr. Yoshifumi Okamura (Japan)
Mr. Ramlan Bin Ibrahim (Malaysia)
Mr. Phillip Taula (New Zealand)
Mr. Petr V. Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Mr. Gorgui Ciss (Senegal)
Mr. Juan Manuel González de Linares Palou (Spain)
Mr. Eduard Fesko (Ukraine)
Mr. Stephen Hickey (United Kingdom)
Ms. Isobel Coleman (United States)
Mr. Elbio Rosselli (Uruguay)
Mr. Henry Alfredo Suárez Moreno (Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Fodé Seck
President of the Security Council

16-19775 (E)

141116

*1619775*

S/2016/948

Annex to the letter dated 9 November 2016 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Visit by the Security Council of the United Nations to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Angola, 10-14 November 2016
Terms of reference
Democratic Republic of the Congo
The Security Council will carry out its mission to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, within the framework of resolution 2277 (2016), the press statements of
15 July (SC/12449-AFR/3414), 16 August (SC/12477-AFR/3430) and 21 September
2016 (SC/12528-AFR/3451).
The Security Council will meet with the President of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Prime Minister and his Government, leaders of the political
parties, both signatories and non-signatories of the 18 October political agreement
resulting from the national dialogue, as well as civil society organizations and the
leadership from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), among others.
In line with the framework set out in the first paragraph above, the Security
Council will deliver the following messages:
1.
To stress the crucial importance of a free, fair, credible, inclusive, transparent,
peaceful and timely presidential election, in accordance with the Constitution, for
stability, development and consolidation of constitutional democracy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
2.
To express concern about the recent violence in Kinshasa and continued
instability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo related to the electoral process
and to call upon all political parties, their supporters and other p olitical actors to
refrain from further violence or other provocations and to address their differences
peacefully.
3.
Acknowledging the conclusion of the national dialogue, to urge all political
parties to show responsibility by joining and continuing an open, inclusive and
peaceful political discussion related to the presidential elections, in accordance with
the Constitution, and to urge further confidence-building measures to ease tension
and build consensus.
4.
To express deep concern regarding the persistence of violence in North Kivu
Province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo where more than 700 civilians
have been killed since October 2014.
5.
To assess the security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the ability of MONUSCO to implement its mandate in accordance with Security
Council resolution 2277 (2016), and in particular to respond to current and ongoing
security threats.
6.
To urge troop-contributing countries to fully implement their mandate to
protect civilians and to remind them of the need for a comprehensive approach, and
to take all necessary measures to carry out the mandate.

2/3

16-19775

S/2016/948

7.
To remind those serving in MONUSCO of their obligations under resolution
2272 (2016).
8.
To call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to take
further military action, in accordance with international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, as applicable, and with the
support of MONUSCO in accordance with its mandate, to end the threat posed by
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of
Rwanda (FDLR) and all other armed groups operating in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
9.
To welcome the regional initiatives and efforts by regional states to enhance
cooperation towards the neutralization of armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and encourage further action.
10. To urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to hold
accountable those responsible for violations of international humanitarian law or
violations and abuses of human rights, as applicable, in particular those that may
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity, including those committed in
the context of the electoral process.
11. To welcome efforts made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to combat and prevent sexual violence in conflict, including progress made in
the fight against impunity through the arrest, prosecution and conviction of
perpetrators from the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(FARDC) and the National Civil Police (PNC) and to encourage the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to strengthen its efforts in this
area.
12. To reiterate their full support to MONUSCO and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in efficiently
implementing their mandate in full.
13. To express their determination to continue to closely follow the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the security conditions on the
ground and the efforts to successfully conclude the electoral process.
Angola
During its visit to Luanda on 14 November 2016, the Securit y Council will
hold talks with the President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, in his capacity as
President of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the President
of the National Assembly, and the Diplomatic Corps accredited to Angola, with the
following objectives:
14. To undertake an assessment of the political and security developments in the
Great Lakes Region, particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, following
the summit held in Luanda on 26 October 2016, with the purpose of engaging in and
supporting the ongoing regional efforts related to peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
15. To discuss the results of the Security Council’s visit to the Demo cratic Republic
of the Congo.
16. To strengthen cooperation relations between the Angolan authorities and the
United Nations (Security Council).

16-19775

3/3
