1 an

>cial
ace;
lited
te a
: the

tted
ffort

,,' 7_,c-,-"--,"cc",,,,_cc-"~1
United Nations

29th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Saturday, 10 July 1982,
at 3.15 p.m.

TWELFTH SPECIAL SESSION

Official Records

NEW

President: Mr. Ismat KITTANI (Iraq)

YORK

disarmament, the delegations of the People's Republic
of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the
German Democratic Republic, the Hungarian People's
Republic, the Mongolian People's Republic, the
Polish People's Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics deem it necessary to make the following
statement.
4. The joint approach of the socialist countries to
the central tasks of the second special session is based
on their conviction that it is necessary to adopt decisions which will, in practice, lead to the elimination
of the threat of nuclear war and to a shift towards
ending the arms race and towards disarmament. and
can give a further impulse to negotiations on those
questions.
5. In 1978, at the first special session on disarmament,
the socialist countries contributed constructively to the
elaboration and adoption of the objectives, principles
and priorities of disarmament negotiations as well
as a programme of action in the field of disarmament,
as contained in the Final Document of that session
Iresolution S-10/2]. Over the last four years they have
lived up to their commitments. In their preparations
for the second special session, and at the session,
the socialist countries continued to work for and contribute to the success of the session on the basis of
the Final Document. They believed that the special
session would offer a good opportunity for all States,
regardless of size, military potential or geographical
situation, to contribute actively to solving the problems of arms limitation and disarmament.
6. Given the deterioration of the international situation as a consequence of the escalation of the arms
race by imperialist forces striving to achieve military
superiority and the enunciation of the doctrine of a
"limited nuclear wlir" and of other doctrines predicated on the use of nuclear weapons, the speCial
session was faced with particularly urgent and important tasks, first and foremost, the task of adopting
very urgent measures to prevent nuclear war.
7. The proposals with which the socialist countries
came to the session were designed to achieve that
particular task. The statement of the Soviet Union,
contained in the message from the head of the Soviet
State, L. I. Brezhnev [12th meeting], concerning the
Soviet Union's unilateral commitment not to be the
first to use nuclear weapons, reflected its profound
concern for the destiny of the world and the survival
of civilization as well as its high sense of responsibility for ensuring lasting peace on earth. The socialist
countries believe that the Soviet Union's decision
should be followed by reciprocal steps by the other
nuclear-weapon Stdtes. They are convinced that the
acceptance by the other nuclear-weapon States of a

AGENDAITEMS9T014
Review of the implementation of the recommendations
and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at
its tenth special session (concluded):
(a) Status of negotiations on disarmament as contained
in the Programme of Action and bearing in mind
the priorities set out In the Programme;
(b) Consideration of the report of the Committee on
Disarmament, in particular of any draft instruments
transmitted by the Committee;
(c) Consideration of the report of the Disarmament
Commission;
(d) Consideration of the implementation of resolutions
of the General Assembly on specific tasks, in particular studies, aimed at the realization of the Final
Document and their follow-up
Consideration and adoption of the Comprehensive
Programme of Disarmament (concluded)
Implementation of the Declaration of the 1980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade and consideration of
initiatives and proposals of Member States (concluded)
Enhancement of the effectiveness of machinery in the
field of disarmament and strengthening of the role of
the United Nations in this field, including the possible
convening of a World Disarmament Conference
(concluded)
Measures to mobWze world public opinion in favour
of disarmament (concluded):
(a) Disarmament education, seminars and training
(United Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament);
(b) World Disarmament Campaign;
(c) Other public information activities
Adoption, in sn appropriate format, of the documents
of the twelfth special session of the General Assembly
(concluded)
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
This afternoon the Assembly will continue to hear
statements by representatives who wish to explain
their positions or express reservations concerning the
items before the Assembly.
2. Mr. RACZ (Hungary): It is my honour at this time
to speak on behaif of a group of socialist r.ountries.
3. 0" the occasion of the completion of the second
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
471

A/S-12/PV.29

UIUiJR;L.".& X .& g.. A• . III

472

Jj~;KJ_~jf~~iQ@AJ'.l!'jt~iI!Ml!'R,~~~.'!~!1'!1~'tkfJ.\:~~r~~]J;:::~
".;~~&'?:c~·~~%J2~};&ff·f[~;''l%~-0:~~~··:~ffi;t~,;'}~~i!f.-'8'I~~::-;EG?,f~7";:~R0T:iJ:f.~J~'7[gj;}-::;:-';:·'::~ii}'G1S;;:::,:::r~E:;3--::~:::-:',-~-s~~m::'.r,.'·
:~,:

General Assembly-Twelfth Special Session,--Plenary Meetings

commitment not to be the first to use nuclear weapons
would, in practice, be tantamount to a total ban on the
use of nuclear weapons.
8. At this special session, the socialist countries submitted a set of constructive proposals aimed at
strengthening peace, preserving detente, ending the
arms race and promoting international co-operation.
Their initiatives cover a wide range of top-priority
issues relating to the curbing of the arms race and to
disarmament, such as a nuclear disarmament programme, a ban on all 'nuclear-weapon tests, the
prohibition of the nuclear neutron weapon and the
prohibition and destruction of chemical weapons. In
that context the socialist countries have proposed a
number of important new elements which take into
account the views of other States and are aimed at
achieving mutually acceptable agreements as soon
as possible.

make a single concrete proposal on the major questions
of concern to the peoples of the world today. On the
contrary, they tried everything to hinder businesslike deliberations. That attitude, which is fraught with
danger for the cause of peace, has been disavowed
at this session by the overwhelming majority of
delegations.
13. In present conditions, the cohesion and cooperation of all peace-loving forces assume ever
greater importance. The socialist countries express
their full solidarity with the anti-war movement of
the popular masses which acquired unprecedented
dimensions on the eve and during the course of the
special session. That movement is a powerful force
against the attempts of imperialist forces, which are
bound to bring the world closer to a nuclear catastrophe. The unity of all peace-loving forces is a mighty
factor for the triumph of the cause of peace.

9. The socialist countries have strongly supported
the intensification of the work in all international
forums where negotiations on arms limitation and
disarmament are or should be conducted. They have
declared the interest of their Governments in resuming
all the negotiations which have been broken off and
their willingness to promote the successful completion
of all such negotiations.

14. The socialist countries are convinced that
today the most urgent task is to stop the arms race
immediately and to proceed without delay to measures
of real disarmament, nuclear disarmament first of all.
That task must be completed if military confrontation
and the danger of war are to be eliminated, if the
process of detente is to be maintained and strengthened, and if co-operation among countries is to be
developed.
J5. The socialist countries reaffirm once again their
invariable willingness to enter into agreements for
the limitation, reduction or prohibition of weapons
of any kind on ajust and reciprocal basis. This applies
not only to nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass
destruction but also to conventional armaments. They
declare their full readiness to co-operate with every
other country and with every people of goodwill in
the world-wide struggle for peace and security.

10. At this session, the socialist countries have
advocated positions' which respond to the aspirations
of the overwhelming majority of countries. Throughout
the session it has been confirmed that on the question
of the prevention of nuclear war and on other key
issues of disarmament, the positions of the socialist
and non-aligned countries are identical or similar.
1J• The session has shown that the question of the
prevention of nuclear war is the focal point of attention of the G~neral Assembly. It was considered
extensively both in the general debate and in practically all the Working Groups, above all the special
group established on the initiative of the socialist
countries. There has been wide recognition of the
need for urgent measures to remove the threat of
nuclear war as well as to freeze and reduce nuclear
arsenals and eventually eliminate them for good.
Expressin2 the profound concern of the oeooles of the
world at the increased danger. of nuciear& war, the
General Assembly has reaffirmed that the prevention
of nuclear war remains the most acute and urgent
task of the present time and urged all States to consider as soon as possible the proposals submitted
during the session, designed to avoid nuclear catastrophe.

I
1

j
j
1
l

l
\

J

j

i

I
"~I

Fl'

f:~
I~
il
i'

I,

I

I',
I,

!
['

I'
i

I

16. That ends the joint statement of the countries
I listed earlier.

J7. I shall now speak briefly on behalf of the
Hungarian delegation.
18. First of all, I take this opportunity to extend
to the President, Mr. Kittani, our congratulations on
the completion of the work of this special session.
We also express our appreciation of the most valuable
contribution') to our deliberations made by Mr. Adeniji,
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee; by the chairmen
of the three Working Groups, Mr. Garcia Robles of
Mexico, Mr. Sadleir of Australia and Mr. Herder of
the German Democratic Republic; as well as by the
co-ordinators of the drafting groups. Our appreciation
goes equally to Mr. Ustinov, Under-Secretary-General
of the Department of Political and Security Council
Affairs; to Mr. Martenson, Assistant SecretaryGeneral of the Centre for Disarmament; to Mr. Csillag,
Secretary of the Ad Hoc Committee; and to all the
members of the Secretariat who carried out their duties
so efficiently at this special session.

12. It has been impossible to take action on concrete
measures of nuclear disarmament and other important
matters because of the obstructionist position of the
United States and some other countries of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] which have
blocked the adoption of decisions in sheer disregard
of the demands of the peoples. The special session
19. The people of my country, having suffered the
has proved that those countries have been guided not
by concern for peace and the achievement of disar- ' horrors of two world wars and having the strong wish
mament but by their intention to block decisions
to live in peace and security, fully recognize the most
which would impede their policy aimed at a further
important task of our time-the avoidance of a nuclear
war. This recognition has been formulated in the
arms buildup in order that they may be able to
message which the Hungarian Peace Movement
impose their wills on other countries and peoples from
a position of superior military strength. They did not
addressed to the special session:

,,'F.' "·<c···

Llestions
On the
usmessght with
avowed
)rity of
md cole ever
express
nent of
edented
~ of the
LlI force
lich are
I' catasl mighty
~d that
ns race
easures
it of all.
>ntation
, if the
trengths to be

in their
:nts for
'eapons
applies
of mass
s. They
1 every
:iwill in
mntries
of the
extend
Ions on
:ession.
aluable
\~eniji,

lalrmen
'bles of
rder of
by the
:ciation
}eneral
:ouncil
:retary:sillag,
all the
r duties
red the
Ig wish
le most
IlUclear
in the
vement

"'' ' ' 1-"'' . .,.,"'.",

~""~ F~ '.. 'c ,-,c'cc ~"",,' ,',,' ,. 'CC'"

. 'r .

~. ,'cc cc'" ,~",·'cc',"·',·"c ,'VT...·""·.,.",·,""""""',..""',

29th meeting-IO July 1982

"In our days the possibility of the outbreak of
a nuclear war, the most devastating ever, looms
over the peoples of our globe as a spectre of final
destruction. At one with other peoples, we Hungarians want to prevent this from happening." [AIS12IAC.115. annex J.]
20. It was against that background that the Hungarian
delegation, together with the delegations of the other
socialist countries, approached the major issues of
this special session. It was against that background
that almost all delegations, as well as the representatives of non-governmental organizations-among
them, Hungarians-and world public opinion welcomed the solemn commitment of the Soviet Union
concerning the non-first-use of nuclear weapons.
21. The Hungarian delegation, like the great majority
of delegations participating in this special session,
spared no effort to bring about the necessary change
in the present unfortunate trend of international
affairs. It is very sad-indeed, it is highly alarmingthat certain delegations have obstinately defied the
wish and determination of the majority and even the
popular masses of their own countries and stubbornly
blocked every effort aimed at reaching agreement on
the: most burning questions. They may have succeeded
in preventing this session from reaching any tangible
results, but they will not, and they cannot, succeed
in escaping world-wide criticism and condemnation
for the role they have played. The power of those who
stand for peace and disarmament will certainly prevail.

22. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): After
the joint statement made on behalf of the socialist
countries, the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic wishes to make the following statement.
23. The second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament was an event in which
the peoples of the world had placed great expectations
on account of the deterioration in the international
state of affairs. The demands of the world-wide peace
movement have made an imprint on the session's
discussions. During those discussions it became clear
that the overwhelming majority of States were deeply
concerned aboui worid peace and iherefore defined
the elimination of the danger of nuclear war as the key
issue of the present time and the main task of this
special session. Numerous constructive proposals and
concrete initiatives have outlined the road towards the
elimination of the danger of nuclear war and the halting
of the nuclear-arms race. In this way, distinct criteria
have been established, against which the attitudes of
each and every State towards the vital issues of
mankind must be measured.
24. Like many other delegations, we deplore the fact
that this session has not been able to agree upon a
document stipulating concrete measures that would
have answered the challenges of our time.
25. In a way, this session has been like a watershed,
with the endeavours of the peace-loving peoples and
States on the one side and the imperialist policies of
confrontation and arms buildup, aggression and
boycott on the other. When the results of this session
are assessed, this must be spelt out with all sobriety
and clarity: Simultaneously with this session, NATO
convened a summit meeting at Bonn, capital of the

r

. . . ., . , ' ' ' ' ' " ' " ' ". . . . . ., . , ' ' ' ' ' .

473

Federal Republic of Germany, to adopt new decisions
accelerating NATO's long-term armaments programme, extending NATO's sphere of activities and
endorsing the deployment of new United States
medium-range missiles in Western Europe. A crusade
was proclaimed against socialism and social progress
in the world. It is self-evident that that course is in
gross contradiction to the building of confidence
among nations. At the same time, a military budget
that has no precedent in history was adopted by the
United States. The world knows of the decisions
taken by that country's Administration to establish
a special command for outer-space warfare and to
aggravate the ongoing trade war against other States.
It was during our deliberations here that Israel, with
the direct support of the United States, sprang the
fifth Middle East war and is now committing genocide
against the Palestinian people. Is there anybody who
does not see the direct connexion between those
events and the obdurate resistance of the representatives of the United States and other NATO members
by frustrating the consideration and preparation of and
agreement on concrete measures to eliminate the
danger of nuclear war, to halt the arms race and to
achieve disarmament? What they were guided by were
not the historic decisions of the first special session on
disarmament but the doctrines of so-called nuclear
deterrence and nuclear first strike, and their craving
for military superiority. It is no wonder, therefore, that
the representatives of those States prevented this
session from adopting forward-oriented decisions.
26. The course of this session has re-emphasized that
the peoples' struggle will continue to centre on the
elimination of the danger of a nuclear war. Also, the
required steps and measures to achieve that goal have
already been outlined.
27. The pledge made by the Soviet Union under
international law not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons is undoubtedly the outstanding result of this
special session. What we must achieve now is a
similar commitment by all nuclear-weapon States.
28. The possibility and the task of working out a
programme of nuclear disarmament have been emphasized by the memorandum of the Soviet Union
entitied .. Averting the growing nuciear threat and
curbing the arms race" [AIS~/2IAC.IIIJ lInd Co,.,'. I].
The new proposals by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics show the possibility of a breakthrough in
the negotiations on the comprehensive prohibition of
chemical weapons. Further COHcrete proposals to
preserve peace and to halt the arms race have been
submitted by other socialist countries, including the
German Democratic Republic. The valuable proposals
and initiatives that have been put forward by nonaligned countries testify to their authors' commitment
to, and vital interest in, tangible actions for disarmament.
29. The work of the delegation of the German Democratic Republic at this session has been determined by
the responsibility that my State derives from its
history and geography. The German peace policy is
never to allow another war to be unleashed from
German soil. Europe and the world at large must not
be aIlowed to perish in a nuclear holocaust. With
that in mind, the German Democratic Republic has
made efforts to contribute to the second special session
on disarmament.

1

•...,.'
""~.. "~-,
'

General Asst'mbly-Twelfth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

30. I should like to recall here the proposals and
initiatives that have been put forward by the German
Democratic Republic.
31. The message of Erich Honecker, Chairman of
the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, to the General Assembly at this session [A/S-/2/
AC./ /6] drew attention to the imperative necessity
of halting the nuclear-arms race. We have proposed
that negotiations be commenced without delay on
the prohibition of the neutron weapon. We have
reaffirmed our proposal to discontinue immediately the
qualitative improvement of chemical weapons. This,
specifically, means stopping the production, stockpiling and stationing of binary and other new types of
chemical weapons. A further initiative of the German
Democratic Republic has highlighted the pre-eminent
responsibility and duty of all States to conduct, without
pre-conditions, serious negotiations in good faith on
arms limitation and disarmament.
32. From the rostrum at this session, my delegation
wishes to reiterate its assurance that the foreign
policy of the German Democratic Republic will continue to be devoted to the resolution of these urgent
Issues.
33. In conclusion, I wish to extend to the President
the thanks and appreciation of the delegation of the
German Democratic Republic for his able guidflnce of
this second special session. We also wish to thank
Mr. Adeniji, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee.
for his dedicated work, as well as the chairmen of the
Working Groups and their subsidiary bodies and all
the staff of the Secretariat.
34. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan): The second special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament is concluding on a sombre note. It is clear
that the high hopes entertained by the' peoples of the
world have not been fulfilled. We have not succeeded
in securing agreement on ways and means to enhance
international security and to promote the vital goals of
disarmament.
35. The Pakistan delegation participated actively
and, we would like to think, constructively in the
proceedings of this session. We were deeply committed to its success. We have to recognize with
feelings of profound regret the failure of the session
to live up to our expectations.

36.

There can be no denying that the grave and
deteriorating international situation has eroded the
prospects of progress in the disarmament process.
We cannot overlook the fact that the proceedings of
this session coincided with the brazen Israeli invasion
of Lebanon and the brutal. suppression of the
Palestinian liberation struggle: It must be stated
again that the relentless pursuit hy some great Powers
of their strategic ambitions, manifested in their policies of intervention, occupation and hegemonism,
places in doubt their overt commitment to the goals
of peace, disarmament and a world order based on
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Small and medium-sized countries like Pakistan have a
vital stake in the establishment of such a world order.

37. This session has served as the focal point for the
widespread expression of public concern about the
arms race. and particularly about the danger of the

use of nuclear weapons. We hope that the massive
public support for disarmament demonstrated all over
the world in recent months will have an impact on
policy makers, especially those of the major Powers.
We have no doubt that the World Disarmament
Campaign, launched at this session, will help to
generate in all countries informed public opinion about
the issues involved in the difficult search for disarmament.
38. In the present atmosphere of international crisis
and confrontation it was fitting that concern about
the danger of nuclear war should be expressed so
widely and unequivocally at this session. The proposals for a complete prohibition of the use of nuclear
weapons. for a freeze of their development and production and for a comprehensive nuclear test ban, as
elaborated in the draft resolutions submitted by India.
Mexico and Sweden, reflect world public opinion.
Pakistan would have liked to see the endorsement
of these proposais by the General Assembly, as well
as the two initiatives supported by non-aligned countries, that is, joint or individual declarations by the
nuclear Powers not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons, and immediate and un, 'nditional assurances
to the non-aligned and other ueveloping countries
outside the major military alliances against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons.
39. While our primary concern about the danger
posed by nuclear weapons remains, there is also the
growing accumulation of conventional arms, which act
as the vehicle of the powerful States to advance their
strategic ambitions and which continue to inflict
tragedy and travail on vast sections of humanity. The
enormous resources consumed in the accumulation of
these means of death and destruction are also a grim
reality that we cannot afford to ignore if we desire
peace and progress.
40. Pakistan welcomes the unanimous reaffirmation
by all States of their commitment to the priorities and
provisions of the Final Document. The international
disarmament strategy endorsed in the Final Document
must be used to stimulate progress in the disarmament
negotiations which are under way and in those which,
;t J."
;c JlVp,",U,
h~ ...... o<rt
",~J] - - - - - - - - ~- ... L - £6·· ...
e.
Will ~VIJlJJIt::J1~t:: III Ult;; IUt U r
I<

4). It is important that all States, and especially the
two leading Powers, enable the Committee on Disarmament, the single multilateral negotiating body, to
discharge its responsibilities fully. We must resolve
to open immediate and serious negotiations on a
nuclear test-han treaty in the Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Committee that was established earlier this
year. We must renew our endeavour in the Committee to reach early agreement on a comprehensive
programme for disarmament. There is also the universal demand that the bilateral talks between the
Soviet Union and the United States should be pursued
in good faith and with a sense of urgency, and that
they should lead to meaningful limitation and significant reductions in the strategic, intermediate and
. other nuclear weapons systems of the two countries.
42. In this nuclear age, disarmament is the precondition of survival. We must not allow despondency
over our present differences to weaken our resolve to
achieve the ultimate goal which we all accept. We are
confident that. sooner rather than later. political,

I

-_- _-_- -_-_- _-_-_- ~_- '_- .'"_- -_- _' 4'_75'1

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-_29t_.!>_.!"_
••_ee_u....,:!!g-:...-1_O_J_U..:.!Y_!_98-_'

:-_-_-_---

:'\

he massive
ted all over
impact on
lor Powers.
isarmament
ill help to
inion about
1 for disarional crisis
cern about
pressed so
. The pro: of nuclear
lt and proest ban, as
d by India,
c opinion.
Idorsement
Ily, as well
~ned coun)ns by the
se nuclear
assurances
countries
the use or
he danger
is also the
, which act
rance their
to inflict
anity. The
mlation of
Iso a grim
we desire
lffirmation
Jrities and
ernational
Document
armament
)se which,
~cially the

on Disar. body, to
st resolve
ons on a
ing Group
arlier this
the ComIrehensive
) the uniween the
e pursued
, and that
and sigdiate and
ountries.
the prepondency
resolve to
It. We are
political,

economic and moral imperatives will compel all
nations, large and small, to seek security through
disarmament.
43. Mr. TSVETKOV (Bulgaria) (interpretation from
French): The Bulgarian delegation fully agrees with
the stL!tement just made by the representative of
Hunga.,I' as Chairman of the group of Eastern
European States for the current month.
44. The delegation of the People's Republic of Bulgaria believes that this closing meeting must answer
the question of whether the second special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament has
succeeded in carrying out its mandate, in helping to
strengthen international peace and security through
disarmament, first and foremost through measures
designed to prevent the danger of a nuclear catastrophe.
45. This session has even greater importance because
of the seriousness of the present international situation. Through their many spontaneous demonstrations
the peoples of the world have categorically expressed
their determination to support practical and effective
efforts for peace and disarmament. The overwhelming
majority of delegations, as well as the representatives
of dozens of non-governmental organizations, have
come out firmly in favour of urgent positive action to
that end. Obviously, all that gave rise to great hope
that the results of the session would meet the legitimate
aspirations of peoples of the world. Hence the disappointment with the final results is even greater. It is
entirely logical to wonder why such an important
opportunity to strengthen international peace and
security has been missed; why, on all sorts of
pretexts, certain countries have made it impossible to
take positive measures to ensure the cessation of
the arms race and genuine disarmament, especially in
the nuclear sphere.
46. The Bulgarian delegation, like the delegations
from the other socialist countries, came to this session
with a sincere desire to make a constructive contribution to the drafting of documents of substance.
47. The commitment entered into from this lofty
rostrum by the Soviet Un!on not to be the first to use
nuclear weapons [12th meeting] is a historic act
which, unfortunately, has not been followed by similar
acts by other nuclear Powers.
48. Among the initiatives of the socialist countries
pride of place goes to the constructive ideas and
proposals set out in the Soviet memorandum entitled
.. Averting the growing nuclear threat and curbing th'e
arms race" [AIS-12IAC.111I and COl"'./]. Halting the
arms race and strengthening peace: this was the goal
of the proposals submitted by the countries of the
socialist community. The proposals of several nonaligned countries had the same aim.
49. Unfortunately, the accomplishment of this rich
and substantive programme of work was obstructed
by those who found their policy on the power of
nuclear weapons and whose military doctrines,
based on the admissibility of the first use of nuclear
weapons in a so-called limited nuclear war, threaten
mankind with total nuclear conflagration. Full responsibility for the unsatisfactory results of the session
falls on the shoulders of the leading circles in the

United States and their closest allies in NATO, who
feel that the success of the session would prevent
them from carrying out their policy of confrontation
and over-armament for which they have opted, in order
to ensure for themselves military superiority and world
supremacy. They have not hesitat~d to strip the work
of this session of its positive and practical value.
50. The results of this session highlight once again
the urgent need to speed up the struggle for peace
through disarmament and to hold serious negotiations
aimed at developing real measures in this regard. At
the present time special importance must be attached
to the fact that the General Assembly has reaffirmed
the validity of the Final Document of 1978 as well
as the commitment entered into by all countries to
ensure its practical implementation.
51. Acts and not words will now decide whether
efforts aimed at reversing the trend towards confrontation and an unbridled arms race threatening international peace and security will be crowned with success.
The People's Republic of Bulgaria, along with the other
socialist countries and with all peace-loving States,
will continue in the future to make every effort to
help to strengthen international peace and security
through disarmament.
52. Mr. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): On 17 June,
Mr. Hussain Muhammad Ershad, head of the Government of Bangladesh, in his address to the General
Assembly [17th meeting], expressed the hope that
this special session would adopt a programme ofaction
which, inter alia, would include a complete prohibition
of the use and threat of use of force as a means of
settling disputes and a joint or individual declaration
by the nuclear-weapon States not to use nuclear
weapons. He also called upon all nuclear-weapon
States to refrain from the testing of nuclear weapons
pending the conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban
treaty, and to provide the non-nuclear-weapon States
and the neutral countries with negative security guarantees. My head of Government also called upon
State:s to suspend the production, deployment and
development of new chemical weapons pending the
conclusion of a chemical-weapon treaty.
_
_ _
P......
•••
••
J-J.
I m: pUllcy 01 Dangl30esn on olsarmamem IS
based on its Constitution, which commits it to the
concept of general and complete disarmament. We
came to this session prepared to take all possible
concrete and tangible actions. It is unfortunate that
despite all efforts the second special session has
ended inconclusively.
1:")

~L

t! _ _

~

54. We deeply regret that the second special session
on disarmament could not take any final decision on
the comprehensive programme of disarmament. While
this is a time to take stock, and a time for some
reflection with the benefit of hindsight, we should like
to urge strongly all nuclear-weapon States and other
militarily significant States to set out immediately to
chart a concrete and definitive future course of action
so as to ensure the early conclusion of the corn..
prehensive programme of disarmament.
55. Simultaneously, we should make every effort to
arrest the conventional arms race and promote the
establishment of nuclear*weapon-free zones and the
meaningful implementation of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. In this regard, the supportive role of non..

~

'(I
, ',1
. ;,1

476

General Assembly-Twelfth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

governmental organizations and research institutes is
considered by my delegation to be a positive service.
56. We strongly believe that there should be checks
on the indiscriminate sale of arms. The deleterious
impact of the arms race on the worid economy is all
too well k lown. The close and organic relationship
between disarmament and development is recognized by all. The economic and social consequences
of the arms r~ce are detrimental, and its continuation
is totally incompatib!e with the implementation of
the new international economic order. The resources
released as a result of disarmament measures should
be used for the improvement of the economic condition of all countries of the world, particularly the
developing countries.
57. In order that the entire world community could
play an active role in the disarmament process, all
efforts should be made to strengthen the role of the
United Nations and the United Nations Centre for
Disarmament, including the multilateral disarmament
machinery. As a mark of our continued and positive
interest in disarmament matters, we have sought
membership in the expanded Committee on Disarmament.
58. I am pleased to inform the Assembly that my
country has decided to make a token contribution to
the World Disarmament Campaign. We are making
this pledge in view of the Secretary-General's report
which emphasizes that the Campaign must be carried
out in all regions of the world [AIS-/2/27]. We should
like the Secretary-General to launch a public-relations
campaign in order to apprise the world of the deleterious impact of the unrestricted arms race.
59. The histcdc consensus embodied in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session was rooted,
as has been rightly said. in the common and universal
awareness that the unrestricted arms race, particularly
the nuclear-arms race, constitutes a grave threat to
the survival of mankind. The time has now come when
all nations of the world, big and small, thdr political
persuasion and ide~'· 'Y notwithstanding, should
join hands to ensure tu~ survival of mankind and our
good earth.
Mr. HEPBURN (Bahamas): Representing a
country which genuinely cares about the fate of the
world and mankind" my delegation intervenes to offer
its assessment of this second special session on disarmament and of prospects for future success with
disarmament.
60.

61. It may be said that, in the final analysis, the first
special session on disarmament and its Final Document
were a declaration of intent and of the requirements
for a disarmed world. This second special session on
disarmament shoul~ be seen as an attempt to move
f."om declaratory pronouncements to practical, concrete steps for disarmament at every level: national,
regional, bloc and global.

62.

(his exercise has forced the United Nations
to grapple with f, ality. Yet my delegation is compelled
to observe that there is a reluctance on the u,art of
Member States to face this reality squarely and fully.
My delegation wishes to emphasize this indictment,
becau~e the degree to which each State represented
hel'e commits itself to a full and honest recognition

ot this reality determines the ultimate and lastmg
success of the proceedings of this session and of
related disarmament efforts in other forums.
63. What is this reality? In my delegation's view,
this reality is characterized by three essential, interrelated aspects. The first is the political stance of
militarily significant States and of those aspiring to be
which regard the consequences-economic and
humanitarian--of arms possession, trade and use as
of less practical and immediate importance than the
gains they have accrued or hope to accrue from continuing their politico-military policies. The second is
the reaction and stance-primarily in the realm of
verbal demands and exhortations--of the majority,
that is, the non-militarily significant States, concerning
(he policies and actions of the minority, that is, the
militarily significant States. The third and final aspect
is the present division of the mcUor actors in the quest
for a disarmed world which pits the super-Power and
nuclear-weapon States against the non-aligned and
neutral States-a somewhat false division, in the view
of my delegation, which masks the more significant
dichotomy and divergence of interests for a disarmed
world, that is, militarily significant versus nonmilitarily significant States.
64. My delegation holds this view because, owing
to the recognized and immediate power and leverage
which the status of .. militarily significant" gives a
State, any blurring of this view of military significance
and of the attendant responsibilities for contributing
to a disarmed world will seal the negative fate of
effective disarmament undertakings. Therefore, my
delegation submits that until States, particularly the
majority, the non-militarily signifk.ant States, recognize and accept this truth and desist from a de facto
policy of general acquiescence to the policies of the
minority, the militarily significant States, there will
be no genuine acts of disarmament.
65. Let me emphasize here that my delegation is
not advocating any abandonment of achievements so
far, especially that enshrined in lne Final Document;
rather, it appeals to and challenges all States to truly
shoulder their responsibilities for disarmament without
recourse to lame e;..cuses, blame-casting or delaying
tactics.
66. To be a little more specific, while the priorities
established in the Final Document should not and must
not be disregarded, there ought to be comp~ementary
concrete efforts at solvin~ concomitant problems and
differences regarding the process of disarmament
which have been re-emphasized at this session, particularly among the nuclear-weapon States and militarily significant States.
67. f:lf edmple, together with negotiations on
nuclear d~~urmament measures, there s":mld be timelimited negotiatiolls for the limitat!oliand gradual
reduction of armed forces and conventional weapons
within the framework of progress f' w'lrds general and
compi~te disarmament, bearing Lnind that States
with the largest military arsenals have a specia~
responsibility in pursuing the process of conventionalarmament reductions.
68. Additionally, and no less important, nonmilitarily significant States have a ro!e to play in that,
at the same time, they should be actively exploring

initiativesUnited Ne
procedures
level of ar
national dl
regions. S
States is 11
For it is (
commitmer
militarily s
their indivi
think twice
which infla
turn, lead
use and thl
internationl
decisions t
conflicts.
69. As a 1
nificant mo
balance" il
Disarmame
within the
tribution be
militarily si.
be the pI
•• militarily
balance" .
70. My d(
indicated, I
militarily si
their own s
that unwitti!
and influenl
is always t
that their
-against tI
will fail.
71. Thus,
non-militari
and large,
particularly
selves and f
That is the
cise we ha"
to what it c
for future Sl
we all here
of the worl<
72. Mr. ~
from Frenc
sentiments
great numbl
speciaJ sess
73. As we
was called 1
this session
danger that
arms race,
the very e
effective COl
ingly heavy
military exp
j

74. The fa
complete ar

"'.""'".,--"""",,.-""----.

[',.,.."..."." ....,...,.....

29th meeting-IO July 1982

initiatives-and I say here that the Charter of the
United Nations provides ample mechanisms and
procedures-to ensure that the lowest possible
level of armaments will characterize not only their
national defence systems but also those of their
regions. Such action by non-militarily significant
States is no longer an option; it is an imperative.
For it is only by such complementary action and
commitment by non-militarily significant States that
militarily significant States, blinkered and bound by
their individual and collective vested interests, will
think twice about maintaining the political doctrines
which inflate their legitimate security needs and, in
turn, lead to arms esralation, arms transferrals and
use and threat of use of arms, all of which increase
international tensions and, in many instances, influence
decisions to engage in and exacerbate international
conflicts.
69. As a first concrete step in the direction of significant modalities for genuine disarmament, "political
balance" in the membership of the Committee on
Disarmament should be reinterpreted as et balance
within the framework of equitable geographical distribution between "miJitarily significant" and "nonmilitarily significant" States, instead of what seems to
be the present composition: "nuclear-weapon",
"militarily significant", "non-aligned" and "neutralbalance" .
70. My delegation makes that proposal because, as
indicated, nuclear-weapon States, in particular, and
miJitarily significant States have become victims of
their own security and political strategies. It appears
that unwittingly they have exchanged immediate power
and influential gains for future powerlessness, as there
is always the risk, owing to the fact of possession,
that their carefully planned checks and balances
-against the use of nuclear arsenals, in particularwill fail.
71. Thus, the real challenge of disarmament is to the
non-militarily significant States, which at present, by
and large, have less to lose from renouncing arms,
particularly nuclear arms, and all to gain for themselves and for militarily significant States by so doing.
That is the assessment of my delegation of the exercise we have just completed, and of its contributions
to what it considers to be the indispensable elements
for future success in this very critical endeavour which
we all here are undertaking on behalf of the peoples
of the world.
72. Mr. MARINESCU (Romania) (interpretation
from French): The Romanian delegation shares the
sentiments of deep disappointment expressed by a
great number of delegations over the outcome of this
special session.
73. As we stated at the beginning, the Assembly
was called upon to make~' ~ffective contribution at
this session towards averWig the particularly serious
danger that the arms race, particularly the nucleararms race, poses to world peace and security and to
the very existence of human civilization, and an
effective contribution to the elimination of the increasingly heavy burden imposed upon all States by gigantic
military expenditures.
74. The fact that this special session was unable to
complete and adopt a comprehensive programme of

477

disarmament means that it has failed to achieve the
central objective for which we gathered together here.
My country has always considered that such a programme-which should encompass all the measures
to be negotiated within the framework of a sustained
disarmament process, carried out with foresight and
leading finally to general and complete disarmamentwould make it possible to co-ordinate the efforts of
all States to reduce and eliminate the tools of nuclear
war and of war in general, thus responding to the
vital interests of all States, nuclear and non-nuclear,
large and small, developed and developfng.

75. Unfortunately, the sustained efforts of numerous
delegations, particularly t~e non-aligned and other
small and medium-sized countries, to formulate a
generally acceptable substantive programme have not
yielded the positive results demanded by the seriousness of the current international situation, and to
keep pace with the hopes with which the peoples of
the world awaited and followed the proceedings of
this special session.
76. The large demonstrations that took. place throughout the world before and durir.·g the special session,
the participation of representatives of world public
opinion in the discussions at this session, and the
numerous messages and appeals addressed to the
session have all demonstrated what the people of the
world expect from their leaders and Governments.
Faced with the fundamental choice I.)f our time
-between the path of co-operation and international
understanding and the path of weapons-peoples of
all countries have resolutely opted for a policy of
peace, disarmament and strict respect by all States for
the fundamental principles of the United NOltions.
77. That is why the basic objective of this session
-putting an end to the arms race and effecting real
progress towards disarmament, primarily nuclear
disarmament-remains an ever more pressing issue on
our agenda. It is made essential by the very facts of
international life. Now more ~han ever, the crucial
problem for mankind is peace or war. Now more
than ever, the solution of this problem requires firm,
concerted action on the pait of an States and an
political factions.
78. In that connexion, primary responsibility falls
upon nuclear-weapon and other heavily armed States.
As the head of the Romanian delegation stated during
the general debate [22nd meeting], the most. urgent
requirement of our time is to unite the efforts nf all
nations in order to halt the dangerous developments
towards confrontation and war, to renounce completely the use and threat of force and to support a
policy of detente and respect for national sovereignty
and independence, as well as to evince polit.ical will
and contribute constructively to the immediate cessation of the arms race and to the intensification of
negotiations aimed at achieving concrete and meaningful disarmament measures.
79. The large number of proposals that have been submitted to this session of the General Assehlbly underscore the profound interest of the international community in effecting a radical change in the international
situation in that direction. The debates have over.whelmingly confirmed the general opinion that the
continued accumulation of wea?ons-partiC'ularly

478

General Assembly-Twelfth Special Sesliion-Plenary Meetings

nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction-will not lead to true security or to the establishment of a climate of mutual trust which is indispensable
for world peace. Quite the contrary, the perpetuation
of fierce military competition, far from serving the
security interests of States, can only further damage
the international situation, increase the dangers of
war-in particular, nuclear war-and make any serious
negotiations on disarmament even more difficult.
80. The Romanian delegation would like to join the
delegations of other countries which have stated their.
determination to act to ensure the implementation of
the objectives and priorities set out in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session and the
strengthening of the central role of the United Nations
in the field of disarmament.
81. As has been stressed in the document entitled
"Considerations of the Grand National Assembly, of
the President of the Socialist Republic of Romania,
Nicolae Ceau~escu" [A/S-12/AC.I/24, annex], which
has been circulated as an official document of this
session-and which expresses the firm determination
of the Romanian people, a determination also manifested by the millions of signatures affixed to the
Appeal addressed to the Assembly at this session
[A/S-12/AC.I/14, annex]-we consider that to achieve
these objectives it is necessary first of all to sto;> the
production of nuclear weapons and to start the gradual
reduction of the existing stockpiles till their complete
liquidation, and to ban for ever all nuclear weapons,
as well as the other weapons of mass destruction. Of
particular importance would be the undertaking by all
nuclear-weapon States of the firm commitment not to
be the first to use such weapons.
82. It is im£erative that we proceed, through the
co-mmon efforts of all S-tates: iothe -freeze and reduction of the gigantic military expenditures, to the adoption of effective measures for the substantial reduction
of conventional weapons, to confidence-building and
disarmament measures, above all in Europe, to the
complete renunciation of all acts of force and threats
of force, and to the settlement of all international
disputes by peaceful means exclusively.
83. The report that we have adopted today, as well
as the agreement reached on the World Disarmament
Campaign-an agreement to which the Romanian
delegation, along with other delegations, made an
active contribution-provides a basis for the continuation and, above all, the intensification of efforts aimed
at halting the dangerous arms race and at negotiating
effective measures for disarmament, especially
nuclear disarmament.
84. We express the hope that because of this session
all countries will step up their efforts so that such
measures can be n~gotiated without further delay.
85. We hope that a new spirit of ,v-operation will
prevail in the coming disarmament ~':'~'otiations, and
I should like to reaffirm my country ·t.'etf>rmination
to make an active contribution to eil\.¥l'd to achieve'
real progress towards a world without weapons and to
safeguard man's fundamental right to peace, life and
freedom.
86. In conclusion, I should like to express our thanks
to Mr. Adeniji, to the chairmen of all the' Working

Groups, and to all those who have assisted us in
our work.
87. Mr. MARTYNENKO (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist RepubHc) (interpretation ji'om Russian): As
the General Assembly takes stock of its work at
this final meeting of the second special session devoted
to disarmament, the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
would like to point out that the overwhelming majority
of delegations and of the representatives of the world
public have expressed, from this rostrum, very serious
concern and alarm over the prospects for peace in
conditions of growing international tension and given
the increasing threat of nuclear war and the continuing
arms race.
88. That concern and alarm reflect as never before
the basic truth that in the present situation there is
no more important and urgent task for States than
the elaboration and adoption of specific and p-ffective
measures aimed at preventing nuclear war, curbing
the arms race and strengthening international peace
and security for all peoples.
89. In our view-and not in our view alone-this
session should have given a new impetus to the search
for a solution to this important and urgent problem.
The events of the session have shown that the overwhelming majority of delegations and the representatives of non-governmental organizations have worked
actively for the adoption at this session of urgent
measures to eliminate the threat of nuclear war and to
end the arms race.
90. The delegations of socialist and developing countries made every effort to enable the session to achieve
tangible results, to be a step forward in comparison
with the first special session on disarmament and to
adopt documents containing specific recommendations on substantive items of disarmament. They put
forward a whole range of ideas and constructive
proposals designed to improve the international
climate, to curtail the arms race and to reduce the
threat of nuclear war.
91. That was precisely the purpose of the message
sent by L. I. Brezhnev to the Assembly at this session
[12th meeting], which contained a statement on the
non-first-use by the Soviet Union of nuclear weapons.
It was emphasized by many that this unilateral undertaking by the Soviet Union was an extremely important
step aimed at preventing a nuclear catastrophe and at
strengthening trust and relations among States. We
continue to hope that other nuclear Powers will respond
to that display of goodwill by the Soviet Union and
will follow its example ..

[A/S-12/AI
vention c
eliminatiol
could forn
94. The I
extremely
document:
our work
session sh
emphasis 4
of disarm,
efforts by

92.

99.

Important and concrete proposals are also to be
found in the memorandum entitled .. Averting the
growing nuclear threat and curbing the arms race"
[A/S-12/AC.1! 11 and Corr.l, annex), which proposes
specific steps for maintaining peace on earth and
amounts to a broad, stage-by-stage programme of
disarmament.
93. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR has always
emphasized, and feels compelled to emphasize today,
that one of the most vital and urgent issues is the
pro~ibition of chemical weapons. The Soviet Union
submitted a draft international convention on the
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their destruction

).

How

tions truly
landmark
achieve di
with regre
results. V
expressed
aligned co

96.

The I
taken by a
from the
knowndoc
They havt
on at the
to deflect
urgent prc
ondary iss
the Unitel
clearly did
an agre~rr
blocking ()
mament; t
possible fo
solutions t
The s
of the Un
again. It ,
ington's p
arms race.

97.

98,

Neve

hope that
countries I
tiatives ani
tive impac
process, a
race and t,
problems (
war and er
We a
structive a
adopted to
General A
existing pr,
100.

Mr.

}i'om Arab;
at the failt
mament to
it, and part
hensive pn
as the corn
ment to ii(
under effe(

29th meeting-IO July 1982

[A/S-12/AC.1/12 and Corr.1, annex]. The draft convention contains concrete proposals aimed at the
elimination of that weapon of mass destruction and
could form a good basis for negotiations.
94. The delegations of the socialist States have been
extremely active in the drafting of generally acceptable
documents at this session. We have been guided in
our work by the idea that the documents of this
session should contain provisions with their primary
emphasis on the most important and urgent key issues
of disarmament. This could be a catalyst for further
efforts by States in the cause of disarmament.
'L However, in spite of the efforts made by delegations truly interested in this session's becoming a new
landmark in the effort to halt the arms race and to
achieve disarmament, the session, as we must note
with regret, huB not managed to achieve the expected
results. We fully share the concern and alarm
expressed in this connexion by representatives of nonaligned countries.
96. The reason for this state of affairs is the position
taken by a number of countries. Those countries have
from the very outset based their attitudes on wellknown doctrines regarding the use of nuclear weapons.
They have attempted to revise the priorities agreed
on at the first special session. They have attempted
to deflect this session from the solution of the most
urgent problems and to focus its attention on secondary issues. Those States are well known: they are
the United States and its allies in NATO. They
clearly did not wish to show political will to achieve
an agreement. Furthermore, they have caused the
blocking of proposed measures in the field of disarmament; their obstructionist approach made it impossible for this session to achieve mutually acceptable
solutions to substantive disarmament issues.
97. The statement made today by the representative
of the United States of America showed this once
again. It was just another attempt to justify Washington's policy of confrontation and of a spiralling
arms race.
98, Nevertheless; we should like to express the
hope that the efforts of the socialist and non-aligned
countries made at this session, along with their initiatives and concrete proposals, will still have a positive impact on the arms limitation and disarmament
process, and that they will help to reverse the arms
race and to achieve solutions to the most important
problems of our time, eliminating the threat of nuclear
war and ensuring peace.
99. We also hope that all States will adopt a constructive attitude towards the contents of the report
adopted today [A/S-12/32], that is, the appeal by the
Generai Assembly to consider on an urgent basis
existing proposals designed to prevent a nuclear war.
100. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation
from Arabic): We all share a profound feeling of sorrow
at the failure of the second special session on disarmament to meet the hopes that had been pinned on
it, and particularly at the failure to agree on a comprehensive programme of disarmament that would serve
as the cornerstone of the global endeavour and commitment to achieve general and complete disarmament
under effective international control.

479

101. However, the phase through which the world
has been passing and the strained international situation resulting from constant disregard of international
order inevitably led us to this deplorable outcome.
It is true that the strained international situation
makes it necessary now more than ever before to
achieve concrete progress in the field of disarmament.
Meanwhile, however, agreement on disarmament
measures requires confidence, which is lacking, and
an international situation that provides the proper
framework for that purpose.
102. Notwithstanding this failure and the present
international situation, we must consider matters
objectively on the following basis. First, despair
regarding any aspect of international endeavour must
be avoided. Let us start afresh. May the current
efforts be continued. The path of disarmament is long
and wide.
103. Secondly, the role of the United Nations must
be promoted by enhancing the negotiating functions
of the Committee on Disarmament and the deliberative
functions of the Disarmament Commission and the
First Committee of the General Assembly, as well as
the scientific role of the groups of experts and the coordinating role of the Centre for Disarmament.
104. Thirdly, the comprehensive programme of disarmament must remain on our agenda. The Committee
on Disarmament should therefore continue its consideration of this item in the light of the amendments,
additions and viewpoints put forward at this session,
so that it may present to the General Assembly a
programme for adoption at its thirty-eighth session.
When that has been done, immediate steps for the
implementation of the programme must follow.
105. Fourthly, there must be support for the ongoing
negotiations between the two super-Powers on the
reduction of their nuclear arsenals and for the negotiations regarding the military situation in Europe.
106. Fifthly, an appeal must be made to all States
and peoples, especially the nuclear Powers, to recog~
nize that if the immediate and long-term disarmament
objectives are to be achieved, every State must bear
in mind the impact its policy may have on world peace
and security. This entails a commitment not to use
force in international relations by means of either conventional or nuclear weapons. This must be a general
commitment that cannot be used by one party to the
detriment of another.
The President took the Chair.
107. In conclusion I wish to pay tribute to all those
who have contributed to the efforts made during the
session: the representatives, the Secretariat and the
governmental and non-governmental organizations.
The spirit that has prevailed throughout this session
is a glowing landmark on the path of international
endeavour for disarmament. This gives cause for
optimism and we hope that general and complete
disarmament will be achieved in the near future.
108. Mr. KANG Maozhao (China) (translation from
Chinese): The second special session on disarmament
is drawing to a close.
109. Just over four weeks ago we gathered here
amidst. the high expectations of the peoples of the
world. Our task was to exchange vi~ws on the question

f·

480

General Assembly-Twelfth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

of disarmament, which is of common concern to all,
and to explore seriously ways and means to disarmament so as to make our due contribution to progress
on this major international question. Though we have
held many meetings of the Assembly and the Special
Committee, it is regrettable that we have failed
to produce any comprehensive disarmament programme which was acceptable to all. We have even
failed to reach a consensus in our review of the
implementation of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session.
110. The Concluding Document of the Twelfth
Special Session, which was produced with tremendous difficulties, is more a reflection of the highly
complex and difficult situation faced by disarmament
than of any modest progress on this matter. That is
because this Document before us is far less com'prehensive and explicit than the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session. One has reason to be dissatisfied and disappointed with this result. What is the
main cause of such a situation? This is something
one must consider seriously.

Ill. A clear trend emerged in the course of the
general debate and the extensive consultations in the
Working Groups during this session, and that is that
an increasing number of countries have underscored
more than ever before the point that States possessing
the largest military arsenals bear a special responsibility for disarmament and should assume an obligation
to take the lead in substantially reducing their armaments. Contrary to this, however, one has seen that
the States possessing the larg~st arsenals have resorted
to every possible means inside and outside the session
to dodge their responsibility and have raised extraneous issues to obstruct the necessary agreement.
Some countries are clearly going all out in a massive
arms race, yet they try to convince us that this is
necessary and justified. Some countries are extremely
sensitive to words like aggression, intervention and
occupation, and would like no reference made to them
in the document, although they cannot deny their
actual deeds. In order to conceal their misdeeds, they
have even tried hard to skip certain points and words
in the document which they had accepted in previous
documents. This therefore is the underlying reason
why disarmament could not make headway and the
current session has failed to achieve any substantive
result.
112. The outcome of this session has once again
proved that disarmament and international security
are inseparable. Since the first special session on disarmament, the arms race has been intensified, the international situation has deteriorated and the danger of
nuclear war has increased. Several wars of aggression by conventional arms have taken place. This
change in the international situation certainly has an
impact on and creates resistance to disarmament. In
the past few years we have often heard debate as
to whether disarmament enhances international
security or international security promotes disar-'
mament-very much like the debate about which came
first, the chicken or the egg. It should be clear by
now that disarmament can hardly make progress in
circumstances in which international security is
constantly breached and the hegemonists and aggressors refuse to renounce their designs.
'

113. The Chinese delegation came here in good faith.
In his address at this session [8th meeting], our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Huang Hua, expounded the
position of principle of the Chinese Government and
put forward concrete proposals for disarmament.
China is a nuclear State, but we declared as far back
as 18 years ago that China would never be the first
to use nuclear weapons and would not use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear States in any circumstances. We hold that the States possessing the
biggest nuclear arsenals should take the lead in
reducing their nuclear weapons. We are ready to
assume appropriate obligations with other nuclear
States through negotiations. China's intention and
position regarding disarmament are consistent, irrespective of the result of international disarmament
conferences. Although the task of disarmament is a
difficult one, we are willing to work unceasingly
towards this end with other countries and peoples
of the world.
114. In conclusion, I wish to extend our thanks to
you, Mr. President, and to the members of the Secretariat for the meticulous arrangements made for the
session. I also wish to pay a richly deserved tribute
to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Adeniji, and his colleagues, who have worked so diligently
and exerted their utmost efforts under very difficult
conditions. We are impressed by their enthusiasm for
disarmament and their untiring spirit in constantly
overcoming obstacles and pressing forward along a
bumpy path.
115. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation
from French): Since the representative of Belgium
spoke on behalf of the countries of the European
Community, he expressed views which are shared by
the French delegation. We should merely like to add
a few brief comments.
116. The French delegation undoubtedly shares the
feeling of disappointment which many among us have
expressed. However, it is not really surprised by the
obviously limited results of our session. Their inadequacy has various causes which should be carefully
stllciipci
jf ~~ WP p~rnp'ltl\l h""""
..1"" 011 001;"'1-. ton "" ... "" ........
~----.- .. -; _ ........... _ - - - •• """..., ... J
•• "'1-''''''' ...,.""" "11 "11311 LV .... 11"UI~

that future special sessions of the General Assembly
have a better chance of success and that we make
progress towards disarmament under the auspices of
the United Nations.
117. First of all, as has been frequently repeated,
the circumstances were not the most favourable. The
international situation has certainly deteriorated
since 1978; the sense of security and the confidence
necessary for any progress in the sphere of disarmament have obviously been affected. The anxiety
we feel and the disappointing results recorded in
negotiations have influenced our discussions.
118. Moreover, the necessary conditions certainly
did not exist for any decisions on the comprehensive
programme of disarmament, the chief objective of the
session for many of us. We lacked the time and also
perhaps the will to find and agree to formulas flexible
enough to offer certain options. Experience has once
again' shown that it is impossible to set a deadline
for the conclusion of negotiations.
119. It has also shown that as far as disarmament
is concerned it is impossible to make progress without

takiJ
Tho:
tion~

''I

that
with
run I
othe
men
120.
effol
the
We

a d'
nect:
base
on t
othe
121.
this
prev
of I
appr
122.
bein
our
Thel
of tl
not '
our
SOCI:

conr
the
in se

a C(
weal
mOl

to s(
123.
this
debCl
mad
mini
inter
marr
grea'
124.
in di
tain
the f
whic
sysh
Assc;
decic
ditio
125.
to pI
conr
ofbi
of III
ferel
man
Corn
prog
chel

-------.'.

."

..
f·

29th meeting-l0 July 1982
I.

I'

e
d
o.

k
It
I'
l-

e
rl

J
I'

j

t
i

f

s
)

~
~

,
t

r

,i

taking into consideration the security needs of States.
Those among them that are called to enter into negotiations, within the context of the long-term programme
that we wish to establish, cannot be bound to accept
within the context of that programme provisions that
run counter to those needs, because it is they, and not
others, that bear the responsibility for the commitments they enter :oto.
120. We were also to draw up a balance sheet of the
efforts made to implement the recommendations in
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session.
We were unable to reach agreement on the terms of
a document. In order to do so it would have been
necessary to continue our consideration on the dual
bases of the Programme of Action adopted in 1978,
on the one hand, and the results achieved, on the
other.
121. We could not go beyond that and introduce at
this time principles and objectives which had not been
previously agreed and which might affect the balance
of the Final Document and the comprehensive
approach embodied in it.
122. Even before we had to resign ourselves to not
being able to agree on the two principal items on
our agenda, the chances of success seemed doubtful.
There was therefore a temptation to change the focus
of the session and to giv~ it as a priority, if indeed
not a unique topic, the prevention of nuclear war. In
our view, this objective cannot be isolated or dissociated from other objectives that are naturally
connected with it-the prevention of war itself and
the maintenance of security and the balances which
in some situations must guarantee it. In this connexion,
a commitment concerning the non-use of nuclear
weapons would constitute a factor of destabilization
in one region of the world and hence a serious threat
to security ann, in the final analysis, to peace.
123. In spite of the failures I have just described,
this session had some positive aspects. The general
debate was of outstanding quality and the statements
made, often by heads of State or Government or
ministers for foreign affairs, were an extremely
interesting contribution to the consideration of disarmament and security problems. They expressed with
great authority the concerns and the hopes of nations.
124. Furthermore, in the course of this session, and
in difficult circumstances, we have been able to maintain and to preserve the achievements inherited from
the first special session: the Final Document of 1978,
which was solemnly reaffirmed; the institutional
system embodied in it; and, in particular, the General
Assembly, at its special sessions on disarmament,
deciding by consensus-which is indeed the very condition of their authority.
125. Finally, we have reaffirmed our determination
to pursue the endeavour begun four years ago. In this
connexion, the prospects are good: the resumption
of bilateral talks on nuclear questions; the resumption
of negotiations at Madrid on the mandate for a conference on confidence-building measures and disarmament in Europe; the resumption of its work by the
Committee on Disarmament, with the hope that
progress will be achieved, in particular with regard to
chemical weapons.

481

126. My country will contribute whole-heartedly to
those efforts. Our delegation submitted several proposals here designed to strengthen United Nations
action, particularly in the institutional sphere and in
the area of verification. It will revert to those proposals at the Assembly's forthcoming session.
127. My country will resolutely continue the work
begun four years ago, for that work will go forward
if we are all able to learn from the difficult experience
we have just shared.
128. I should not like to conclude without expressing
the French delegation's thank~ to Mr. Adeniji, who
has made a particularly valuable contribution to our
work and has guided our efforts towards an honourable
and acceptable outcome of our discussions. I should,
of course, also like to express our gratitude to all
those who, throughout this special se~sion, have contributed to our efforts.
129. Mr. WEGENER (Federal Republic of Germany): I can be brief, since the representative of
Belgium has already expressed the views of the
10 member States of the European Community,
including my own. It gives me great pleasure to express
my Government's gratitude to Mr. Adeniji, who, under
your leadership, Mr. President, presided over our
deliberations in the Ad Hoc Committee. We have all
benefited from his calm, his sense of realism and his
wisdom. Without his great experience and dedication,
we would have been unable to complete the report of
the twelfth special session of the General Assembly.
130. My Government joins the consensus on this
report, although we had hoped for a more substantial
and concrete outcome of this session. The report
rightly dwells upon the close relationship between the
international situation and progress in disarmament,
and it makes reference to the inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence of peoples. In the
view of my Government, Article I, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations endows this right with
a universal character, making it applicable to all
peoples. The reference in paragraph 60 of the report
cannot, therefore, be construed as a restriction of this
right,
0

131. We realize that the expectations we have brought
to this session have in large measure remained unfulfilled. We set our sights high, and we now know that
we were too ambitious. Time was too short to cope
with the vast array of issues. But we cannot allow
resignation and disappointment to determine the
outcome of this special session. We must-and I know
we will-continue to work for the achievement of the
objectives that have brought us together for the last
five weeks.
132. All of us have learned more about each other's
security perceptions and about each other's hopes
for disarmament and arms control. We have built
upon and confirmed the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session, and we have ensured the continuity
of the dialogue between ourselves. We must now
look to the future.
133. The report of this session underlines the fact
that peace is our highest aspiration and that the prevention of war i:s the most fundamental objective
of disarmament and arms control. Our countries and
our Governments must dedicate themselves to the

Generai Assembiy-Tweifth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

pr\;;vention of war in all its aspects, conventional and
nuclear. We must ensure that none of our weapons
will ever be used except in defence against armed
attack.
134. In his speech before this session [10th meeting],
Ctmncellor Schmidt reported on the results of the
meeting held at Bonn of the heads of State and Government of NATO and called attention to the armscontrol elements contained in the programme for peace
and freedom adopted by the Bonn conference. We
note with deep satisfaction that the strategic arms
reduction talks began on 29 June, that negotiations on
intermediate-range nuclear forces [INF] are under way
at Geneva, and that two days ago a new Western
initiative was presented at the mutual and balanced
force reduction talks at Vienna.
135. With respect to the INF negotiations, we hope
that the objective pursued by the United States,
namely, the total elimination of the land-based longerrange INF missiles of the Soviet Union and the United
States, can be achieved. In November of this year,
at the follow-up meeting at Madrid of the Conference
on Security and Co-operation in Europe, efforts will
resume to reach agreement, as an integral part of a
balanced outcome, on a mandate for a conference on
confidence- and security-building measures covering
all of Europe. These negotiations cover all aspects of
the military relationship between West and East. We
are confident that every effort will be made to achieve
concrete results. We have reason to hope that we have
now set the stage for the achievement of a stable
military balance at the lowest possible level.
136. In his speech Chancellor Schmidt also outlined
the principles that, in the view of my Government,
should govern global disarmament and arms control.
He stressed the need for more openness and calculability of military potentials and actions, for concrete
confidence-building measures and for verification. In
an effort to promote those goals, my delegation submitted to this session working papers on confidencebuilding measures and on the problem of verification
of a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons. We
hope that those papers will, with others, prove to be
useful to future deliberations in the United Nations
and to negotiations in the Committee on Disarmament.
In this context, Chancellor Schmidt has announced
as a practical contribution to disarmament and arms
control the holding of two conferences, the first, a
seminar on confidence-building measures, and the
otner, a second mternatlOnal workshop on verification
in connexion with a chemical-weapons ban, both
scheduled to take p!ace in 1983 in the Federal Republic
of Germany. Invitations to those events will be sent
out shortly.
137. It is of the greatest importance that we do not
leave this session in disappointment and frustration.
The goodwill and moral inspiration that have been
brought to this session must not be lost. We are all
asked to contribute to the cause of disarmament and
arms control and to the achievement of substantial
agreements in this field, in a concrete and constructive
manner, and thus to do our share in the process of
strengthening peace and security in our respective
regions and in the world as a whole.

138. Mr. SAOLEIR (Australia): The second special
session on disarmament ends today with little in the
way of tangible achievement. The hopes held for
this session since a date was set for it nearly four
years ago remain unfulfilled. Compared with 1978
the world is more heavily armed and a more risky
place in which to live. It is not least for that reason
that the Australian delegation regrets very much that
the efforts of so many delegations at disarmament
diplomacy and negotiation have produced so few
results. We should not, however, in any end-of-session
chagrin, be unduly despondent. Thus it is that in this
short statement I seek to draw from our experience of
the last few weeks.
139. It is, first, self-evident that disarmament does
not operate in a political vacuum. All delegations
have addressed their task at this session sharply
conscious of the situation in the world around us.
Four years ago something of a peak in international
confidence existed. That confidence has since been
severely shaken. On all sides the will to negotiate has
become hesitant. A major casualty of these changes
has been disarmament. That is inevitable since it goes
to the heart of the national security of States. Recognition of this fact is essential if progress in disarmament is to be made. The root causes of the problem
need to be addressed and a climate of confidence
restored.
140. Secondly, the institutional framework so
essential to the process of confidence-building already
exists. The United Nations, with its Charter and its
subsidiary bodies, can and must continue to play a
central role in disarmament matters. We have failed
the United Nations in several ways in recent years.
It has not, contrary I suspect to widely held views,
failed us. We need to support and strengthen the
United Nations as a body in every possible way. It
is the essential bridge between the hopes of States
and of the peoples of the world and the realization
of those hopes.
141. Thirdly, the process of restoring confidence and
turning our hopes for disarmament into actual
measures requires a hard-headed, calculated and
practicai approach. There is a role for rhetoric in
general debate which can lift our eyes to the horizon,
but it is a limited role. The path to disarmament
must be trod, step by heavy step. There is no other
way. There are no short cuts. It will not help, for
example, if we promote draft resolutions which stand
no chance of success. It does not help, for example,
if we make political point-scoring a first priority or
if we forgo partial measures in the hope that general
and complete disarmament is at hand.
142. In practical terms let me translate this into
some recommendations. In the area of nuclear disarmament, we should give full support to the various
bilateral talks between the super-Powers. The Committee on Disarmament needs to have a good hard
look, at an early date, at what it should foster in the
. area of nuclear disarmament. On a nuclear-test ban,
the Committee on Disarmament should seize with
both hands the opportunity presented by the agreement
to set up a working group. As to a ban on chemical
weapons, I see no reason why this cannot become a
success for the Committee on Disarmament. As to
rad:ological weapons, we have no doubt that a treaty

l---;\:::ial
:he
for
mr
178
ky
on
lat
~nt
~w

on
lis
of
es
ns
Ily
IS.

lal
~n

as
es
es
gII'-

m
;e
iO

Iy
ts
a
:d
5.
5,

le
It
~s

n
d

.1
d
n
I,

It
I'
'I'

d

.,

r
II
)

s

Il

------~._-,._.,._-~-

~: ~,' .• <,,'

29th meeting-IO July 1982

is achievable, though new approaches may be needed.
These should be soberly examined. The issue of
negative security assurances may need to be temporarily downgraded in the Committee's priorities.
143. The comprehensive programme of disarmament
should be carefully reviewed now that the pressure of
the second special session has been lifted. The concept of a comprehensive programme of disarmament,
I should stress, remains fully valid. On outer space,
the opportunities for serious multilateral work remain.
Conventional disarmament is an area that calls for
much more serious attention than it has so far been
given.
144. The international disarmament agenda needs
careful scrutiny. The annual inflation rate in the First
Committee must be halted and reversed. The principle of consensus as a basis for real disarmament
needs to be reaffirmed and enhanced. Voting, which
highlights division, should as a matter of principle
be condemned as harmful.
145. The disarmament institutions, including both the
Committee on Disarmament and the Disarmament
Commission, should be strengthened. This may
involve budgetary questions, but most of all it involves
political will.
146. It is on that note that I come to an end. It
cannot be denied that in recent years the political will
to make disarmament work has been lacking. We
must develop and nurture such a will. Knowing what
we know and fully appreciating the political context,
the validity of the institutions, the difficulty of the task
and the practical issues on our agenda that call for
attention, we should neither lose heart nor oversimplify, but move forward with firm commitment
and deep determination. The disarmament process will
require and deserves no less.
147. Mr. President, I cannot leave this session
without thanking you for the leadership you have
given us and without paying a tribute to the Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Committee, Mr. Adeniji, especially
for his dedicated and skilful guidance, and to all of
those in the Secretariat who have with energy and
generous commitment heiped and supported us in
our task.
148. Mr. ABADA (Algeria) (interpretation from
French).: This second special session of the General
Assembly on disarmament, patiently awaited and
painstakingly prepared, quite rightly captured the
attention of the international community and
nourished our peoples' hope that general and complete
disarmament would become a reality, thus establishing
for "'uture generations a universal era of peace, security and progress.
149. This session has been accompanied by a remarkable popular movement which has given abundant
proof that disarmament can no longer be considered
a matter for the Powers but, on the contrary, is a
concern of all the peoples. Meeting as we are, four
years after a historic session of the Assembly gave
a significant impetus to the efforts of the international community on the road leading to disarmament,
our present deliberations were naturally intended to
include a critical and rigorous evaluation of the results
achieved and to draw up a real disarmament strategy.
Therefore, this session was seen as a special oppor-

483

tunity to establish, with lucidity and responsibility, a
fundamental need and to begin the long desired
collective action to launch an irreversible process of
disarmament.
150. The many indications of a worsening crisis in
international relations show every day the pressing
need for such action and, since it involves our survival, the absolute need to overcome the present
circumstances and at last turn the tide of history
towards well-being, progress and hope.
1St. In the general debate with which this session
opened we heard the most authoritative voi:es of
Member States and the anxious voices of nongovernmental organizations unite in demanding
general and complete disarmament. The non-aligned
countries duly echoed that demand, which they
translated into proposals designed above all to ensure
the success of our work.
152. That readiness has not flagged. For five weeks
our countries have shown the full extent of their
constructive spirit and their desire for a successful
outcome. Whether in the evaluation of the implementation of the 1978 Final Document or in the negotiations on the comprehensive programme of disarmament, the non-aligned countries have gone a long
way towards meeting the positions of their partners,
several of which have shown a spirit of co-operation
which we acknowledge. Nevertheless, the absence
of the political will on the part of others has led our
work to an impasse.
153. When the technique of non-negotiation takes
precedence over the painstaking search for agreement,
when the procedural resources are used to challenge
agreed principles and priorities and when policies
designed precisely to impede the implementation of
the Final Document persist in this body, it is inevitable
that all efforts and energies founder before the strong
established positions.
]54. It is a matter of great concern that, in a constantly detleriorating international situation, the current
session has not been able to achieve even a minimum
of significant results and to translate into texts a real
wiJI to solve the problems which face the international community in the field of disarmament. In such
a situation, those who have blocked the achievement
of the smallest concrete result by adopting rigid stands
and advancing deliberately uncompromising arguments
should be fully aware of the responsibility they bear
for the failure of the session.
155. Nevertheless, the fact that this session has not
yielded concrete results only strengthens our devotion
to the historical validity of the Final Document. The
comprehensive programme of disarmament prescribed
therein is more necessary than ever. The obvious
failure only adds to the determination·mor the nonaligned countries and all those working for disarmament to redouble their efforts to ensure the success
of this greatest of all tasks and meet the expectations
of the peoples. In the present. world situation wc
have no alternative but to repulse death and unhappiness and establish one day true peace and the security
all need. Disarmament remains the linchpin of that
peace and security.
156. Mr. GARCfA ROBLES (Mexico) (interpretation Font Spanish): I feel it is not necessary for me

i

.~

·I,.' ·
. ,,1

I]

I.

.~

~--,
484

General Assembly-Twelfth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

to convey to you, Sir, the satisfaction that I feel ~t
attending a special international meeting such as this
under your enlightened presidency. Since this is not
the first time that this has occurred, I am convinced
that you are well aware of my feelings. Similarly,
I should like to express my appreciation to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of this special session,
Mr. Adeniji.
157. We are nearing the end of the second special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in conditions very different from those that
existed on a similar occasion in the last hours of the
first special session devoted to disarmament four
years ago.
158. The Assembly can undoubtedly say that it has
achieved unanimous agreement on the fundamental
objectives and essential aspects of t~e conte~t,
modalities and financing of one of the Items on Its
agenda, which surely can have incalculable consequences, the World Disarmament Campaign, the
beginning of whkh was solemnly announced by the
President of the General Assembly a: the inaugural
meeting on 7 June last. For my delegation, this is a
matter of particular satisfaction, as Mexico had the
privilege of submitting the proposal to establish this
Campaign during the thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly.
159. In addition to this achievement, it can undoubtedly be considered a positive result that the Assembly
has encouraged and strengthened to an extraordinary
degree the active interest of all the peoples of the
world in the promotion of peace and disarmament.
This interest was unquestionably shown in this very
city, New York, when nearly 1 million human beings
gathered in Central Park to proclaim it.
160. However, this should not make us lose sight of
the fact that as far as the basic item on the agenda is
concerned-the adoption of a comprehensive programme of disarmament that would correspond ~o
what was explicitly requested by the Assembly In
paragraph 109 of the Final Document of the Te~th
Special Session [resolution 5-10/2], the draft of which
was wOiked Oii fOi two yeais in the Committee on
Disarmament-the Assembly has failed. How can we
explain this failure if, as we read· in the report of the
Ad Hoc Committee,' which was approved yesterday
by consensus, the States participating in this session
have unanimously and categorically reaffirmed the
validity of the Final Document and their solemn
commitment to imp'ement it? We must keep very
clearly in mind that, among other fundamental principles and conclusions, the following appear in that
Final Document:
"The attainment of the objective of security,
which is an inseparable element of peace, has always
been one of the most profound aspirations of humanity ... Yet the accumulation of weapons , particularly
nuclear weapons, today constitutes much more a
threat than a protection for the future of mankind.
The time has therefore come to put an end to this
situation, to abandon the use of force in international relations and to seek security in disarmament
[ihid" para. /].
"While the final objec;tive of the efforts of all
States should continue to be general and cqmplete

disarmament under effective international control,
the immediate goal is that of the elimination of the
danger of a nuclear war [ihid., para. 8].
.. Existing arsenals of nuclear weapons alone are
more than sufficient to destroy all life on earth ...
The inc~'ease in weapons, especially nuclear
weapons, far from helping to strenghthen international security, on the contrary weakens it. [/hid.,
para. I I.]
.. Enduring international peace and security cannot be built on the accumulation of weaponry by
military alliances nor be sustained by a precarious
balance of deterrence or doctrines of strategic
superiority. [lhid., para. 13.]
"Removing the threat of a world war-a nuclear
war-is the most acute and urgent task of the present
day. [/hid., para. 18.]
"The most effective guarantee against the danger
of nuclear war and the use of nuclear weapons is
nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons." [Ibid., para. 56.]
161. There are two possible replies to the question
that I asked a few moments ago. The first is that there
is frequently a great difference between words and
deeds. The second is that the commitment to observe
and implement the Final Document should be understood as something that-thanks, perhaps, to a ray of
light such as that which caused the sudden conversion
of Saul on the road to Damascus-could only be
effective once it has been proclaimed in the Ad Hoc
Committee. However that may be, I firmly believe
that the members of the group that is known in
Geneva as the Group of 21, which includes Mexico
and all the member States of the Committee on Disarmament that do not belong to either of the two military
alliances, can indeed have a very clear conscience.
162. The working documents that the Group submitted to the Committee on Disarmament to make a
contribution to the drafting of a comprehensive programme fully comply with the provisions of the
Final Document. Moreover, I doubt whether in the
history of multilateral disarmament negotiations there
is any case in which one of the parties has made so
many and such far-reaching concessions as those
made by the Group of 21 during the short four weeks
since the work of the Working Groups and the Drafting
Groups began. It was agreed that the provisional
hypothesis of a three-stage programme would finally
become fact. It was agreed that there would be no
deadlines for any of the stages but a deadline for the
achievement of the programme as a whole. It was also
agreed that, to define the commitments that States
would be ready to enter into in that connexion,
terminology similar to that accepted by consensus in
the General Assembly resolution on the Second Disarmament Decade would be used. A new structure was
established for the first part of the chapter on measures which would deal with nuclear weapons, very
carefully taking into account objections put forward
concerning the structure of the original draft.
163. As far as the nuclear Powers are concerned
-in particular, the two which last year by their vetoes
prevented the Committee on Disarmament from establishing an ad hoc working group to deal with the

29th meeting-tO July 1982

Dntrol,
of the
ne are
th ...
luclear
Iterna[Ibid.,

y canlry by
anous
·ategic
uclear
,resent
Janger
ons is
nation
lestion
t there
Is and
bserve
underray of
'ersion
t1y be
d Hoc
)elieve
wn In
1exico
Disarlilitary
rIce.
) sublake a
e pro)f the
in the
i there
ide so
those
weeks
rafting
isional
finally
be no
'or the
is also
States
exion,
sus in
d Disre was
I mea, very
Irward
erned
vetoes
estabth the

negotiations on the prohibitIOn of nuclear-weapon
tests-we should like to believe that the second of the
two hypothetical replies I suggested earlier was the
correct one. This would mean that they would in
future be ready to consider seriously the provisions
of paragraph 51 of the Final Document, by virtue of
which negotiations on the drafting of a nuclear-testban treaty
" ... should be concluded ur~ently and the result
submitted for full consideration by the multilateral
negotiating body with a view to the submission of
a draft treaty to the General Assembly at the
earliest possible date."
164. I indeed hope that such is the case, because
I am convinced, as I stated in October 1981 in the
First Committee, and as I repeated on 2 February
1982 at the opening meeting of the session of the
Committee on Disarmament this year, one of the
indispensable conditions of the comprehensive programme becoming a reality is that it contain nothing,
either in letter or in spirit, that could be interpreted
as a step backwards as far as the Final Document is
concerned.
165. Meanwhile, we shall have to envisage adopting
at least some isolated measures of particular urgency,
such as an immediate freeze on the nuclear weapons
of the two super-Powers, regarding which the delegations of Mexico and Sweden submitted a draft resolution to this special session, which, at their explicit
request, is to be transmitted by the Secretary-General
to the forthcoming thirty-seventh session of the
Assembly.
166. Finally, I should like to recall, as an additional
example of that kind of measure, that the Secretary
for External Relations of Mexico, Mr. Jorge Castaiieda, in a speech which he delivered in this Hall on
9 June [41h meelinR], invited the four nuclear-weapon
States which had not yet done so to agree not to be
the first to use those abominable weapons of mass
destruction. One can appreciate, therefore, the gratification with which we received the announcement,
also made in this Hall on 15 June [/21h meelill1of!
by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Andrei Gromyko, that the head of State of his
country, Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, wished to communicate
to the General Assembly the commitment of the Soviet
State not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. In
view of the fact that China had made a similar
statement previously, there remain only three nuclear
Powers-in alphabetical order, France, the United
Kingdom and the United States-to which the General
Assembly should appeal at one of its forthcoming
meetings to adopt a similar policy and make a declaration of identical scope.
Mr. SOLA VILA (Cuba) (;l11erprelal;oll .fi'OI1l
There is no simpler word than "disappointing" to define the outcome of the second special
session on disarmament. The expectation of achieving
specific measures to avoid nuclear war; the adoption
of a comprehensive programme of disarmament, with
its principles, objectives, measures and machinery,
within a reasonable period of time; and the assessment of the outcome of the first special session-all
this has been frustrated by the unchanging rhetorical
and chauvinistic positions of those who have built
167.

Spanish):

48S

their political careers on the basis of threat, blackmail
and disregard of the fundamental interests of peace
and disarmament and the legitimate interests of
developing countries.
168. At the Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries held at Havana
from 31 May to 4 June 1982, only a few days before
the start of this. session, attention was drawn to the
mass movement which has sprung up throughout the
world against the production, stockpiling and use of
nuclear weapons, and it was stressed that no doctrine
for the use of nuclear weapons could be justified.
169. My delegation deeply regrets that certain
nUclear-weapon States and their allies have prevented
the special session from taking a concrete decision
on this question. What is more, they have elaborated
doctrines for the use of nuclear weapons in clear
defiance of public opinion and the international community.
170. The foreign ministers meeting at Havana called
upon the Assembly at this session to adopt urgent
measures for the prevention of nuclear war. My
delegation again expresses regret that those very
States not only constantly resorted to procedural
questions to prevent the establishment of a working
group to consider that item, but did not accept the
suggestion that they should make a commitment not
to be the first to use nuclear weapons and opposed
the adoption of concrete measures to that effect
submitt~d by many countries.
171. The foreign ministers placed particular importance on the adoption at this session of a comprehensive programme of disarmament for the implementation of effective disarmament measures in
accordance with the priorities set out in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session, within a
suitable time frame, so as to ensure the achievement
of the objectives ofgeneral and complete disarmament.
172. It is a secret to no one, however, that this
session was unable to adopt the comprehensive programme because those same countries, in disgraceful
defiance of public opinion and the international com·
munity, questioned the objectives, principles and
priorities which seemed to have been accepted by
consensus during the first special session on disarmament. What is more, items of such priority importance as the drafting of a, treaty on the general
and complete prohibition of' nuclear-weapon tests
-which has had its own dynamic for many years and
to which the highest priority has been attached-were
on the verge of being excluded from our agenda and
from ail possible disarmament negotiations when some
claimed that they could be placed-inadequ8telywithin the framework of nuclear disarmament measures. We cannot forget that simiiar attempts were
made in the Committee on Disarmament, but you
certainly cannot fool all of the people for a very long
time.
173. My delegation regrets that those same States
have made the most brazen use of force in an attempt
to turn the Final Document into a dead letter. When
it is not a change of President it is the international
situation: when it is not a lack of instructions or communication problems it is intervention and interference
in the internal affairs of some State. In short, one

486

Gencl'al Assembly-Twelfth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

never ""ilOWS where one stands, because the lack of
political will to negotiate seriously and constructively
is so great that no attention is paid to the recommendations of the General Assembly or to the appeals
of non-governmental organizations, including the
survivors of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki massacres,
who, along with hundreds of thousands of others,
marched a few days ago before the United Nations
Headquarters.
174. They have talked a lot about reports and "transparency" with regard to military expenditures, but
they do not admit to the recent astronomical increases
in their own budgets. They have talked a lot about
disarmament machinery, but they do not admit that it
was they themselves who prevented the Committee
on Disarmament from discharging its functions by not
permitting agreement on a question of machinery.
They have talked a lot about disarmament studies, but
they do not admit that they have quantitatively and
qualitatively increased their nuclear weapons and that
in some of those very studies the danger of their
nuclear tests is pointed out. They have talked about
the use of chemical weapons as alleged in press
reports, but they refuse to pay compensation for the
damage they themselves caused by their use of
chemical weapons in Viet Nam; nor have they commented on the use of poison gas by Israeli troops
against the Palestinian people in Lebanon-and
we know the origin of those weapons. They have
talked about respect for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations while they continue to collaborate in the nuclear sphere with Israel and South
Africa and, in the Security Council, to veto the
application of the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII
of that same Charter against their South African and
Israeli allies.
175. .My delegation had hoped, as had many other
delegations, that the Assembly would recommend at
this session the adoption of urgent measures to prevent
nuclear war and promote disarmament negotiations.
Among such measures are: a convention on the
prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons; individual
or collective declarations on the part of nuclear-weapon
States that they wiii not be the first to use such
weapons; the beginning without further delay of negotiations on the attainment of a treaty on the prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests; a complete freeze on
the development, manufacture and deployment of
nuclear weapons by all States which possess such
weapons; and the prohibition of the manufacture and
deployment of new systems of chemical weapons.
Those hopes have not been met.
176. Today we are closing this special session
devoted to disarmament, but there can be no doubt
that it was condemned t.o failure from the moment
we heard two significant statements at the meetings
held on the mornings of 17 and 23 June.
177. In conclusion, Mr. President, I should like to
express my delegation's gratitude for the efforts you
made, along with Mr. Adeniji, Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee, to achieve a successful result at this
session. I should like also to congratulate the chairmen
of the other groups and sub-groups.
178. In spite of the final result of this special session
devoted to disarmament, we shall pursue our ~fforts

to ensure peace and general and complete disarmament.
179. Mr. SILOVIC (Yugoslavia): I should like at the
outset to avail myself of this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Adeniji and to express our appreciation for
the great devotion, skill and dedication which have
marked his efforts. We owe him and all the chairmen
of the Working Groups and sub-groups our gratitude.
180. Our expectations-the justified and reasonable
expectations of the broadest range of the international
public-have been betrayed. We must note with regret
that the absence of substantia! results at this session
runs counter to the unequivocal and urgent need for
effective measures to overcome outstanding crises in
international relations, an integral part of which is the
unabated arms race.
181. In our view, there is no doubt that the basic
causes of the present adverse international situation
and of the arms race are to be found in the policy
and practices which are contrary to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in the
policy of the threat or use of force, the outstanding
instrument of which is the arms race.
182. Big-Power rivalry and the bloc policy have
brought the world into a state of neither peace nor
war, into a situation of ever more direct threat of
the outbreak of wars of the widest proportions,
including the threat of nuclear war with all its devastating consequences.
9

183. An integral part and consequence of such a
situation is the obstruction and hindering of the work
of the process of multilateral negotiations on disarmament. There is a tendency to hamper the efficacy
and the central role of the United Nations and of the
Committee on Disarmament. We are also witnessing
attempts to circumvent .J_~ United Nations and the
multilateral negotiating m .
lism for solving crucial
international problems, which are of the most direct
concern for the security of the whole international
community. The absence of political will to reach
consensus at this session is in itself a reflection of
such tendencies, That is why renewed endeavour~
are needed, endeavours aimed not only at reaffirming
but also at strengthening the role of the United
Nations in the process of disarmament and at creating
conditions leading to more efficient use of the existing
mechanism.
184. The adoption of the comprehensive programme of disarmament would, inter alia, make
possible the harmonization of various efforts at different levels in the field of disarmament. By placing
the emphasis on the significant and irreplaceable role
of the multilateral mechanism we do not wish to deny
the importance of bilateral negotiations within the
framework of overall efforts aimed at disarmament
and at the strengthening of international security. But
in our view, such negotiations can make a full contribution and acquire full significance only if they do
not run· counter to the accepted goals of disarmament in general.
185. Deep contradictions on substantial issues concerning the prevention of war have been expressed a'
this session more than ever before. We consider that
the international community should not accept pasi-

29th meeting-IO July 1982

i
i
~

1
.~

tions baseu on unllarerai perceptions and mreresrs
propagating a kind of hierarchy of wars, that is, their
classification according to the category of weapons
used in them. In this connexion we want to emphasize that we share the awareness of the urgent and
immediate need to prevent the gravest danger overshadowing the world, nuclear war, but also, and on
the same level of urgency, conventional wars, which
so directly and ever more frequently jeopardize the
freedom of States and the independence of countries throughout the wmld, and which could even
lead to a nuclear cataclysm.
186. The outcome of this session is doubtless a
warning signal for the international community to
increase its efforts aimed at overcoming difficulties
and controversies that have been spoken of here and
to find roads leading to consensus on the content and
character of concrete measures and obligations to be
contained in the comprehensive programme of disarmament. We consider it positive that this session has
reconfirmed the concept of this programme and has
made arrangements for further negotiations leading
to its early elaboration and adoption
187. This session has reaffirmed the significance and
the lasting value of the Final Docum,mt of the Tenth
Special Session and has thus given new impetus to the
obligation to continue all negotiations on multilateral,
regional and bilateral levels on all open issues of
disarmament. In this context we attach particular importance to more effective action by the United
Nations and the Committee on Disarmament. We also
consider that the success of efforts at the regional
level, and among them, particularly, the first steps
in launching the pr.:>ces~ of European disarmament,
may significantly improve the international climate
and bring about consensus on the comprehensive
programme of disarmament.
188. Only if political will and readiness to proceed
from words to deeds are shown can we expect the third
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament to promote substantially the cause of
disarmament and strengthen international security.
I should like to express the determination and readiness
of Yugoslavia to make its full contribution to that end.
189. Mr. VRAALSEN (Norway): The second special
session on disarmament opened five weeks ago in the
shadow of armed regional conflicts. Since the first
special session, four years ago, we have lived through
a period of international tension and conflicts. We
have witnessed an increasing trend to resort to force
in the settlement of international disputes. The relationship between the major power alignments has become
more strained.
190. This worsening of the international political
climate, coupled with an increasing awareness of the
destructive power of modern weapons, has created
concern and anxiety in large sections of the public.
International negotiations on disarmament and arms
control have become more difficult. We have seen how
the international conflicts of the last two years
negatively influenced the preparations for this special
session.
191. Nevertheless, some developments indicate that
the international climate may be improving. We find it
particularly welcome that the bilateral talks between

487

the United States ana me Soviet Union on intermediate and strategic nuclear weapons have started.
New proposals have just been introduced in the talks
at Vienna on mutual and balanced force reductions.
192. There were therefore considerable hope and
expectations by the public that the second special
session would carry even further the process initiated
by the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session.
We must confess that we have not managed to meet
these expectations. They were probably too ambitious in relation to what this session could realistically
accomplish during the time we have had at our disposal. The Norwegian Government shares the disappointment voiced by other delegations that we have
not succeeded in agreeing on how to follow up the
goals laid down in the Final Document.
193. But our genuine regret at not having been able
to advance further in the area of disarmament should
not lead to despair, nor should it undermine our
common efforts vigorously to pursue negotiations
towards disarmament and arms control. Any frustration arising from the lack of progress at this session
should be transformed into a strong determination to
obtain results. Nor should we underrate the results
w~ .. :ch we have been able to achieve in spite of the
heavy ·odds against us. Above all, my delegation
would like to emphasize that we have reaffirmed the
validity of the Final Document and pledged to respect
the priorities in its Programme of Action.
194. Furthermore, we consider it significant that we
have obtained a consensus report of this session. In
itself consensus does not satisfy the many different
aspirations and wishes of Governments. Consensus
embodies compromise, which necessarily means that
not all Governments, my own included, see all their
positions reflected in the final report. But in our view,
consensus is a necessary prerequisite for the continuation of the process of negotiations and deliberations
in the field of disarmament and arms control inside the
United Nations system.
195. Only in this way can the United Nations and its
special session on disarmament influence the disarmament negotiations taking place in various forums.
It is to be hoped that the deliberations carried out
during this session and the different proposals that
have been advanced will have a positive impact on
the negotiations that have already been initiated.
196. Nor should we underrate the importance of the
preparatory work carried out by Governments, by
the Centre for Disarmament and by numerous nongovernmental organizations prior to this session. This
has helped to focus attention on the vital question
of arms control and disarmament. We hope that these
valuable efforts and the results obtained at this special
sessgon will strengthen the commitment to obtain
positive results in the ongoing negotiations.
197. Like many other nations, Norway expected
the second special session on disarmament to be an
opportunity for increasing the membership of the Cornmittee on Disarmament. On the basis of the agreement reached at this session, my delegation is looking
forward to receiving the report of the Committee on
Disarmament to this effect at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly. For its part, Norway
will continue its efforts to become a full member of
J. ~<

-~·~4g8~8~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~_~Gc~~e~rn:I~A:~:e_m~=b_I=Y_~T:W_'_:_b_~_~_-_~_~_~_~_i~_-_~_._._~_M-_e_e-t_i-n_~_-__-_·_~_- _· _-_- _-_·_-_-_-_-_-_·_-_-_-_-_----·--~~~'-I---w~
the Commitiee on Disarmament. Regardiess of the
result, however, we intend to participate actively in
the Committee's work as an observer, as we have done
in the past.
198. The problems confronting this session concern
the common destiny of mankind. The halting of the
arms race is not the responsibility of the major Powers'
alone, but should be seen as the responsibility of
all States. This responsibility should be exercised,
inter alia, through the United Nations, which consequently has a very important role to play in the field
of disarmament.
199. Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian):
The second special session of the General Assembly
on disarmament is drawing to a close. As is well
known, the international community, or at any rate
its overwhelming majority, awaited this session with
hope and with confidence that it' would encourage
progress in solving the most important problems
confronting mankind at the moment-preventing a
nuclear catastrophe and carrying out real disarmament. The convening of the second special session
on disarmament was preceded by significant preparations in which we played an active part. A host of
decisions taken at the regular sessions of the General
Assembly and adopted on the initiative of the States
of the socialist community and of the non-aligned
group were part and parcel of this preparation process.
Many efforts to that end were undertaken by the
Committee on Disarmament, the Disarmament Commission and special committees, not to speak of the
work of the Preparatory Committee for the Second
Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to
Disarmament.
200. World public opinion, which was displayed
just before and during this session in a mass anti-war
movement under the slogans of preventing nuclear
war and freezing and eliminating nuclear arsenals,
also waited hopefully and demanded positive results.
This unprecedented concern and alarm on the part of
world public opinion was reflected in almost all the
statements made by representatives of non-governmental organizations from this rostrum. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR eJ:(presses its gratitude
for their important 'contribution to the work of this
special session.
201. The current special session of the General Assembly will go down in history if only because at this
session the Soviet Union unilaterally undertook the
obligation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons,
as stated in a message from the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union, President of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev [12th meeting]. This is a great step towards the
prevention of a nuclear catastrophe, a step on the path
that could lead to a solution of this problem if the
example of the Soviet Union is followed by other
nuclear Powers.
202. The Soviet Union, in documents submitted at
this session, presented a broad range of concrete
and constructive proposals aimed at eliminating the
growing threat of nuclear war, curbing and reversing
the race in nuclear and other armaments and pre-

venting and eliminating chemical weapons. It was
stated once again at this most important rostrum that
there is no type of weapon which the Soviet Union
would not be prepared to limit or ban on a reciprocal
basis; that the Soviet Union is prepared to consider
and discuss any constructive proposals in this sphere
-whoever they may come from-based on the principle of parity and equal security. Delegations of
States from the socialist community have at all stages
and in all bodies during this session shown a spirit of
constructive co-operation in the quest for mutually
acceptable solutions and a readiness for well-thoughtout and meaningful compromises.

and
on b
inclu
that
Hun!
208.
with
we a
of th
Gem
regal
Final
situa

203. The non-aligned States, taking a responsible
approach to the tasks of this session and making
significant efforts towards ensuring its success, have
made important proposals to prevent nuclear war, for
the non-use of nuclear weapons and for a freeze on
arsenals and other proposals.

diffel
to al
Docu
comr
that ~
side.
side I

204. We note the positive significance of a number of
conclusions that we were able to adopt at this session
as a result of the persistent joint efforts of the forces
of peace and progress.
205. However, through the fault of the forces of
imperialism and reaction, which dream of military
superiority and world domination, this session has
not, most unfortunately, responded to the hopes of
peoples of the world. The position of the United States
and of some other States members of NATO, regardless of what their representatives here have said
-rdesortin g flrodm timbe t.o tidme to worhn~outdste~eotYhP~S
an open s an er- 01 ls own to t IS: esplte t ell'
ritual prattling about so-caHed preparedness to take
steps in the sphere of disarmament, they have in fact
blocked the work of the session. Furthermore, by not
allowing the adoption of new decisions, those delegations de facto are rejecting previous understandings,
taken with their participation, on such important
items as nuclear disarmament, strengthening of international security, and so forth. Those States openly
acknowledge that their military doctrine not only does
not exclude the possibility of their being the first to
use nuclear weapons, but is virtually based on this
dangerous premise. The policy of achieving military
superiority which they have adopted is without a
doubt incompatible with the goals of arms limitation
and disarmament, as was clearly shown during the
current session. In fact it is symptomatic that before
this session the NATO bloc approved a comprehensive
programme for an arms race, and near the end of
the session the United States scheduled military
exercises with a view to a detailed elaboration of a
series of steps which would be undertaken in a prolonged nuclear war.
206. This special session on disarmament is drawing
to a close. Humankind is still waiting for the threat of
nuclear war to be removed and for the arms race to
end in order to turn to practical steps to bring about
.disarmament. We are convinced that the peoples of
the world will subvert the criminal schemes of
militarists and aggressors and that they will have their
say in favour of preventing a nuclear catastrophe and
thwarting the arms race, especially the nuclear-arms
race, and of achieving mutually acceptable agreements
on measures for true disarmament.

209.

~r~:

dangl
who
again
tives
freezl
orgal1
dedic
will 0
210.
arms
-om
Unite
main
Secm
force
that v
of a
be wi
securJ
remal
DocUl
I

InClt:n,

'''''LI''j
imple,
the Cl
substc
[re soh

211.
nothir
to co
direct
tional
currel
212.
made.
Disarr
Grou~

accorr
unkno
Disarr
intern
I do r

29th' meeting-to July 1982

207. An appraisal of the outcome of this session
and our view of it is set forth in the joint statement
on behalf of the delegations of the socialist States,
including the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
that was made today by the representative of the
Hungarian People's Republic.
208. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I come to this rostrum
with a spirit of optimism, notwithstanding the facts
we are forced to face when we consider the failure
of this special session. Tie tenth special session of the
General Assembly an,· its Final Document were
regarded as a great success, and yet no part of that
Final Document has been implemented and the world
situation has since that time gravely deteriorated. What
difference can it make if this special session fails
to adopt a final document, seeing that the Final
Document or' the Tenth Special Session has been so
completely ignored? Yet there is an old Greek proverb
that says that there is no evil without some beneficial
side. We must therefore attempt to see the beneficial
side of this failure of the present special session.
209. First and foremost, this session has provided
us with the opportunity to hear the voice of people
from all over the world who have been alerted to the
dangers of an approaching nuclear conflagration and
who have expressed themselves in emphatic terms
against the continuation of the arms race. Representatives of the world-wide movement in favourofa nuclear
freeze and representatives of non-governmental
organizations have expressed themselves here with
dedication and determination, and they represent the
will of the people.
210. We want the cessation of the arms race. But the
arms race is only a consequence of the original error
-one might even call it a sin-of establishing the
United Nations impeded in its ability to achieve its
main purpose, its very raison d'etre, by denying to the
Security Council the availability of a United Nations
force to give effect and validity to its decisions. When
that was done, the Council was reduced to the status
of a mere debating society whose decisions would
be without consequence. The system of international
security envisaged in the Charter has therefore
remained inoperative. In its Declaration, the Final
Document referred to the fact that "Genuine and

489

remains that the question of international security has
been put off to some time in the distant future, but
it must be considered concurrently with efforts
towards disarmament. The result is that the Disarmament Commission, after so many years of efforts
under various denominations, has not achieved any
reduction in armaments or any regulation of armaments, and the arms race has been accelerating by
leaps and bounds. What can mankind hope for in this
situation?
213. I said at the outset that I came here with a spirit
of optimism. I believe we must remedy thi:3 situation.
It is our duty to do so by turning to a consideration
of international security. In the Charter and in the Final
Docume, , we give the United Nations a central role
and primary responsibility for disarmament. Do we
want to give that primary responsibility to an ineffective United Nations, one whose main purpose has
been truncated? Why do we not try to make the United
Nations effective and see whether an effective United
Nations can make a difference in the present situation?
For surely it would make a great difference, indee(~ a
tremendous difference. We cannot function when the
United Nations is a lame duck.

implementation of the security system provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations and the speedy and
substantial reduction of arms and armed forces"
[resolution S-/0/2, para. /3].
211. If this session has failed, therefore, it is because
nothing has been done since the first special session
to comply with the Final Document and its main
directive to implement the Charter system of international security through the United Nations, concurrently with efforts towards disarmament.

214. Let me re-emphasize this point and say that
the next special session of the General Assembly
should be a special session on international security,
I had earlier proposed that this special session should
be devoted to disarmament and international security,
but that suggestion was not taken up. Had it been,
things might have been oifferent. I am therefore now
proposing that the next special session deal with the
subject of international security.
215. We live, I fear, in a world of pretence. We
attempt to ignore stark realities. Inspired by an
obsolete past, we automatically bring forth our faded
cliches and shut our ears to the voice of reason. Our
behaviour towards the United Nations is a blatant
reflection of that pretence. We treat the Organization
as though it were a functioning one, and we make no
attempt to make it function. But we must face realities.
The first reality is that we cannot proceed to agreements on disarmament without first halting the arms
race. The second is that we cannot halt the arms race
without providing a security alternative to armaments
and arms comnetitioii
thiOiiuh
an effective United
r
c:>
Nations collective security system as required by the
Charter.
216. If we bear these realities in mind, we shall
see that disarmament efforts will not be in vain. The
disarmament efforts can and should become productive through international security, not otherwise.
217. Mr. ULRICHSEN (Denmark): My delegation
adheres fully to the statement made by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the 10 member States
of the European Community.

212. Some efforts towards disarmament have been
made. There have been very devoted efforts in the
Disarmament Commission. We are grateful to the
Group of 21 for what it has been trying so hard to
accomplish. The fact remains, however, that, for
unknown reasons, no efforts have been made in the
Disarmament Commission towards the system of
international security, as urged in the Final Document.
I do not know why and I do not ask. Yet, the fact

218. On behalf of the Danish delegation I should like
to add the following observations. There can be no
doubt that the outcome of our work will be judged
unsatisfactory by the majority of people. But, as you
said, Mr. President, disappointment must not lead to
despair. I think we all realize that the report of the
Committee on Disarmament gave us few guidelines for
solving the essential disarmament questions, and we
have not been able to do much better. We must

In",.: ...", ... "'~,..,.. ,..~ ... " ... 1.. 1-

<_...1 <L __ • __ L
1"'31"15 p~a~~ ~all VIIIY vc \,,1 CClLCU LIIJ

_ 1:'1:'• • • , - - uugn .L
un::_ \:::Il\:::(,;uve

490

'

'0':
~.:'

..•..•.•..•.••·•••...., ..•·..•.

.
1.

I'

.,

~I
\:1

General Assembly-Twelfth Special Session-Ptenary Meetings

also recognize that the special session took place at a
time when the international climate was not propitious
for working out a future disarmament programme,
which necessitates the participation and the active cooperation of the whole United Nations family.
219. All who have taken part in the deliberations of
the last five weeks would render a service to the cause
of disarmament by re-evaluating the course of events.
Even if our work did not result in a comprehensive
programme of disarmament, our discussions were held
in a calm atmosphere and often with a serious approach, corresponding to the desire of our people. We
could not realize our ambitious projects, yet some
foundation for future disarmament initiatives was laid.
220. It is premature to draw a final conclusion from
this special session. However, it seems to us that
much time has been used to discuss minor issues,
disregarding the problems vital to humanity. The
session has shown that there is a need to be less
versatile and more concrete, and that would be our
advice to the Committee on Disarmament when it
resumes its consideration of this matter. Many fruitful ideas have been put forward and I am sure that
they can contribute to promoting the disarmament
process.
221. In his statement in the general debate [11th
meeting], the Danish Prime Minister, Mr. Anker
Jorgensen, said that. the international climate was a
basis for disarmament, and nobody can deny that
fact. We must all, not only in words but primarily in
deed, do our utmost to bring about this prerequisite
for future disarmament measures.
222. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (interpretation from
French): On 22 June, during its statement in the
general debate [22 nd meeting J, my delegation
expressed its views on the situation in the world.
It stressed the correlation between that situation and
the arms race. It stated the hopes it placed in this
special session and outlined the results that it felt
should be expected.
223. Today, at the time when we are getting ready
to close this session, my delegation cannot keep
silent on its regret and disappointment. We regret to
note, first, that the members of the international
community, gathered here of their own free will, have
been unable to find even the least common denominator ir, terms of language to describe the situation
we are facing today, a situation which severely puts to
the test the most sacred principles in which all of us
believe and for the defence of which the Organization
was founded.
224. Our disappointment stems from the realization
that the international community has not been able
at this juncture to take even the smallest step to ward
off the threat of war that hovers over us. Our disappointment is aJI the deeper because of the failure of
our attempts to arrive at an agreement banning for
ever the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
which we all agree would lead to the annihilation of all
mankind.
225. The fact that those embarking on the preparations for a nuclear holocaust do not yet appreciate
the danger in which they place the world, and therefore themselves, shows, in our view, their utmost
insensitivity or irresponsibility.

226. Our frustration and our bitterness stem from
the fact that the death and desolation being suffered
today by innocent peoples all over the world and in
particular in the Middle East, on Lebanese soil, have
not made sufficient impact to dictate the measures
required to halt the race for over-armament.
227. It is indeed an edifying example of the possible
use of immense arsenals of weapons, particularly when
they are put into the hands of irresponsible men.
What will it be like when those same irresponsible
individuals are ready to press the nuclear-weapon
button?
228. The report this session is adopting as a kind of
conclusion implicitly acknowledges that the international community, gathered here, has been unable to
meet the demands of the situation prevailing in the
world or to respond to the profound aspirations of our
peoples.
229. Could it be otherwise-and to us this seems
clear at the end of this session-when the political
will necessary to reach any kind of agreement is
lacking among those possessing the biggest arsenals of
weapons of destruction? Could it be otherwise when
the concern of the big Powers is confined to ensuring
their own security without worrying unduly about
international peace and security?
230. Although this session has been unable properly
to fulfil its mandate, this does not mean we can
renounce our responsibilities. We should like to
believe that reason and the general interest will
prevail. We appeal therefore to those who are not yet
ready to do so to make the necessary effort to join in
the will of the vast majority, voiced here by the
non-aligned countries, in order to prevent a nuclear
catastrophe and achieve general and complete disarmament, and to devote themselves exclusively to
economic and social development, in international
peace and securitv.

J
I

(

!

.f

2
a
s
a
a

231. We dare to hope that the Committee on Disarmament, to which has been transferred the priority
task of working out the comprehensive programme
of disarmament, will be able to fulfil the new mandate
entrusted to it by the deadline set.

,

232. I cannot conclude, Mr. President, without
paying a tribute to you and to Mr. Adeniji, the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, who showed throughout our session authority, dedication and devotion
worthy of our most sincere praise.

tl

(J

g
a
p
C

a
n

2

233. Mr. SUJA (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
jhJlll Russian): The second special session devoted to
disarmament had a great. responsible task, that is. to
determine practical ways for bringing to an end the
increasing growth of ever more destructive types of
weapons, primarily nuclear weapons.

n
p

o
b
a

c'

C

234. The position of Czechoslovakia and of the other
socialist countries on these matters of principle
affecting today's world cannot be in any doubt. In cooperation with many other countries, including coun. tries of the non-aligned movement, we have done
our utmost to secure the adoption of effective measures and decisions to avert the threat of nuclear
war which hangs over all mankind. It is perfectly fitting
that-as can be seen from the statements of the
overwhelming majority of representatives of States

2:
SI

a'

d
si
t~

pi
m

p:

'!
M

I

t

sr .&••••'I? • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •7

7 _ _.'.:

7

7

'.0'

_.,.

lm
ed
In

ve
es
tie
~n

n.

lie

m
of
a-

to
le
Llf

lS
al
IS
)f
:n

19
Jt

Y
n
0

11
~t

n

e
If

.0

1I

y
'"

..'"""

1

I

29th meeting-IO July 1982

and non-governmental and other organizations in the
general debate-it is precisely that question that has
become the primordial topic of the entire session.
235. The prevention of a nuclear disaster has become
an integral part of the work of this session and of
international relations as a whole. In recent years in
particular this has been the result of the feverish
efforts to increase the sophistication and to accumulate
the most destructive types of nuclear weapons,
including neutron weapons and their means of delivery,
in combination with well-known doctrines of the
possibility of their use in a limited or even a winnable nuclear war, and similar inhumane theories.
That is the prime cause for the aggravation of international relations.
236. Czechoslovakia, which is situated in a region
with the greatest concentration of armed forces and
armaments in the world, has more than one reason to
share the prime concern of the world community
about this development. Quite near our western
borders several thousands of warheads of NATO are
located. The flight of nuclear-tipped missiles, including
nearly 600 United States medium-range nuclear
missiles, the deployment of wh~ch is being prepared
just west of our boundaries, is to be measured not in
minutes but in seconds. That is why we attach primary
significance to the appeal for all nuclear-weapon States
to respond to the commitment of the Soviet Union not
to be the first to use nuclear weapons by undertaking
a similar obligation. That would without any doubt
constitute a reliable barrier against the dang,~r of the
unleashing of a nuclear conflict and would certainly
. facilitate subsequent negotiations on nuclear disarmament.
237. We feel that all the other constructive proposals
and initiatives in this direction submitted at this session, in particular by the non-aligned countries, are
also important and timely. We advocate thorough
and constructive consideration of them. We highly
value the proposals of India, Mexico and a number of
other countries of the non-aligned movement which
give evidence of the highly responsible and active
approach taken by those countries to the most important aspects of the work of this special session and
to disarmament matters in general. We take a similarly
constructive approach to a number of other initiatives
and proposals on the most important aspects of disarmament.
238. This session has shown, infer alia, the urgent
need for the conclusion ofa convention on the complete
prohibition of chemical weapons and the destruction
of their stockpiles; a draft of such a convention has
been submitted by the Soviet Union [A/S-/2/AC.//I2
and Co,.,.. I , annex]. We feel that this draft must
constitute the basis for further negotiations in the
Committee on Disarmament.

f

239. While a number of new initiatives and proposals
submitted at this session could play a positive part in
averting nuclear war and bringing about disarmament,
that cannot conceal the fact that the results of the session are not commensurate with the magnitude of the
tasks that faced it or with the expectations of world
public opinion, which has rightly demanded effective
measures and concrete actions towards disarmament,
particularly nuclear disarmament. Responsibility for

7

491

this outcome ofthe session lies wholly on the shoulders
of the delegations of those countries which, as in the
past, have avoided constructive, businesslike negotiations and have striven to divert our negotiations.
And all of that has been done in an attempt to justify
the further accumulation of nuclear weapons and to
shift the balance of forces in ihe world in their favour,
as well as to act from a position of strength. Moreover,
they have even been talking about the "usefulness",
indeed about the "peace-making" role, of nuclear
weapons. At a time when in the United Nations there
are discussions about the prevention of nuclear war,
the com.,rehensive programme of disarmament and
other major problems involved in reversing the arms
race, in the NATO headquarters, under the leadership
of the United Stales, doctrines of first nuclear strike
and long-term programmes for the accumulation and
further sophistication of weapons are being elaborated.
This policy, however it may be camouflaged, radically
contradicts the interests of all peoples and obstructs
the preservation of peace. It is not possible to hide the
fact that it is that policy and nothing else which has
led to the general aggravation of the international
atmosphere, the growth of tension in the world and,
in the final analysis, to the exacerbation of the danger
of nuclear war.
240. We believe that all the constructive and useful
elements of the session should be put to use. In the
spirit of the Declaration on International Cooperation for Disarmament, adopted on our initiative,
we are prepared to make further constructive efforts,
together with other countries, to secure the implementation of the aims of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly and, on
the basis of mutual interest and undiminished security,
to reach agreement on the limitation, reduction and
elimination of any kind of weapons. Only by the joint
efforts of the States Members of the United Nations,
based on political goodwill, will it be possible to reach
a substantial turning-point in the solution of pressing
disarmament problems.
241. Lastly, let me thank you, Mr. President, for your
skilled leadership of this session; and Mr. Adeniji, the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee, the chairmen of
the Working and Drafting Groups, and the officials and
other personnel of the Un~ted Nations for their
personal contributions and inestimable assistance.
242. Mr. KRYSTOSIK (Poland): Long weeks of hard
work are almost over. Soon the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament
will be closed. As we approach that moment one cannot
but express a feeling of deep disappointment and
regret that it has not been possible to achieve our
goals and to live up to the expectations.
243. Our point of view has been reflected in detail
in the joint statement of the socialist countries made
by the representative of Hungary. Now my delegation
wishes briefly to stress that it was with appreciation
that my Government w~lcomed the decision to convene this session. We came to it with a belief that its
outcome would meet the needs and hopes of nations,
and to the best of our abilities we tried to contribute
to its work and results.
244. From the very beginning we have emphasized
our feeling of concern, as we realized that it would not

"1

r:---~-"~"''''=:::::::::::::=:wel:h:=i:~:i:=:le:~rY
::t1n~'~<""" . .·. . .

:1 ~
...~

'1
Ii.l.
". !

. • .~

:~

"1
!i~
::~
1*1

(m

.':

'.~.'

"~.':

.

;~

"f
f;

"~I

. ))~;

.~

. ill
;~\

:0

,~
;~
.
5!
;~
.;(\
. .~

~

.~

"'~
;m

.1j,~i
~'

.~
.~
B:!

.~

easy to succeed. We pointed to a number of
negative phenomena which have accumulated in the
political, military and economic spheres, and which
c.ontinue to.cast a 1011g and ominous shadow on internatlonal relatIOns. Among these are: the constant quantitative and qualitative growth of armaments; the use
of force and the threat of use of force in international
relations; persistent and dangerous conflicts; the
development of intervention forces; theories concerning carrying out and winning a limited nuclear
war; ar,.l plans to deploy Pershing 11 and cruise missiles
. W t
Et'
f
th d
m
es ern urope, s emmmg rom
e angerous
evolution in the policy of some NATO countries.

245. In view of the awareness of these growing
dangers, we believed that the present session would
mark an important stage in the efforts to reverse
these ominous trends, efforts which would help to
overcome the obstacles and barriers to the disarmament dialogue. We considered that at this session
it would be possible to reaffirm fully the programme
of action in the field of disarmament and to adopt the
comprehensive programme of disarmament. We
thought that it would be possible to find common
I
ways and to work out the necessary yet mutual y
acceptable solutions .
246. Unfortunately, this session has proved the lack
of the necessary political will on the part of those
countries which are mainly responsible for the arms
race and for the exacerbation of the international
situation. This session has not been able to adopt the
decisions which in practice would lead to the elimination of the threat of nuclear war and to a halting of
the accelerated arms race.
247. This session, however, has forcefully manifested that there is grave concern among nations
about the continuing arms race, that the prevention
of nuclear catastrophe remains the most acute and
urgent task of the present day, and that the redoubled
efforts to ensure disarmament should be continued.
248. In his statement in the general debate the
Foreign Minister of Poland, Jozef Czyrek, said:
"Unswervingly linking its future and development with the building of international security
based on detente, disarmament and co-operation
among nations, Poland, together with its allies, is
ready to do its utmost to ensure that the prospects
of a lasting peace for the world will, as a result of
this session, become a reality." [10th meetin!(,
para. 201.]
249. Today, now that we have adopted the report
and know the outcome of the session. as well as the
reasons which played the decisive role in this respect,
we wish once again to emphasize that, regardless of
difficulties and obstacles, Poland will continue to work
consistently for the cause of disarmament, which is the
urgent imperative of our time, and for the consolidation of peace and international security.
250. Mr. FRANCIS (New Zealand): May I express
my appl'eciation to you, Sir, for the manner in which
you have presided over this special session of the
Assembly, to the officers of the Ad Hoc Committee
and the chairmen of the Working Groups for their
efforts, and in particular to Mr. Adeniji for the skilful

T

•.·•

.' ....•••

~.~

.····f·· -,- .
..'

••..... •

and tireless manner in which he caiiled out his duties
as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee.
251. The New Zealand delegation shares the disappointment expressed by all speakers today that the
special session has been able to report so little progress
towards the goals it set for itself. That disappointment will be felt not only by the Governments we
represent but by the many ordinary citizens around
the world who looked to this session to give a new
impetus to disarmament efforts.
252. It was to be expected that the goals would be
difficult to achieve. We met during a period of conflict
and international tension and a~ a time when Governments in many parts of the world appear to have
concluded that the security of their countries can be
preserved only by building up their military strength.
253. This session was looking to other ways of
enhancing national and international security-in
particular, by providing direction to future negotiations
on all aspects of disarmament and a standard by
which future progress could be measured. That was
a particularly ambitious goal. Deliberations over the
past month have shown, as you, Mr. President, have
observed, that this body cannot insulate itself from
the climate of the day .
254. If the results of this session have for that reason
been disappointing and its achievements limited, it has
nevertheless served a number of useful purposes. It
has provided an opportunity for all delegations to
improve their understanding of the security perceptions of others. It has helped stimulate public consciousness of the need for genuine and substantial
measures of disarmament and provided a forum in
which non-governmental organizations could express
the profound concern of people all over the world to
be freed from the danger and burden of armaments.
Member States have reaffirmed the validity of the
Final Document and committed themselves to the
goals and priorities it embodies. In addition, Member
States have reaffirmed the central role of the United
Nations in disarmament and their determination to
ensure that the multilateral processes of disarmament
will continue here and in the Committee on Disarmament.
255. Those are important achievements, even if
against the goals of the session they are relatively
limited ones. The Assembly did not complete its task
at this session. Though its results were meagre and
discouraging, that is no reason to despair. The work
that began with the first special session still remains
to be done, and the effort will be continued. That it
could not be completed here is only a more compelling reason to continue the task and to rethink our
approaches to the issues. There is much to be learned
from the discussions of the past five weeks. Many
ideas and indications of possible new approaches have
been put forward, some by representatives of the
non-governmental organizations that shared in the
deliberations of the Assembly. They all need to be
considered carefully and with an open mind.
256. New Zealand, for its part, is ready and willing
to do whatever it can in this process and to make
its contributions whenever it finds opportunities to do
so. We see this as a time not for despondency but
rather for determination and for a renewed effort that

.....

.... "

..

··r'·
duties
~ disat the
>gress
point-

t8 we

round
l new
lId be
Inflict
Ivernhave
:in be
ngth.
IS of

y-in
ltions
d by
: was
r the
have
from
:ason
t has
~s. It

to
rcepconmtial
m in
>ress
Id to

IS

~nts.
~ the

the
nber
lited
n to
nent
Isar-

n if
vely
task
and
mrk
ains
at it
omour
'ned
any
lave
the
the
, be
ling
ake
Ido
but
:hat

_ ••'O--"•.._.. _~-------

~'--'-~

,', .;_'-',:~";~:'- ••• ':':"-,ic. _!. ; "..,

29th meeting-to July 1982

493

will demonstrate that public ~onfidence in the Organization has not been misplaced.

one can prevent the Khmer people from continuing
those activities.

AGENDA ITEM 3

265. Although our delegations do not object to the
approval of the report of the Credentials Committee
since it refers to the credentials of a great number of
delegations of Member States, we feel that it should be
p
')n record in the most unambiguous way that
app)" val of the report in no way connotes any measure
of agreement on the part of our delegations with the
presence in the United Nations of the so-called represenlatives of the Pol Pot clique.

Credentials of representatives to the twelfth special
session of the General Assembly (collcluded):
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
257. The PRESIDENT: I invite representatives to
turn their attention to the draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph 16
of its report [A/S-12/28].
258. In the Credentials Committee the draft resolution was adopted without a vote. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
resolution?

The dr{dt resolution was adopted (resolution S-I 2/ I).
259. The PRESIDENT: I shall call now on those
representatives who have asked to speak in explanation of their positions on the resolution just adopted.
260. Mr. RACZ (Hungary): I have asked to speak on
behalf of the delegations of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian SSR, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, the
Soviet Union and the Ukrainian SSR.
261. With regard to the report of the Credentials
Committee, the above-mentioned delegations wish to
point out that the recommendation of the Committee
totally disregards the real situation in Kampuchea
and ignores the relevant provisions of contemporary
international law as well as common sense. At previous
sessions of the General Assembly, our countries have
repeatedly and clearly stated their position on this
question: the seat of Kampuchea in the United
Nations belongs to the legitimate Government of the
People's Republic of Kampuchea.
262. The delegations on whose behalf I am speaking
most resolutely reject the illegal participation of representatives of so-called Democratic Kampuchea in the
work of the General Assembly. We consider their
presence at this special session devoted to disarmament to be a gross insult to the millions of victims
of ihe genocidai Poi Pot regime and a violation of the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
263. The question of the representation of Kampuchea is obviously part of the designs of those whose
only goal is to bring about the reinstatement of the
Pol Pot clique, which has been condemned throughout
the world, and to maintain tension "nd instability
in South-East Asia. Our delegations nme with regret
that certain other countries have been misled by
fallacious propaganda, the aim of which is to maintain
the illusion of so-called Democratic Kampuchea
through the illegal occupation of the seat of that country
in the Organization.
264. We should like to emphasize that, despite all
the efforts to impede the policy of reconstruction and
all the attempts to undermine the international authority of the People's Republic of Kampuchea and its
legitimate Government, the country is continuing to
make progress amI to consolidate the achievements of
1979, which was a turning-point in its history. No

266. Mr. SRITHIRATH (Lao People's Democratic
Republic) (interpretation from French): While joining
in the consensus on the adoption of the report of the
Credentials Committee on the credentials of delegations to the second special session devoted to disarmament, the Lao People's' D~mocratic Republic,
together with the delegations of non-aligned countries
which recognize the People's Republic of Kampuchea
as the sc'le authentic and legal Government of Kampuchea, wishes to place on record its firm and formal
objection to the presence of those persons who claim
to represent so-called Democratic Kampuchea, which
does not exist on the political map of the world.
267. My delegation expressly requests that this
statement be duly reflected in the records of the
General Assembly.
268. Mr. KOR BUN HENG (Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretation j;'om French): Following the
adoption of the report of the Credentials Committee,
the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea wishes to
sta~e its serious reservations with regard to the participation of the delegation of Viet Nam in this second
special session devoted to disarmament, for the
following reasons:
269. First, since 25 December !978, six months after
the adoption of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly, Viet Nam
has been waging a war of aggression and invasion
against Democratic Kampuchea. This Vietnamese
aggression constitutes a flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, the principles of international law and the relevant re8o!utions of the
United Nations.
270. Secondly, at present 300,000 Vietnamese soldiers and administrative officials are putting my
country to the torch and to the sword. The famine
they have deliberately created has already killed
several hundreds of thousands of Kampucheans. Conventional weapons of all r.inds have already massacred
several hundreds of thousands more. In their foul
crimes aimed at exterminating the people of Kampuchea the Vietnamese invaders have also used chemical
and bacteriological weapons, which have caused the
death of several thousand Kampucheans and pose a
grave threat to the human and ecological environment. At the same time they have driven Kampuchean
peasants off their land and have sent in nearly a million
Vietnamese to establish settlements in Kampuchea.
271. Thirdly, this Vietnamese war of aggression in
Karr:'uchea has created a flood of refugees, which not
only causes indescribable suffering to hundreds of
thousands of Kampucheans and Vietnamese but also

1

494

General Assembly-Twelfth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

constitutes a heavy burden for the countries of first
asylum in the South-East Asian region, especially
Thailand, as well as for the countries that accept the
refugees and those that give humanitarian assistance.
272. Fourthly. this war of aggression and genocide
waged for more than three years by Viet Nam could
not have come about or continued without the assistance of the Soviet Union, which now amounts to
$6 million a day.
273. All these facts show that Viet Nam constitutes
the major and most direct threat to peace, security
and stability in South-East Asia. As stated in the
joint communique issued on 16 June 1982 by the
Foreign Ministers of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, and distributed as an official document
of the General Assembly:
"'The Foreign Ministers expressed their grave
conc,un over the situation in Kampuchea. They
stressed that the continued Vietnamese military
occupation of Kampuchea constitutes a serious
threat to peace and stability in the whole SouthEast Asian region. They reaffirmed their strong
conviction that the continued occupation of Kampuchea by Viet Nam represents a serious violation
of international law and the principles of the
United Nations Charter." I
What Viet NBm has b~en doing manifestly runs counter
to the letter and spirit of the Final Document and
to the spirit ef this session.
274. For all those reasons my delegation feels that
Viet Nam has no proper place here so long as it has
not ended its aggression against. and occupation of
Kampuchea and totally and Uliconditionally withdrawn its forces of aggression flOm Kampuchea in
accordance with United Nations re~olutions and the
Declaration of the International Conference on
Kampllchea.
275. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to inform the Assembly that on 22 June last, at Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, the three Kampllchean parties
signed a Declaration on the Formation of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, with
Samdech Norodom Sihanouk as President, Mr. Khieu
Samphan as Vice-President in charge of Foreign
Affairs and Mr. Son Sann as Prime Minister.
276. The objectives of the Coalition Government of
Democratic Karnpuchea are:
"To mobilize all efforts in the common struggle
to liberate Kampuchea from the Vietnamese aggressors with a view to restoring the motherland as
a sovereign and independent country:
"To bring about the implementation of the
Declaration of the International Conference on
Kampuchea and other relevant United Nations
General Assembly resolutions." 2

277. The Kampuchean people as a whole hails this
coalition whole-heartedly and with national pride.
Peace- and justice-loving peoples the world over
welcome its establishment. Hanoi and Moscow, on
the other hand, are enraged over this coalition. Why
such rage? For the simple reason that they have failed
in their treacherous manreuvres to split the patriotic
Kampuchean forces and to keep them from forming
this coalition. This only unmasks still further the
true expansionist nature of Hanoi and Moscow.
278. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan): My delegation wishes
to place on record its formal reservation to the credentials of the Kabul delegation present at the second
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmamen t.
279. The delegation of Pakistan shares the position
reflected in this regard in paragraphs 10 and 11 of
the report of the Crede.ntials Committee. This position is consistent with the principled stand taken by
Pakistan in international forums.
280. Mr. SOLA VILA (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): My country wishes once again to reaffirm
its position of recognizing as the sole and legitimate
representatives of the Kampuchean people those
individuals who make up the Government of the
People's Republic of Kampuchea. We have no objection to the adoption of the report, but that in no way
signifies recognition of the representatives of the
Pol Pot regime.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
281. The PRESIDENT: I now invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent prayer
or meditation.
The representatil'es stlll1llinR, ohsen'ed a minute' s
silence.
I

Closure of the twelfth special sessioll

282.

The PRESIDENT: I declare closed the twelfth
The l11eelillR rose al 7 p.m.

NOTES
I OIJkial Records (~r the Security Coullcil,
1hirty-.\'C'\'ellth
Y('ar, SlIpplemellt fi}r July, AURust and Septemha 1982. document

5/15268.
2 lhid., Suppleme'/lt for April, May ami .Iune' /982. document
S/15252,

s••t Hard ·Copy Available
