UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2542nd

MEETING:

25 MAY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2542) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoptionoftheagenda......................................

.. ... .. ... . 1

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/16574) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

S/PV .2542

.‘.

NOTE

1

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capi,t$‘letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are norm&y published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council,’ numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

’

2542nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,

Ecuador, Jordan, Somalia and the Sudan in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta; Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Albornoz
(Ecuador), Mr. Salah (Jordan), Mr. Adan (Somalia)
and Mr. Birido (Sudan) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

agenda (SlAgendal2542)

of the agenda

‘,

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives
of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16574)
The meeting

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The first speaker is the representative of Jordan. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption

25 May 1984, at 3 p.m.

4. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) [interpretationfrom
Arabic]:
Mr. President, I wish to thank the members of the
Council for allowing my participation in the Council’s
discussion and to congratulate you most sincerely on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. Having had the honour of working with you
personally when Jordan was a member of the Council,
I have first-hand knowledge of your eminent qualities
and diplomatic skill. The good relations between our
countries make it all the more gratifying to us that this
grave responsibility should fall to you. Your country’s
support for Arab rights makes me ah the more pleased
to see you in the Chair. We are certain that the Council
will adopt important and effective resolutions under
your able guidance. I wish also to take this occasion to
commend your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets, the
representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, for his adept conduct of the Council’s work last
month.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16574)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the previous
meeting [254Zst meeting], I invite the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information of Kuwait and the representative of Saudi Arabia to
take places at the Council table, and I invite the representatives of Bahrain, Oman, Panama, Qatar, Senegal, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The Council is meeting to discuss a question vital to
the freedom of international navigation in the Gulf region and to the security and stability of the States
members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, which have
submitted a collective complaint regarding Iranian air
attacks on Saudi and Kuwaiti tankers in the territorial
waters of the States members of that Council, and
against other ships in international
waters.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Al-Sabah
(Kuwait) and Mr. Shihabi(SaudiArabia)
tookplaces at
the Council table; Mr. Al-Sabbagh (Bahrain), Mr. Ali
(Oman), Mr. Kam (Panama), Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar),
Mr. Sarre’ (Senegal), Mr. Al-Mu&
(United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Sallam (Yemen) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Iran’s raids on Saudi and Kuwaiti tankers, as welI
as its attack on civilian shipping in international waters,
constitute a grave development in the Gulf region. This
gravity is reflected in two aspects: first, the illegality

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of

I

and illegitimacy of those attacks; secondly, the political
consequences of their continuation.

they ask the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities.

7. For more than two weeks Iran has been trying to
impose a military blockade on neighbouring Arab
States. The continued arbitrary attacks against civilian
commercial tankers and ships in the Gulf are aimed at
imposing an economic blockade on the States of the
Gulf Co-operation Council by force. Iran’s action is a
flagrant violation of the principles of international law.
Having attacked peaceful civilian commercial targets of
States not parties to its war with Iraq, which has been
going on for almost four years, Iran bears responsibility
for the war’s continuation. Some of the tankers that
were attacked were in Saudi Arabian and Kuwaiti territorial waters or within those States’ exclusive economic zones. Other ships were attacked in international
waters. Furthermore, fraternal Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, in addition to the other members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, have declared their neutrality with
regard to the Iran-Iraq war and have sought, individually and collectively, to maintain the neutrality of the
Gulf, with respect not only to this war, but also to
international competition and rivalry among the major
Powers. Indeed, those States have made positive endeavours to put an end to the war. Thus the Iranian
military operations in international waters and against
civilian targets in the ports of the Arab Statesof the Gulf
are unwarranted acts of aggression posing a grave
threat to the vital interests, national economy, sovereignty and safety of those countries.

10. We in Jordan cannot accept the pretexts by which
Iran is seeking to justify its attempt to impose an eco-.
nomic blockade of the Gulf States and to intimidate
those States. If political and economic relations maintained by certain States with Iran or Iraq are ajustification for attacking those ’ States by either of the two
belligerents, I assure members of the Council that a
large number of States Members of the United Nations
could possibly be the targets of attacks, not only by Iran
but by other States as (well. Many wars and armed
conflicts are in progress in the world, and all the parties
to those wars maintain military, economic and political
relations with the majority of States in the world. It is
inconceivable that such relations should in any way be
considered to be a justification for changing the internationally accepted definitions of neutrality and of the
state of war.
11. In the particular caseof Iran, the facts show something very close to a violation of the laws of neutrality
and other international obligations, but they have not
provoked anyone to the point of a declaration of war.
On the contrary, Iran is receiving military and political
assistance from numerous States both within and outside the region.
12. The illegality and illegitimacy of recent Iranian
acts of aggression in the Gulf region against tankers and
other ships belonging to Arab and other States are
obvious, and I need not dwell on them. More important
-and more dangerous-is the political magnitude of
these Iranian practices. First of all, this escalation by
Iran undermines the principle of the neutrality of the
Gulf. The States members of the Gulf Co-operation
Council have been trying to keep this vitally important
region free from big-Power rivalry and contention, and
I believe that those States have earned our admiration
and gratitude for their persistent endeavours and for
their determination to transform the region into a place
of international co-operation and mutual benefit rather
than letting it be drawn into the terrible quagmire of
international polarization, whose negative effects are
felt in more than one part of the world.

8. The resulting tension in the region, which poses a
threat to the safety of international shipping, represents
a serious escalation and extension of the Iraq-Iran war
and could have grave consequences. Iranian military
operations against international shipping and against
the facilities of the Gulf States are in contravention of
the principles of international law and the provisions
of the ,Charterof the United Nations, which prohibit
threats against the territorial integrity and stability
of States and ban the threat or use of force in international relations. Moreover, Iran’s actions violate the
principle of maintaining good-neighbourly relations and
the laws of neutrality. If Iran had a complaint against
the Gulf States, it should have brought it to the Security
Council.

13. In addition, the States of the region have not’retreated into isolation. We are all aware of the positive
role played by those States on the international scene,
both economically and politically. They have always
supported the voice of reason and moderation and have
always stood for the values of tolerance, rationality and
open-mindedness. But Iran’s position vis-d-vis those
States has become a threat to all these positive values
and positions. Iran’s current military actions against
these Gulf States appear to be an element in a political
campaign aimed at stifling them economically with the
ultimate view of destabilizing them, strangling their
public life and undermining the cultural values they
embody, such values as tolerance, co-existence and
openness to various cultures and ideas of the world.

9. Iran’s disregard for the principles of international
law and the provisions of the Charter stands in contrast
to the responsible position taken by the Arab States that
have been the object of recent Iranian attacks, by members of the Gulf Co-operation Council and by other
members of the League of Arab States. Both Kuwait
and Saudi Arabia-the two States adversely affectedhave, as a matter of principle, shown a readiness to
accept Iran’s apology and a desire not to escalate
the situation. They have used peaceful means, through
internationally recognized regional and world channels. They have taken diplomatic measures within the
Gulf Co-operation Council and within the League of
Arab States, which have a joint defence treaty. Now
2

I should like to reiterate my delegation’s satisfaction at
the fact that you are presiding over the Council, in view
of your experience and your ability in handling the work
of this paramount United Nations body. I should like
also to pay a tribute to the previous President, the
representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic.

14. Iran’s recent action amounts to a use of military
force to destroy the economic basis of the political
stability and security of the States of the region. It takes
on dangerous strategic dimensions affecting the security of the Arab nation. We in Jordan are following this
closely and with the utmost concern. Israel’s expansionist plans and its aspirations for new strategic positions in the Arab world cause us to be gravely concerned about Arab security and attempts to undermine
the steadfastness and stability of any Arab country.

21. In the complex and important situation which the
Council has been considering, fundamental principles
of international
coexistence are involved which are
essential for Ecuador, such as respect for the territorial
integrity of States, the non-use of force in international
relations, the peaceful settlement of disputes, free navigation and trade in international
waters and innocent
passage in national waters.

15. On another level, everybody is aware of the
strategic importance of the commodity which has become the target of Iranian aggression. International
economic stability depends primarily on the continued
supply of energy and crude oil. Hence, impeding the
peaceful commercial shipping of that commodity poses
a direct threat to the security and stability of the world.
Iran must be made to realize the magnitude of its current actions against its Arab neighbours. Its attempt to
hinder the shipment of this important commodity could
give rise to incalculable military and political dangers.
Thus, Iran’s attempt to obstruct international shipping
and the threat it poses to Gulf security could result in
instability in the region which, in turn, could lead to
foreign military interventions,
which would not be in
the interest of international peace and security.

22. For these reasons Ecuador has deemed it fitting to
make itselfheard in this debate on a situation which is of
great concern to all regions of the world. Ecuador has
cordial relations with the countries involved in this
conflict. These countries belong to a region which has
with our own region common roots and traditions of
history and culture. Paraphrasing the maxim of the
International
Labour Organization that poverty anywhere in the world is a threat to prosperity everywhere,
it might be said, similarly, that violence anywhere in the
world is a threat to peace everywhere.

16. I can affirm that the concern of Jordan and the
Arab world as a whole at the current threat to the
security of the Gulf States arises not only from important international strategic considerations. The stability
and security of the Gulf and the integrity of that part of
the Arab nation, along with the values and heritage it
represents and its support for Arab rights, constitute
another major source of Jordan’s concern at the current
attempts to destabilize that part of the Arab homeland.
Hence it is incumbent upon the Council promptly to
condemn these actions, which represent a grave threat
to the sovereignty, independence and welfare of the
States of the region, as well as a danger to regional and
international peace and security.

23. The Gulf region has become an area of great sensitivity and importance for peace and for the world
economy. Situations have arisen which have force-d the
sovereign will of certain countries that are not parttes to
the regrettable hostilities in the Gulf and have induced
them to take part in a warlike situation, with calamitous
consequences. ‘This is inadmissible and dangerous for
the international
community.
.24. The Security Council is traditionally the guardian
of the principle of non-intervention,
that of the non-use
of force and, correlatively,
that of the peaceful settlement of disputes. These principles must be converted
into reality more by successful actions than by the
proliferation of debates which have taken place on this
subject in a number of bodies in the United Nations
system, such as the Special Committee on Enhancing
the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of Force
in International
Relations.

17. Iran must be made to understand that the Council
has the ability to take the necessary actions to prevent a
repetition of such acts and that there are other more
peaceful and effective means available to Iran to end its
war with Iraq: diplomatic means. Iran could also pursue
a better path in order to live in peace and harmony with
its neighbours: the path of co-operation and peace,
instead of confrontation and war.

25. The resolutions of the Council aimed at the effective implementation
of peaceful settlements of disputes may also constitute a response to the ‘clamour of
the peoples concerned. That is why my delegation has
insisted on the necessity of establishing specific rules
and practical and effective machinery, as set forth in
the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International
Disputes [General Assembly resolution
37110 of 15 November 1982, annex] and as advocated by
the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

18, Finally, we hope that the Council will meet the
challenge confronting it on this occasion.
19. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
I now invite the representative of Ecuador to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.
20. Mr. ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador) [interprerutionfiom
Spanish]: Mr. President, I thank you for being kind
enough to allow me to participate
in this debate.

26. The principle of banning the threat or use of force
in relations among States is at the basis of international
3

law, and without it there could not be any legal coexistence, nor could the United Nations exist. Our civilization requires that the conduct of States be brought into
line with that basic principle, and success in that regard
would mean the ‘complete rule of law in a civilized
world. In fact, the Charter bans not only war but also
the threat or use of force. In keeping’with
the same
principle, the internationally
organized community also
bans economic, political and other forms of pressure,
that is, anything constituting the essence of intervention. In the principle of the non-use of force, the inviolability of the territory of States is an essential element.
In accordance with the same principle, States must
refrain not only from the threat or use of force but also
from violating existing borders as a means of settling
their international disputes.

may be the right time for the Council to stop this armed
conflict between Iran and Iraq and promote the solutions advocated from time to time by the very protagonists in this regrettable situation. The Movement of NonAligned Countries and ‘the Organization of the Islamic
Conference have also taken important initiatives aimed
at restoring peace to the region.
., /. .’
2’.
30. Furthermore, the recent events have violated the
principle of free navigation and the free passage of
commerce, with grave consequences for world economic stability and repercussions elsewhere for the
supplies of many Member
.bf States.
3 1. Finally, there is an unacceptable situation of recourse to coercive action clearly constituting the use
and threat of the use’of force, aiming to extend the
conflict to other countries in the region, with a clear
threat to their territorial integrity.

27. For Ecuador in particular and for Latin America
in general, the principle of the non-use of force and that
of the legal coexistence of States are one and the same.
The principle of the non-use of force is directly related
to the obligation under the Charter to settle intemational disputes by peaceful means. Therefore membership in the United Nations implies .a commitment
to
refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State
and also implies a commitment
to practice tolerance
and to live in peace with one’s neighbours.

32. For this reason;‘the delegation of Ecuador has
come to the Council to express its earnest hope that we
shall see prevail the spirit of the peaceful settlement of
disputes, the wisdom to implement international
law
and the need to show’ in critical situations, such as
the one before us;. the effectiveness of the institutions created by the international
community,
which
has placed its hopes in the Council, the best instrument
of law to preserve or.restore peace.

28. As for Latin America, in the Declaration and Plan
of Action recently adopted by consensus at the Latin
American Economic Conference, held at Quito on
12 and 13 January 1984, the heads of State or representatives of the Latin American and Caribbean countries
reaffirmed the principle of the equality and solidarity of
peoples wishing to live within the framework of democratic principles, as well as the full exercise of human
rights and the benefits of progress for all inhabitants, in
an atmosphere free from external pressure, threats and
aggression. In particular, the participants of that conference stated the following in article 2 of the Declaration:

33. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make h-is statement.
34.

Mr. BIRIDO

(Sudan) [interpretation
from Aruto extend to you and the
other members of the Council our sincere thanks for
giving my delegation the opportunity
to participate
in the Council’s deliberations
on the item under discussion.
Kc]: Allow me, Mr. President,

35. I also extend to you warm congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are confident that your long diplomatic and
political experience, for which you are well know, will
enable you to guide the Council’s work to the success
that we all seek and for which the whole international
community yearns.

“We reiterate our commitment
to eliminate once
and for all any recourse to the threat or the use of
force in the solution of international
conflicts. We
once again call for disarmament
that wiIl make it
possible to reallocate the resources squandered ,on
the arms race and armaments towards objectives
which contribute to strengthening the development
of all the peoples of the world. There is an essential
link between the problems of peace and of development, since without peace, development will be unattainable, and without development,
peace will always be precarious.“’

36. I also take this opportunity to extend thanks to
your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets, representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, for
his skill and competence during his presidency of the
Council in April.

29. The present case, which has regrettable and dangerous aspects, and the continuation of which could
endanger the maintenance of international
peace and
security, is all the more complex because it is taking
place in a region which has been the scene of a continuing cruel state of war, which must be ended. This

37. Having heard all the comprehensive
and clear
statements from the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information
of Kuwait,
the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Qatar and
other speakers, I ‘need not dwell at length on the grave
action taken by Iran in committing
aggression against
4

oil-tankers of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
State of Kuwait. What increases our concern is the fact
that this unwarranted aggression took place in the
territorial waters of the States of the Gulf Co-operation
Council and outside the theatre of operations of a regrettable war which has entered its fourth year.
38. The Iranian act of aggression against the Kuwaiti
and Saudi Arabian oil-tankers clearly threatens the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the States of the region. It is also a flagrant threat to
the freedom of navigation in international waters and
waterways leading to and from.the ports of all the Gulf
coastal States. We also feel that this aggression is a
violation of the principles of international law and the
provisions of the Convention on the High Seas of 1958,
which places freedom of navigation at the forefront of
the freedoms enjoyed by all States; the provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
1982;3 the regional conventions concluded by the States
of the region; and other international
conventions in
this regard.
.’
39. The complaint lodged with the Council by six of
the Member States which are known for their respect
for the principles of good-neighbourliness
and their
commitment
to the objectives of the Charter and of
other regional and international organizations to which
they belong, clearly reflects the deteriorating situation
in that sensitive region as a result of the recent Iranian
act of aggression against Saudi Arabian and .Kuwaiti
ships. Such an act could lead to widening the scope of
the war and threatening the peace and stability of the
States of the region and the whole world, involving
those States in the rivalry and contention of the major
Powers, and destabilizing the international economy as
well as obstructing the efforts of developing countries
towards construction, progress and development.
40. The Sudan has stated on several occasions in the
Council and in other forums that the bleak picture that
characterizes the current international
situation requires all Member States to consolidate policies of
peace and good-neighbourliness
and to honour their
commitments
under the Charter on the non-use or
threat of the use of force in international
relations
against the territorial integrity and political independence of any State.
.‘.
41. It is regrettable that the acts of aggression against
ships of two Member States run counter to the aims and
objectives of the international
community in that region, especially the conditions which it is striving to
bring about among neighbouring States, such as Iran
and its neighbours, which are bound by many links of
religion, culture and history. Such links should have
promoted relations of good-neighbourliness
and mutual
respect for sovereignty, independence and non-intervention in the internal affairs of these States. These
links should have been a firm foundation for fruitful cc&.
operation in all fields, including the harnessing of all
their potential and resources in the interest of progress

and development and in the confrontation of the genuinely fateful threats to the region and to the aspirations
of its peoples.
42. This incident has once more highlighted the need
for the Council to assume its responsibility to condemn
and put an end to this aggression in view of its potentially destabilizing threat to the peace and security of
the region and to the legitimate interests of its States
and of the entire world. Moreover, the Council should
also ensure against a repetition of such acts of aggression against ships sailing to and from the ports of States
not parties to the hostilities, thus safeguarding freedom
of navigation in the region. To that end, the Council is
duty-bound to adopt effective measures required by the
situation, by calling upon Iran to desist from aggression, to respect the sovereignty of the States of the
region, their territorial integrity, their waterways, ports
and economic installations,
to fulfil the obligations of
good-neighbourliness
and, to comply with the principles;
of the Charter
and international
law.
s_:
.I,
43. We reaflirm our belief that the only way to end
once and for all the Iran-Iraq conflict is through dialogue and objective negotiation within the framework
‘.
of international
norms of law and legitimacy.
44. It is regrettable that the efforts of the international
community,
represented by the Council, and those’of
the Movement of ‘Non-Aligned
Countries, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and the initiatives
of the Gulf States themselves have not led to the cessation of the bloodshed and hostilities that have claimed
the lives of thousands of victims in two neighbouring
States.
45. ,Hence we feel that this act of aggression once
again highlights the need for the Council to assume its
responsibility to intensify its efforts at putting an end to
this war and restoring peace and security to the States
._
of the region and to the entire world.
46. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
&m&j:
The next speaker ‘is the representative
of Panama.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
47. Mr. KAM (Panama) [interpretation
from Spanish]: I am sincerely pleased, Sir, to return to the Security Council table under your presidency of this important body. It was my personal privilege to share with
you the work of the Council in 1981 and 1982, and I was
an eyewitness to your great experience,’ well-known
diplomatic skill and sober judgement. I am convinced
that under your leadership the Council will demonstrate
restraint and a spirit ofjustice as it resolves the difficult
issues on its agenda.
48. I would like to convey my delegation’s congratulations to Mr. Vladimir Kravets, representative of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic on his outstanding
job as the President of the Council in April.
49. *. Panama deplored the Iran-Iraq conflict from its
very inception and unequivocally
supported a just,
peaceful and honourable settlement for both sides. As

members of the Council in 1981and 1982, we supported
the resolutions unanimously adopted by the Council to
put an end to that fratricidal war. We have consistently supported the decisions of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and the resolutions of the General
Assembly aimed at the same goal. We have also supported the peace efforts of the Secretary-General and
those of his Special Representative, Mr. Olof Palme,
the Prime Minister of Sweden.
50. Panama’s position on this conflict has been consistent with our record as a peace-loving country that
promotes international co-operation and unswervingly
advocates the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
51. For this reason, we cannot help feeling indignant
and outraged over the fact that ships flying the Panamanian flag have been victims of armed attacks in the
Gulf region.
52. The international press has reported these events
in recent days following the sinking of the Panamanian
freighter Fidelity which resulted in the death of a number of its crew members.
53. However, I should like to draw to the attention of
the Council that armed attacks on vessels flying the
Panamanian flag in the Gulf region go back to May of
1981. On 21May 1981, the Panamanian freighter Louis Z
was attacked. Subsequently, on 11 January 1982, an
attack on the freighter Success set it ablaze, requiring
abandonment. On 15 May 1983, the Panamanian oiltanker Pun Oceanic caught fire as a result of an air
attack. On 25 May 1983, the Panamanian vessel Seazruns was damaged as a result of an air attack.
54. In more recent weeks, the renewed outbreak of
hostilities between Iran and Iraq has also brought with
it an intensification of attacks which, unjustifiably,
have been repeated against Panamanian vessels. On.
18 April of this year, the tanker Rover Star was
damaged in an air attack. On 14 May, the Panamanian
oil-tanker Esperunzu ZZcaught fire in another air attack.
Today, the international news press agencies have reported further attacks on vessels flying the Panamanian
flag.
55. However, as we denounce these facts, we do not
wish to get involved in the sterile exercise of recriminations, nor do we wish to level any accusations against
either side. We are advocates of positive solutions
-solutions which preserve our rights and interests as
the country with the world’s fourth largest merchant
fleet.
56. We denounce these incidents in the Security
Council because we feel that this body, charged with
maintaining international peace and security, cannot
remain indifferent to these renewed attacks on Panamanian vessels devoted to peaceful trade.
57. My country makes an urgent appeal to the parties
to the conflict to refrain from further hostile acts against
Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

Panamanian vessels and to respect and implement scrupulously the principles of international law enshrining
the principle of freedom of navigation and guaranteeing
innocent passage for merchant vessels.
58. We also appeal to both sides to abide by the fundamental norms of humanitarian international law,
which oblige respect for civilian objectives and protection for the lives and physical well-being of those not
participating in hostilities-and this would certainly
apply to Panamanian vessels and their crews.
59. We must emphatically declare that Panama is not
at war with anyone, nor is it party to any armed conflict.
Our merchant marine occupies a prominent position in
the world maritime community; it has not been, it is not,
nor wiIl it be an instrument of war. It is an unparalleled
vehicle for peace and international co-operation and
is engaged in peaceful commerce and economic trade
among nations. Consequently, we demand that all parties show respect for our vessels, consistent with their
status.
60. My delegation urges the Council to carry out its
functions under the Charter and to take action to ensure
that there should be no recurrence of attacks against
Panamanian vessels or against ships of countries not
party to the conflict. Similarly, we call on the Council to
take action to ensure that the right of free navigation
and trade in international waters may be effectively
exercised by my country and all other countries.
61. We call on the parties immediately to cease all
hostilities in the Gulf region, including all maritime
corridors, navigable waterways, port facilities, terminals, off-shore structures and all ports with direct or
indirect access to the sea.
62. We urge Iran and Iraq to refrain from intensifying
the armed conflict which has already caused so much
destruction and death. We urge them to set aside the
use of force and to embark on the path of the peaceful
settlement of their dispute through dialogue and negotiation. That is certainly the only path to a just and
lasting peace.
63. Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate its faith
in United Nations actions, particularly in the action of
the Security Council, of which we have had the honour
to be a member on many occasions. Panama is a small.
country, possessingno force other than the moral force
deriving from our unwavering support for the principles, objectives and purposes of the Charter, to which
we have recourse today.
The meeting

rose at 4.45 p.m.

’

NOTES
I See A/39/118-E/1984/45,
annex.
* See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 450, No. 6465.
3 Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea, vol. XVII, document A/CONF.62/122.
90-61313-January1993-2,050
