A/63/PV.66

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

66

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 10 December 2008, 4.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Wolfe
(Jamaica), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 4.30 p.m.
Agenda item 58 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/435)
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Third Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Given that the
65th plenary meeting has been suspended to enable the
Assembly to take action on the report of the
Committee, I would like to propose that explanations
of vote on the recommendation of the Committee
contained in document A/63/435, if any, be made
during the consideration of other reports of the Third
Committee. If I hear no objection, it is so decided.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: We are celebrating the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, one of the greatest achievements of this
Organization. It endowed humanity with a consistent,
coherent, universal, sole body of human rights. History
came to divide this sole body, resulting in greater focus

on civil and political rights to the detriment of
economic, social and cultural rights.
That is not to say that we are satisfied with the
level of attention paid to civil and political rights.
Quite the contrary, it is our belief that all of us, States
Members of the United Nations, must dedicate much
greater efforts to fulfil our obligations to protect,
promote, respect and fully realize all human rights for
all, without discrimination of any kind. But, as we all
agreed 15 years ago in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, all human rights are universal,
indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and must be
treated in an equal manner, on the same footing, and
with the same emphasis. In practice, that means that
realizing economic, social and cultural rights is
fundamental to promoting, protecting and respecting
civil and political rights, and vice versa. Hence, paying
less attention to some human rights is detrimental not
only to those particular human rights, but to all human
rights.
By adopting this draft optional protocol, the
General Assembly will break down the walls of
division that history built and will unite once again
what the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
proclaimed as a sole body of human rights 60 years
ago. It will finally provide at the international level the
same degree of protection to economic, social and
cultural rights that has existed for civil and political
rights since 1976. And it will do justice to the goals of
the founders of this Organization, which were to ensure
for all freedom from fear and freedom from want.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-64061 (E)

*0864061*

A/63/PV.66

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as that used in the Third Committee.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 11
of its report. The Assembly will now take action on the
draft resolution, entitled “Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights”. The Third Committee adopted the
draft resolution. May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to do likewise?

2

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/117).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 58.
Members are reminded that the 65th plenary
meeting of the General Assembly will resume
immediately.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

08-64061
