A/72/269*–S/2017/780

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
1 August 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-second session
Item 67 (b) of the provisional agenda**
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support

Security Council
Seventy-second year

Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
In the present report, submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
71/315, progress made since the submission of the report of the Secretary -General on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/65/152-S/2010/526) is reviewed.
The present report covers the period from July 2016 to June 2017 and
highlights major developments regarding peace and security a nd its interlinkage with
sustainable development in Africa. Progress made by the United Nations system in
implementing key priority areas identified in the review report is examined, as well
as the support the Organization has been providing in the impleme ntation of peace
and security priorities contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
Consistent with the mandate of resolution 71/315 to develop policy proposals
on persistent and emerging challenges confronting Africa, the role of regional
organizations and their regional and international partners in sustaining peace in
Africa, including the United Nations, as reflected in the Joint U nited Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in April
2017, is discussed in the present report. The importance of conflict prevention and
the critical need to address the root causes of conflict in order t o achieve sustainable
peace are also highlighted. It is recommended, among other things, that the
international community, including the United Nations, further strengthen political,
substantive, institutional and financial cooperation with African regiona l and
subregional organizations as first responders to conflicts on the African continent in
their quest to sustain peace.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 15 September 2017.
** A/72/150.

17-13183* (E)

150917

*1713183*

A/72/269
S/2017/780

I. Introduction
1.
In 1998, following a request from the Security Council ( S/PRST/1997/46), the
Secretary-General undertook a comprehensive analysis of the causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. In the
subsequent report, he proposed specific measures to prevent, mitigate and r educe
conflict, achieve peace and promote sustainable development on the African
continent (see A/52/871-S/1998/318).
2.
In its resolution 63/304, the General Assembly requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report reviewing the status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the 1998 report. Following broad -based consultations
coordinated by the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, including wi th the
United Nations system through the Interdepartmental Task Force on African Affairs,
the Secretary-General submitted to the Assembly a review report (A/65/152S/2010/526) outlining progress, recommendations and proposals for a renewed
engagement with Africa.
3.
In that report, it was highlighted that the United Nations system must establish
the appropriate partnerships to enhance the capacity of African regional
organizations as leading actors in the areas of peace and development on the
continent. The African Union, in the solemn declaration adopted in 2013 on the
occasion of its fiftieth anniversary, pledged not to bequeath the burden of conflicts
to the next generation of Africans, and has been implementing the African Peace
and Security Architecture. Furthermore, the concept of sustaining peace, including
conflict prevention and post-conflict recovery, introduced in the report of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(A/69/968-S/2015/490), confirms the interdependence of durable peace and
sustainable development and the importance of promoting both sustaining peace and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
4.
Against that background, the present report, prepared in consultation with the
Interdepartmental Task Force on African Affairs, chaired by the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa, provides an update on major peace and security
developments in Africa (section II) and takes stock of key actions and initiatives
undertaken by the United Nations from July 2016 to June 2017 to implement the
recommendations of the review report (section III). The role of regional and
subregional organizations in sustaining peace in Africa (section IV), as well as
recommendations to enhance their role and their partnership with the international
community, including the United Nations (section V), are also discussed in the
present report.

II. Year in review
5.
During the reporting period, Africa continued to make strong strides towards
development, prosperity and peace. In line with the fourth aspiration of Agenda
2063, “a peaceful and secure Africa”, the African Union made the ground -breaking
decision in July 2016 to institute and implement a levy of 0.2 per cent on eligible
goods imported into Africa. The levy is intended to endow the Peace Fund of the
African Union with an estimated $400 million by 2020 with the aim of, among other
things, providing reliable and predictable funding for peace and security and
securing an equitable and predictable source of financing for the African Union,
thus contributing to the establishment of the financial autonomy of the African
Peace and Security Architecture. The decision was welcome d by the Security
Council in its resolution 2320 (2016). The African Union, under the leadership of
2/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, also initiated an institutional reform process
to transform the organization into a self-reliant continental body by 2018.
6.
Member States of the African Union have devoted the year 2017 to harnessing
the demographic dividend through investments in youth. In line with Security
Council resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security, in which the Council
stressed the importance of creating policies on the engagement and participation of
youth in political and peace processes, the African Union produced a road map in
which it highlighted the need to invest in inclusive, representative and participatory
political processes, under the pillar of rights, governance and youth empowerment.
In January 2017, the African Union also endorsed a “master road map of practical
steps to silence the guns in Africa by the year 2020”, which provides practical
guidance to African countries, regional organizations and other partners in their
efforts to promote peace and security on the continent.
7.
With regard to governance, the African Peer Review Mechanism continued its
revitalization process. In August 2016, various decisions and recommendations
strengthening the human, financial and institutional capacity of the Mechanism were
adopted at the African Peer Review Forum. Furthermore, in January 2017, African
Union leaders expanded the mandate of the Mechanism in its monitoring and
evaluation role for both the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063.
8.
Overall, African countries achieved further economic growth, while at the
same time addressing the root causes of conflicts, preventing and managing them,
and in so doing, fighting against violent extremism and terrorism. Key economic
achievements are outlined in the report of the Secretary-General on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) (A/72/223).
9.
During the reporting period, seven presidential elections held in Africa saw the
re-election of the Head of State in Cabo Verde, Gabon and Zambia and the transfer
of power to another President in the Gambia, Ghana, Sao Tome and Principe and
Somalia. Most of the presidential elections were conducted in an inclusive,
transparent and peaceful manner, whereas a few other election results still posed
challenges, adversely affecting political stability and socioeconomic development.
10. In the Gambia, the outgoing President rejected the results of the presidential
election of December 2016, which increased political tensions in the country. In
subsequent weeks, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the African Union and the international community, including the United Nations,
undertook intensive negotiations leading to acceptance by the President to leave the
country in January 2017, averting a military intervention by ECOWAS. The Spe cial
Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel engaged with
all stakeholders concerned to help to resolve the crisis in the Gambia peacefully.
11. In Gabon, tensions remained high between the Government and opposition
following the contested presidential election of August 2016. A Government -led
national dialogue was launched amid a lingering crisis. Concerns raised by the
opposition on the outcome of the dialogue further complicated reconciliation efforts
and increased the risk of further violence. The United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) remained actively engaged throughout the electoral crisis.
12. In the Central African Republic, progress in the political and security situation
had mixed results. The Government has sought to drive reforms, re-establish key
institutions and advance the dialogue process with all armed groups. The
international community continued to provide critical support to the Government,
including in the form of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, led by
the African Union with support from the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the
17-13183

3/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

Congo, Chad and Angola. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic also acted robustly to deter
violence, protect civilians, support democratic institutions and foster political
dialogue. The Mission will, through the Special Representative of the Secretary General for the Central African Republic and Head of the Mission, continue to
support national authorities in fostering peace and security, while UNOCA will
advocate for constructive engagement to end the crisis at the subregional level.
13. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, political tensions rose as the second
term of the President ended in December 2016. An interim solution was provided
through a political agreement under the auspices of the Episcopal Conference of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in December 2016. The implementation of the
agreement, however, has encountered numerous setbacks as a result of insufficient
delivery on commitments and weaknesses in the organization of some political
opposition actors. For instance, circumstances surro unding the signing of a special
arrangement for the implementation of the agreement, the designation of a new
Prime Minister and the formation of a new Government of national unity were
denounced by parts of the opposition and increased political uncertain ty.
Meanwhile, armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and militias
in the Kasai regions continued to spread violence. The killing of two United Nations
experts who had been conducting a Security Council-mandated investigation is now
under investigation, while the Human Rights Council has established a commission
of inquiry to look into broader allegations of violence. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes region remained fully engaged in supporting efforts to foster peace,
security and development.
14. Somalia completed the transition to a bicameral federal parliament in which
almost 25 per cent of the parliamentarians are women. Eighteen per cent of the
parliamentarians are under the age of 35, while around half of those elected are new
members. The parliament elected a new Federal President in February 2017. The
seamless transition of power and swift formation of a new Government renewed
momentum in advancing peacebuilding priorities. In March 2017, the Secretary General visited Mogadishu and Baidoa in his first official field visit. He expressed
his solidarity with the Somali people and praised their efforts towards the successful
organization of presidential elections, despite the famine crisis caused by drought to
which the Government had to respond with the assistance of United Nations system
agencies and non-governmental organizations.
15. On the security front, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
continued its fight against Al-Shabaab. As AMISOM reaches the tenth anniversary
of its deployment in 2017, the building of Somali security institutions has become
an urgent priority. In the past few months, consensus has emerged on a conditions based transition from AMISOM to Somali security forces to allow for the
establishment of a capable security sector.
16. There had been minimal progress towards implementing the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. In December 2016, the
President of South Sudan announced the launch of a national dialogue initiative as a
top priority for 2017. In view of continuing military offensives against opposition
strongholds throughout the year, the announcement was received with considerable
scepticism by opposition parties, civil society and faith -based organizations and still
lacks credibility even after the swearing-in of an enlarged steering committee in
May 2017.

4/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

17. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan continued to try to enhance the
protection of civilians while facing considerable obstruction from government
forces in conducting its operations. Although the alert of risk of famine in some
areas has been lifted, 7.8 million people in South Sudan remain in need of
humanitarian assistance. Military offensives and high levels of food insecurity have
displaced more than 3.8 million people, making it the world’s fastest-growing
refugee crisis. The African Union High Representative for South Sudan and
representatives of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
continue to be supported by the United Nations to promote a national dialogue and
implement the peace agreement.
18. There was little progress during the reporting period with regard to efforts to
improve and address outstanding post-secession issues between the Sudan and
South Sudan. Progress has been lacking, in particular in the implementation of nine
agreements signed between the two Governments on 27 September 2012. Despite
continued engagement by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
supported by the United Nations, no major progress has been a chieved on temporary
arrangements in the Abyei area or its final status.
19. Darfur has seen a considerable reduction in fighting between government
forces and armed groups not party to a peace agreement. However, violent
intercommunal disputes and widespread crime involving armed militias continue to
generate insecurity and prolong large-scale displacement. The existing peace
agreement has not been implemented fully, and negotiations with the
non-signatories have stalled. The reconfiguration of the Africa n Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is under way to reduce its footprint and focus
on the protection of civilians and stabilization efforts.
20. In Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office and
other international partners supported the ECOWAS-led mediation, which brokered
a six-point road map, agreed on 10 September 2016, and the Conakry Agreement of
14 October 2016. ECOWAS prepared a viable way out of the crisis, but national
actors have yet to take concrete steps towards the appointment of a consensual
Prime Minister and the formation of an inclusive government. In June 2017, at a
summit held in Monrovia, ECOWAS Heads of State and Government gave the
parties to the conflict a further three months to break the politic al deadlock and
extended the mandate of the ECOWAS security mission in Guinea -Bissau until the
end of September 2017.
21. In Burundi, two years since the crisis began, the impasse has further deepened
and the political space has narrowed. Despite some imp rovements in the security
situation, killings, disappearances, arbitrary detentions, forced abductions and
paramilitary activities of the Imbonerakure, the youth wing of the ruling party, are
reportedly continuing under the current Government and its secur ity forces. As a
result, the economic development and humanitarian situations have severely
deteriorated and a steady stream of refugees have fled to countries in the region. In
that context, a United Nations police component mandated by the Security Counc il
will be deployed. Meanwhile, regional efforts under the auspices of the East African
Community continue to promote inclusive political dialogue.
22. Terrorism and violent extremism remains a major peace and security threat in
Africa. Civilian populations, including women and children, and security forces in
countries of the Lake Chad Basin (Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria),
Burkina Faso and Mali continue to be the target of terrorist attacks. In the most affected areas, particularly in north-east Nigeria, more than 2.5 million people have
become internally displaced persons, refugees or returnees.

17-13183

5/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

23. The Multinational Joint Task Force, established by members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and Benin, made tremendous efforts in dislodging Boko Haram
from its previous strongholds. In February 2017, a renewed support implementation
agreement and a memorandum of understanding between the African Un ion
Commission and Task Force troop-contributing countries were signed with the
support of the United Nations Office to the African Union. A similar regional
initiative by Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger in deploying a
joint force for the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which aims to address
violent extremism and transnational organized crime in the Sahel, was authorized by
the Security Council in its resolution 2359 (2017). Serious human rights concerns
continue to be reported in the context of the fight against Boko Haram, including
executions and arbitrary detentions; those concerns will need to be urgently
addressed by the Member States concerned.
24. In Libya, the situation remains tense and the transition process has not been
fully implemented as parallel institutions continue to exist. The loss of control by
the central governing institutions led to numerous non -State extremist groups
gaining de facto control over some areas, which translated into increased illicit
trafficking activities. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya continues to
implement its mandate linked to the implementation of the Libyan Political
Agreement.
25. In Mali, there were some positive developments, with the implementation of
the peace agreement, including the establishment of interim authorities in each of
the five northern regions, the holding of a conference for national harmony and the
launch of a constitutional review process. However, key institutional and political
reforms specified in the peace agreement remain pending. Persistent delays in its
implementation have hampered the redeployment of the Malian defence and
security forces and the re-establishment of State authority in the north and centre of
the country. Against that background, insecurity continues to spread into central and
southern Mali as well as at its borders.
Enhanced focus on the nexus between peace and development
26. In January 2017, at the high-level dialogue convened by the President of the
General Assembly on the theme “Building sustainable peace for all: synergies
between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and sustaining peace”,
mutually reinforcing linkages between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and sustaining peace were discussed. The 2030 Agenda and Agenda
2063 both underline the importance of the nexus between peace and development
and promote a comprehensive approach to advance sustainable development and
achieve durable peace.
27. On 19 April 2017, the Secretary-General convened the first United NationsAfrican Union annual conference at United Nations Headquarters with the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission. During the Conference, the need to
promote synergies and complementarity between the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063
and the fact that both agendas take a holistic and integrated approach to the
important nexus between peace and development and to good governance was
agreed on.
28. To enhance the peace and development nexus at the intergovernmental level,
in June 2017 the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat and
the Peacebuilding Support Office organized a joint meeting of the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission on the situatio n in the Sahel.
Participants in the meeting stressed the need to avoid a disproportionate emphasis

6/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

on security and to address the root causes of conflict that pertain to the social,
economic and environmental areas.

III. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the
review report
29. The present section highlights recent initiatives and actions undertaken by the
United Nations system to implement recommendations contained in the
comprehensive review report (A/65/152-S/2010/526).

A.

Institutional cooperation
30. In December 2016, the General Assembly adopted resolution 71/254 on the
Framework for a Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s
Integration and Development Agenda 2017-2027. The partnership provides an
overall platform for United Nations-African Union cooperation through the
Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa, which will enable the United Nations
system to deliver comprehensive programmes of support to the African Union and
regional economic communities with the effective, coherent and coordinated
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda.
31. During the first United Nations-African Union annual conference, the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission signed the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security. The Framework is aimed at strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union through a more strategic, systematic
and predictable partnership based on their respective comparative advantages and
complementarity in peace and security, and at increasing coordination and
operational synergies in addressing security challenges in Africa throughout the
conflict cycle.
32. In October 2016, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa co -organized with
the Economic Commission for Africa and the Department of Public Information the
2016 Africa Week, on the theme “Strengthening partnerships for inclusive
sustainable development, good governance, and peace and stability”. The week -long
high-level events were organized in collaboration with the African Union, the
NEPAD Planning and Coordination Agency, the African Peer Review Mechanism,
regional economic communities and members of the Interdepartmental Task Force
on African Affairs. The week provided an effective and inclusive global platform for
fostering sustainable development in Africa through strengthened partnerships.

B.

Conflict prevention, peacekeeping and conflict management
33. On the basis of their respective mandates, entities of the United Nations
system continued to provide support in addressing conflict in Africa. To re-establish
intercommunal dialogue around land use, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO) established a community-based animal health service in
the disputed Abyei Administrative Area between the Sudan and South Sudan. This
livelihoods project was focused on promoting social stability among the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities. It is being expanded to other border areas of
South Sudan and its neighbouring countries.
34. A new joint programme on gender, natural resources and peacebuilding has
been established by the United Nations Environment Programme, the United

17-13183

7/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

Nations Development Programme, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women).
The initial pilot project has begun in North Kordofan. The Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action of UN -Women
mobilized $6.7 million in its first year. In Burundi, women media tors, supported by
the Instrument, remained a powerful force for conflict resolution, with over 600,000
people participating in local-level dialogues.
35. With regard to conflict prevention related to resource management, an African
intergovernmental initiative on sustainability, stability and security, launched at the
twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Marrakech, Morocco, in
November 2016, is aimed at, among other things, preventing the emerging threats
on natural resource depletion and mismanagement. The secretariat of the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa , acts as the secretariat
of the task force for the initiative.
36. With regard to prevention aspects related to child protection from violence, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
has developed an action plan to end and prevent child recruitment and use and to
prevent sexual violence against children, signed with the Coordination des
mouvements de l`Azawad in Mali, and an action plan to end and prevent child
recruitment and use in the Sudan, signed with the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North.

C.

Post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery
37. The United Nations system provided focused policy and project support to
assist African countries with post-conflict recovery. In Mali, the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) supported an “education for peace” project involving
355 schoolchildren in Timbuktu. A total of 495 other children were trained as “back to-school ambassadors” to sensitize their own community through interpersonal
communication and discussions around peace and social cohesion. Through
community dialogues and radio programmes aimed at providing youth with the right
tools to promote peace and understanding, the children contributed to disseminating
their knowledge and influencing 325,000 parents on the importance of peace,
cohesion and stability. The International Labour Organization promoted decent work
as a tool for peacebuilding and resilience in Africa through the Labour Market
Statistics and Analysis Academy, organized from 24 October to 4 November 2016 in
Côte d’Ivoire.
38. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), in the
Economic Development in Africa Report 2017, highlights that tourism has the
potential to reduce the risk of conflicts, enhance peace through employment creation
and promote socioeconomic development. The United Nations University Maastricht Economic and Social Research Institute on Innovation and Technology
assessed the unconditional cash-based assistance programme in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and ascertained the programme’s positive influence on
household investments in livestock, increased school enrolment and improved
resilience.

8/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

D.

Sustained economic growth and sustainable development
39. To promote Africa’s socioeconomic development and resilience to address the
root causes of conflict, the United Nations system continued to provide a wide range
of support. The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa and UNCTAD co -organized
a high-level meeting on tourism and sustainable development in Africa in
collaboration with the World Tourism Organization in July 2016. The meeting
provided a unique platform for stakeholders in the tourism sector to discuss their
contributions to Africa’s achievement of the Sustainable Development Goal s. The
Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States provided global
platforms for knowledge-sharing on the implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 (Istanbul Programme
of Action) in Africa by organizing meetings on sustainable energy in Dar es Salaam,
United Republic of Tanzania, in December 2016 and on broadband connectivity in
Dakar in February 2017.
40. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat provided
advisory services to Guinea to develop e-governance in the country’s sustainable
development strategies and to bolster institutional and human resources to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. In South Sudan, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, in cooperation with Canada, implemented an
$11 million project supporting fishing communities and industries, aimed at
improving food security, creating jobs and sustaining the fisheries sector. The
International Fund for Agricultural Development has been collaborating with
NEPAD under the Initiative for Food and Nutrition Security in Africa to support the
delivery of effective multisectoral nutrition interventions by Go vernments.

E.

Human rights and humanitarian affairs
41. Following decisions made at the World Humanitarian Summit, the United
Nations country team in Nigeria, led by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, developed a joint vision and a “critical path” towards a
coordinated platform for the delivery of humanitarian and development assistance in
the north-eastern area of the country, transcending the humanitarian-development
divide in line with the new way of working.
42. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is
providing technical, financial and human resources support to, among other things,
the development of the 10-year action plan of the African decade of human rights
(2016-2026) that will be submitted for adoption at the African Union summit in
January 2018. The action plan is a continental action -oriented blueprint to advance
the human rights agenda. Support and collaboration is also ongoing between the
United Nations and the African Union with regard to the implementation of the
United Nations human rights due diligence policy in joint action by the two
organizations.

F.

Governance, rule of law and the administration of justice
43. On the margins of the sixth Tokyo International Conference on Af rican
Development Summit, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, together with the
Government of Kenya, the African Union and the African Peer Review Mechanism
secretariat, convened a high-level event on support by the Tokyo International
Conference for good governance in Africa. The event advocated for the Conference

17-13183

9/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

process to provide technological and financial support to the Mechanism and for the
operationalization of the proposed African human security index, as outlined in
Agenda 2063.
44. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
and UN-Women provided support to State authorities in Mali to restore the rule of
law, improve women’s access to justice and fight impunity. They also supported the
Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission in Mali on gender and transitional
justice. The International Maritime Organization is working with the Federal
Government of Somalia and Somali regional authorities to re -establish a maritime
administration, including the updating of the country’s maritime code and associated
legal and organizational frameworks.

G.

Women’s empowerment and gender equality in peace and security
45. FAO continued to work on issues related to food security and agriculture,
which include gender equality, women’s empowerment and protection from gender based violence. For example, FAO-Dimitra Clubs, which represent a signature
gender-sensitive approach for community-based participatory development, are
deployed across hundreds of rural communities in African countries.
46. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
been supporting the Special Rapporteur on the rights of women in Africa of the
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, as well as many initiatives o n
gender equality and women’s rights with the African Union Commission, in areas
such as gender and countering violent extremism and child, early and forced
marriage. The Office is also promoting the development of standard manuals on
human rights monitoring and incorporating human rights and gender perspectives in
the African Union election observation manual.

H.

Security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration
47. The United Nations Office to the African Union and the World Bank supported
the African Union in developing a programme proposal that gives strategic guidance
as it moves into the second phase of its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme (2017-2019). The proposals include the provision of
operational support to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration interventions,
the solidification of collaboration between the African Union, the United Nations
and the World Bank on the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, and the identification of strategic priority areas.
48. UNICEF supported the release of a total of 7,590 children associated with
armed forces and groups through official disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2016. Around 12,600 other children associated with or
suspected of association with armed forces and groups were released in the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Lake Chad Basin
countries and Mali.

10/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

I.

Combating the proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons
and transnational organized crime
49. The Office for Disarmament Affairs is contributing to the implementati on of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel through a three -year capacitybuilding project to combat illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
Additionally, within the context of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Office is providing training on small arms control to Lake Chad Basin
countries to prevent the diversion of weapons to non-State armed groups.

J.

Countering terrorism and violent extremism
50. Facing growing threats posed by terrorism and violent e xtremism, the United
Nations system provided reinforced support to Africa. The Office of Counter Terrorism is providing assistance through projects to promote a strategic approach
to capacity-building in the areas of border security and mitigating the fore ign
terrorist fighter phenomenon and kidnapping for ransom, among others. Support is
also being provided to Eastern, Central and Southern Africa to develop and
implement regional strategies in countering terrorism and violent extremism.
51. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continued to promote the
ratification and implementation of 19 international legal instruments on preventing
and combating terrorism. It also delivered technical assistance and training to
several countries of the Maghreb on counter-terrorism legislation and international
cooperation on criminal matters.

IV. Persistent and emerging challenges confronting Africa:
the role of regional and subregional organizations in
sustaining peace
52. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71/315, the present section highlights
persistent and emerging challenges facing Africa. As sustaining peace is one of the
most pressing of these issues, the present report is focused on the role of regi onal
and subregional organizations in achieving this goal. Since taking office early in
2017, the Secretary-General has shared his vision on prevention and sustaining
peace and has been vigorously promoting and advocating for this agenda.
53. In its report, the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture underlined the need for comprehensive approaches to
conflict and stressed that sustaining peace should be treated not only as a
post-conflict activity, but as a priority activity to be carried out during all stages of
the conflict cycle. It also highlighted the necessity of fostering inclusive national
ownership in sustaining peace and called for stronger partnerships with regional
organizations. These salient points were reflected in Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262 on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, both adopted on 27 April 2016.
54. In Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the essential role of
regional arrangements for the maintenance of international peace and security is
recognized. As regional organizations are closer to conflict zones, their proximity
often gives them a much deeper insight of the context and dynamics of conflicts in
the region. Regional organizations would have stronger incentives to resolve
conflict as it may easily spill over into neighbouring countries. W hile geographical

17-13183

11/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

proximity may create national interests that may not have a positive impact on
conflict resolution, proximity also reduces the cost of intervention.
55. In addition, the role of regional organizations in sustaining peace has become
increasingly critical, especially in the face of emerging cross -border threats such as
violent extremism, terrorism and transnational organized crime in the Lake Chad
Basin, the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, among other areas, as well as in several
post-conflict settings in African countries in which there is a relapse into conflict.
Furthermore, a few fragile and complex emergencies are still bedevilling Africa and
resisting all existing conflict management frameworks.

A.

Sustaining peace and creating an enabling environment for peace
in Africa: norms, policies and structures
56. In 2002, after the signing of its Constitutive Act, the African Union adopted
the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, following which the African Peace and Security Architecture was
established. The goal was to provide African solutions to African challenges on
peace and security matters. The main pillar of the Architecture is the Peace and
Security Council, supported by the Panel of the Wise, the Continental Early
Warning System, the African Standby Force and the Peace Fund. The Protocol sets
out various mechanisms to sustain peace, ranging from conflict prevention and
management to post-conflict recovery.
57. The eight regional economic communities and two regional mechanisms for
conflict prevention, management and resolution, which are the building blocks of
the African Union, have become essential components to achieving peace and
security in Africa. All eight regional economic communities have adopted protocols,
charters, treaties and strategies to prevent conflict and sustain peace. For example,
the Protocol relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security of ECOWAS, adopted in 1999,
complemented by the Supplementary Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance
of 2001 and the ECOWAS Conflict Prevention Framework of 2008, is arguably the
most comprehensive protocol of a regional economic community relating to peace
and security. ECOWAS has also established relevant institutions and programmes to
sustain peace.
58. The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
Agenda 2063 will help to address the root causes of conflict, including by
promoting equality, justice and good governance, fostering economic growth,
providing access to education and health services and equal opportunities, building
just and inclusive societies, empowering women and youth as agents of peace, and
leaving no one behind. In this respect, as implementing agents for Agenda 2063, the
regional economic communities play key roles in setting policies at the subregional
level, including by aligning their strategic plans with Agenda 2063, implementing
programmes such as the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa and
instituting regional monitoring and evaluation platforms.

1.

Sustaining peace
59. In accordance with Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262, sustaining peace encompasses: (a) activities aimed at
preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict, such as
preventive diplomacy, early warning activities and mediation, and also post-conflict
recovery and reconciliation to prevent a relapse into conflict; and (b) activities that
contribute to and create an environment conducive to peace and development by

12/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

addressing the root causes of conflict, including reconstruction, capacity-building
and resilience activities. These two categories of activities are intertwined and
mutually reinforcing, which reflects the importance of coherent, integrated and
comprehensive approaches. Also, the promotion of inclusive and strong institutions
may prevent conflict from erupting in a post-conflict country or a country that has
not experienced conflict but where risks exist.
(i)

Preventive diplomacy, mediation and early warning
60. Conflict prevention is essential to sustaining peace. The African Union has set
conflict prevention as a key strategic priority since it is more effective, averts
human suffering and costs far less in both human and financial terms than
responding to conflicts. In the African Peace and Security Ar chitecture, the Panel of
the Wise and the Continental Early Warning System are key mechanisms to prevent
conflicts. The Panel consists of five eminent persons who provide support to the
Peace and Security Council and the Chairperson of the African Union Co mmission
on preventive diplomacy. Since many regional economic communities have also
developed structures similar to the Panel of the Wise, in 2013 the African Union and
the regional economic communities established the Pan -African Network of the
Wise to promote coordination between actors involved in preventive diplomacy and
mediation.
61. Preventive efforts contributed to diffusing tensions in many situations in
Africa. For election-related conflicts, the African Union and the regional economic
communities have advanced prevention mechanisms, including pre-electoral
political missions and electoral observation and monitoring missions, for example,
in the successful engagement of ECOWAS, the African Union and the United
Nations in the peaceful presidential elections in Ghana in December 2016. At the
same time, the African Union Panel of the Wise often faces difficulties in
coordinating various preventive diplomacy processes as many separate yet often
overlapping initiatives of different panels, representati ves and envoys are designated
by the regional economic communities, the African Union and the United Nations to
try to address the same conflict situations.
62. The African Union developed the Continental Early Warning System, which
collects and analyses peace- and security-related information to advise the Peace
and Security Council through the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
Many regional economic communities have also established subregional early
warning systems. However, there continues to be a space for reinforcing
coordination between continental and subregional systems as well as among
subregional systems. Few early warnings are systematically integrated into
decision-making processes in a way that has consistently led to early response s. The
establishment of clear channels of communication on early warning reports to
decision-making bodies, including the Peace and Security Council, is essential, as
noted in the master road map of practical steps to silence the guns in Africa by the
year 2020 of the African Union.

(ii)

Post-conflict reconstruction
63. Post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding are crucial to sustaining peace
and preventing countries from relapsing into conflict. Some post -conflict
reconstruction activities, such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, are
designed directly to sustain peace, while other efforts, such as institution -building
and post-conflict reconciliation, serve to create an enabling environment for peace
and development. Post-conflict reconstruction also needs to address livelihood
opportunities across a variety of sectors to ensure that sustaining peace is viable.

17-13183

13/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

64. Within the framework of the African Union, the Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development Framework and the African Solidarity Initiative, which was
initiated for mobilizing resources for the Framework, provide a framework for the
design of post-conflict reconstruction activities. The African Union foresees the
adoption of regional post-conflict reconstruction and development policies in every
regional economic community. While the African Union has been implementing
various post-conflict reconstruction and development initiatives in post -conflict
countries such as the Central African Republic, Liberia and Guinea -Bissau, such
programmes, including the African Solidarity Initiative, face pers istent and serious
challenges in mobilizing financial resources to effectively implement recovery
projects.
65. At the subregional level, some regional economic communities have
successfully implemented post-conflict reconstruction and development
programmes, such as the IGAD training programme on security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in South Sudan and the trading for
peace programme of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa in the
Great Lakes region. Many regional economic communities have yet to develop their
post-conflict reconstruction and development frameworks and to reinforce their
implementation capacities. Additional challenges were noted in the African Peace
and Security Architecture road map for 2016-2020, such as the lack of a clear
definition of responsibilities of the African Union and the regional economic
communities, as well as the lack of regular exchanges among the communities.
2.

Creating an enabling environment for peace
66. Effective conflict prevention needs to address the root causes of conflict by
promoting sustainable socioeconomic development, good governance and respect
for human rights. The African Union has addressed the structural causes of conflict
in numerous key instruments. With regard to good governance and human rights, it
established the African Governance Architecture, which includes the African Peer
Review Mechanism, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights and
the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights. Agenda 2063 and its
implementing arm, the NEPAD Planning and Coordination Agency, has also been
pivotal in addressing socioeconomic development issues, including agriculture,
infrastructure, energy and power, and climate change.
67. The African Union also developed the Continental Structural Conflict
Prevention Framework, endorsed by the Peace and Security Council in 2015, to
strengthen its long-term prevention activities. It described the Framework and the
development of the country structural vulnerability assessment as a voluntary
process. These new tools will complement existing mechanisms, including the
African Peer Review Mechanism, to reduce the conflict vulnerability of member
States. It is also important to underline the need for conflict -sensitive approaches,
rooted in conflict analysis, when dealing with a fragile or post -conflict environment
on the basis of the principle of “do no harm”.
68. At the subregional level, the regional economic communities, as key pillars of
the African Governance Architecture, have been striving to promote good
governance and respect for human rights. Initiatives of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to promote democracy and good governance
include the adoption in 2004 of the Principles and Guidelines Gove rning
Democratic Elections. Since 2008, ECOWAS has had a conflict prevention
framework for promoting conflict prevention and human security, including
structural conflict prevention. In a recent review of the ECOWAS Conflict
Prevention Framework, however, it was noted that development partner support had
been heavily focused on operational conflict prevention activities, such as early

14/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

warning, while structural conflict prevention activities, such as youth empowerment
and natural resource governance, had received relatively little or no support.
69. The regional economic communities are vital to the promotion of inclusive
sustainable development. As they were initially established to facilitate subregional
economic integration, they have developed various instruments to that effect and
play a central role in promoting trade liberalization through the establishment of the
Continental Free Trade Area. In the long run, the efficiency gains caused by trade
liberalization are expected to lead to positive employment effects, including
improved youth employment. This therefore further contributes to the achievement
of sustainable development and the creation of an environment conducive to peace
and stability.
70. The African Union and the regional economic communitie s have been making
great strides in norm-setting and policy development for the creation of an
environment conducive to peace. However, the domestication and implementation
of these policies and frameworks at the national, subregional and regional levels
have not been executed speedily enough to effectively address the root causes of
conflict owing to limited political will, inadequate monitoring and financial and
technical constraints.

B.

Partnerships with subregional and regional organizations in
sustaining peace in Africa

1.

Political cooperation
71. Political cooperation between the regional economic communities, the African
Union and the United Nations enabled the successful resolution of political crises
following presidential elections, such as in Guinea in 2015 or in the Gambia in
December 2016. On those occasions, the responses of ECOWAS, the African Union
and the United Nations proved to be swift and decisive. The international
community spoke with one voice, including through joint communiqués. In Burundi
in 2015, when the President expressed his intention to run for a third term, there was
more difficulty in advancing peace because there was no political consensus among
the members of the East African Community, the African Union and the United
Nations. Ultimately, the lack of consensus contributed to prolonged political and
social instability in the country.
72. Coordination, coherence and complementarity of perspectives and responses to
conflict among subregional, regional and international institutions remain elusive.
In the case of cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, the
annual consultative meetings between members of the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council are therefore critical as they help both
organs to reach a shared vision on conflicts and challenges in Africa before key
decisions are made. In that regard, the role of the three non -permanent African
members of the Security Council has been growing in sharing Africa’s vision,
perspectives and common positions at Council meetings. Similar consultations
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the African Union Peace and Security
Council could also be enhanced to promote political cooperation, along with closer
coordination between the Peacebuilding Fund and the Post -Conflict Reconstruction
and Development Framework of the African Union. In that regard, the meeting held
in Addis Ababa in October 2016 between the members of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the African Union Peace and Security Council to discuss ways to
enhance cooperation was an important step.

17-13183

15/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

73. The necessity to promote political cooperation includes intracontinental
relationships between the African Union and the regional economic communities, as
well as among the communities. For example, the relationship between the African
Union and the communities is not fully defined in the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. As
underlined in the African Peace and Security Architecture road map, there is a need
to further promote dialogue between the Peace and Security Council and similar
organs of the regional economic communities. At the subregional level, although
overlap in areas of responsibility among regional economic communities sometimes
causes political tensions within the institutions concerned, there are good examples
of collaboration, such as between SADC and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region in their efforts to sustain peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
74. Lastly, some new regional peace and security initiatives have been developed
to address emerging regional threats, including the Multinational Joint Task Force to
fight against Boko Haram, the regional task force for the elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, and the joint force of the Group of Five for the Sahel to fight
violent extremism and terrorism in the Sahel region.
2.

Institutional cooperation
75. Institutional and technical cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union and regional economic communities, including through the United
Nations Office to the African Union, is vital to addressing peace and security
challenges. The Office provides timely, coherent and coordinated strategic,
operational and technical advice in prevention and mediation e fforts, as well as in
the planning and management of African Union peace support operations. Moving
forward, the implementation of the Joint United Nations -African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security is an important step towar ds
further strengthening the strategic partnership between the two organizations. The
Framework provides guidance for concerted decision-making as well as joint
strategy development and action to prevent and respond to conflicts and address
their root causes.
76. At the subregional level, the United Nations has steadily been developing its
institutional cooperation with the regional economic communities on peace and
security. UNOCA enhanced its partnership with ECCAS within the context of their
framework for cooperation and plan of action for 2017. The United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and ECOWAS are currently developing a joint
security sector reform and governance support programme to enhance capacity for
implementation and provide support to member States. The Department of Political
Affairs of the Secretariat has been reinforcing its partnership with IGAD on the
basis of a framework for cooperation, and with SADC through the establishment of
a liaison office in the SADC secretariat. Similarly, United Nations system agencies
also provide support to regional economic communities, including support from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to IGAD on
the regional solutions for Somali refugees and FAO assistance t o strengthen the
capacities of the IGAD Conflict Early Warning and Response Mechanism. At the
global level, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, through the organization of
annual briefings given by the regional economic communities to Member State s,
provides a platform to the communities for global advocacy.
77. Sustaining peace cannot be achieved through institutional cooperation in the
peace and security sector alone. Therefore, it is vital to reinforce comprehensive,
complementary, coherent and coordinated institutional cooperation on a wide range
of issues. Anchored in Agenda 2063, the partnership on Africa’s integration and

16/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

development agenda provides the overall platform for cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union through the Regional Coordination
Mechanism for Africa, enabling the United Nations system to better deliver
programmes of comprehensive support to the African Union as well as the regional
economic communities through subregional coordination mechanisms.
3.

Financial cooperation
78. African regional organizations have been instrumental in addressing emerging
peace and security threats, although they have been facing capacity gaps, including
limited staffing, deficiencies in equipment, inadequate logistics and , especially,
financial constraints. As identified in the African Peace and Security Architecture
road map, notwithstanding several decisions made in the establishment of the Peace
and Security Council, the African Union, regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms still encounter challenges in assuming financial ownership of
the Architecture and are highly dependent on bilateral and multilateral partners,
including the European Union through the African Peace Facility.
79. To overcome those challenges, the African Union decided to operationalize the
Peace Fund through a levy of 0.2 per cent on eligible imports to African countries.
The levy is intended to endow the Peace Fund with an estimated $400 million in
2020. If achieved, it would allow for the African Union to meet its own commitment
to finance 25 per cent of the cost of its own peace support operation.
80. Direct financial support was provided by the Peacebuilding Fund to the
African Union Commission to support African Union human rights observers in
Burundi in May 2016, a pioneering step forward in legal and financial cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union towards conflict prevention and
recovery. This catalytic funding ended in February 2017 following the decision b y
the European Union to support African Union observers in Burundi.
81. The aforementioned example proves that the international community,
including the United Nations, can provide reinforced financial support to
complement Africa’s efforts in sustaining peace. With regard to peace operations,
the Security Council, in its resolution 2320 (2016), expressed its readiness to
consider options in response to the African Union proposal to finance 25 per cent of
the cost of such operations by 2020. This represents significant progress in
advancing long-standing discussions between the two organizations on supporting
operations. The updates and proposals requested by the Council were submitted by
the Secretary-General in May 2017 (see S/2017/454) and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission in June 2017.

V. Conclusions and recommendations
82. The role of African regional and subregional organizations in sustaining peace
has become more vital than ever given the evolving security landscape and the
regional dynamics of conflict in Africa. Sustaining peace requires coherent,
comprehensive and integrated interventions by African Member States, regional and
subregional organizations and international partners. To prevent the eruption of
armed conflict, conflict prevention and risk mitigation through early warning are
crucial to address the root causes of conflict, particularly in fragile countries and
post-conflict situations.
83. As first responders, the African Union, regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms have been playing an increasingly proactive and fundamental
role in addressing peace and security threats through the steady implementation o f

17-13183

17/19

A/72/269
S/2017/780

the African Peace and Security Architecture. The international community needs to
further strengthen cooperation with those actors through increased political,
institutional and financial support. This would entail a bold vision and initiatives to
explore innovative solutions and provide a better anticipation of needs on the
continent.
African countries, the African Union and the regional economic communities
84. Sustaining peace requires enhanced and inclusive national ownership and
leadership. This entails African countries strengthening the capacities of
pre-existing local infrastructure for peace and establishing national policies to lay
the foundations for sustaining peace. It also requires the full participation of
partners and all segments of society, in particular women and youth, as well as other
actors, including African regional and subregional organizations, in peace and
political processes and governmental efforts towards sustaining peace.
85. To address the root causes of conflict, African countries are encouraged to
proactively participate in the existing mechanisms such as the African Peer Review
Mechanism and the country structural vulnerability assessment of the African
Union. It is also crucial to domesticate international and region al norms and
policies, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063,
and to promote their effective implementation. Similarly, to advance
implementation of both agendas, it is necessary to further reinforce institutional
interlinkages at the continental level among the African Peace and Security
Architecture, the African Governance Architecture and the development architecture
of the African Union, such as NEPAD and other regional initiatives.
86. Enhanced links between early warning mechanisms and early responses are
key to preventing conflict. The Constitutive Act of the African Union provides for
the right of the Union to intervene in a member State, even against the will of the
Government concerned, in case crimes against humanity are committed. To
reinforce early warning systems, African countries and the regional economic
communities are encouraged to further develop partnerships with the United Nations
and civil society organizations, including youth and women associations, as well as
faith organizations and traditional and religious leaders. Key actors at the grass roots level often possess first-hand information on how to tackle the root causes of
conflict and achieve peace and security.
87. With a view to generating a common understanding on sustaining peace in the
country concerned, regional economic communities could play an interface role
between national and subregional initiatives in a manner that is coherent with
broader continental and international support.
88. To effectively address cross-border threats, including violent extremism and
terrorism, regional economic communities should further develop political and
institutional cooperation among themselves. To that end, reinforced collaboration
among ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Lake Chad Basin Commission was encouraged
by the Security Council in its resolution 2349 (2017) through the development of a
comprehensive strategy to address the root causes of the emergence of Boko Haram.
The cooperation among the regional economic commissions could be replicated in
addressing the root causes of conflict in the Sahel and other regions.
International community and the United Nations system
89. The international community, including the United Nations system, should
strengthen its support for African regional organizations with regard to early
warning systems, conflict prevention, including mediation, post -conflict recovery,
capacity-building, resilience and other related issues. Technical support, such as
18/19

17-13183

A/72/269
S/2017/780

information-sharing and communications technology, should be provided for the
reinforcement of early warning systems at all levels on the continent. Support for
conflict prevention activities has often been overlooked by the inte rnational
community, including in situations of humanitarian crisis.
90. The United Nations needs to provide more coherent, comprehensive,
integrated and coordinated support to African regional organizations, especially
through the implementation of the United Nations-African Union partnership on
Africa’s integration and development agenda. In that respect, all United Nations
entities are encouraged to strengthen partnerships and collaboration at all national,
subregional, regional and international levels through existing mechanisms.
Development partners that intervene in a fragile or post -conflict setting should also
integrate conflict-sensitive approaches, based on the principle of “do no harm”, to
their programmes and strategies.
91. As conflict situations become more complex and intractable, collaboration
between the United Nations, the African Union and regional economic communities
should be reinforced to strengthen their preventive efforts. The role of other
stakeholders, including Special Representatives and Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General, should also be reinforced. In that regard, collaboration among
those players remains crucial for political consensus.
92. Notwithstanding the positive evolution of the African Union and the
strengthened United Nations-African Union partnership, including on financing, as
well as the commendable efforts of the African Union towards marshalling
additional resources from African countries, the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture still relies heavily on the support of the
international community.
93. The United Nations will continue to work towards a shared vision for
implementing sustaining peace in Africa and building a better future for its people.
This vision needs to articulate clearly the objectives and roles that the United
Nations and the African Union can play in a mutually reinforcing way. To assist
African subregional and regional organizations in their efforts to strengthen the
financial autonomy of the African Peace and Security Architecture, the United
Nations and other partners are encouraged to develop innovative frameworks to
mobilize funds for long-term and sustained financial engagements. Reinforcing the
capacity of African countries and regional organizations on domestic resource
mobilization would require support from international and regional financial
institutions.

17-13183

19/19
