A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/102
9 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 107
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/639)]
52/102. Follow-up to the Regional Conference to Address the Problems of Refugees,
Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement and
Returnees in the Countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
and Relevant Neighbouring States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/113 of 20 December 1993, 49/173 of 23 December 1994, 50/151 of
21 December 1995 and, in particular, 51/70 of 12 December 1996,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 1 and that of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees,2
Recognizing the acuteness of the migration and displacement problems in the countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration in developing strategies and practical tools for more effective
capacity-building and enhancing programmes to address the needs of various categories of concern to the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
Convinced of the necessity for the further strengthening of practical measures towards the
implementation of the Programme of Action adopted by the Regional Conference to Address the Problems

1

A/52/274 and Corr.1.

2

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/52/12).

98-76675

/...

A/RES/52/102
Page 2

of Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in the Countries
of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant Neighbouring States,3
Reaffirming the view of the Conference that the primary responsibility for tackling population
displacement problems lies with the affected countries themselves and that these issues are to be regarded
as national priorities, while at the same time recognizing the need for enhancing international support for the
national efforts of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States aiming at the effective
implementation of such responsibilities within the framework of the Programme of Action of the Conference,
Recalling that the protection and promotion of human rights and the strengthening of democratic
institutions are essential to prevent mass population displacement,
Mindful of the fact that effective implementation of the recommendations contained in the Programme
of Action of the Conference should be facilitated and can be ensured only through cooperation and
coordinated activities undertaken in this respect by all interested States, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and other actors,
Noting and reaffirming the importance of the 1951 Convention4 and the 1967 Protocol5 relating to the
Status of Refugees,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 1 and that of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees;2
2. Notes the positive results achieved by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the International Organization for Migration and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe in the implementation of the Programme of Action adopted by the Regional Conference to Address
the Problems of Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary Displacement and Returnees in
the Countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant Neighbouring States, and invites
these organizations to continue to steer the ongoing and future activities relating to the follow-up to the
Conference;
3. Welcomes the efforts of the Governments of those countries of the Commonwealth of Independent
States that, in cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner, the International Organization for
Migration, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe, have
undertaken practical steps in the implementation of the Programme of Action;
4. Invites all countries that have not yet done so to accede to and implement fully the 1951 Convention
and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees;
5. Appreciates the efforts made by the Office of the High Commissioner, the International
Organization for Migration and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to support the
implementation of the Programme of Action in the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
and underlines the necessity of an appropriate response by the international community to appeals for funds
by the Office of the High Commissioner and the International Organization for Migration;

3

A/51/341 and Corr.1, annex, appendix.

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

5

Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

98-76675

/...

A/RES/52/102
Page 3

6. Calls upon States and interested international organizations, in a spirit of solidarity and burdensharing, to provide appropriate forms and levels of support for the practical implementation of the Programme
of Action;
7. Invites international financial and other institutions to contribute to the financing of projects and
programmes within the framework of the implementation of the Programme of Action;
8. Invites the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States to intensify bilateral and
subregional cooperation in maintaining the balance of commitments and interests in the process leading up
to the implementation of the Programme of Action;
9. Calls upon the Governments of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States to
continue to strengthen their commitment to the principles underpinning the Programme of Action, in
particular human rights and refugee protection principles, and to lend high-level political support to ensure
progress in its implementation;
10. Emphasizes the necessity of fulfilling the recommendations of the Programme of Action relating
to ensuring respect for human rights as an important factor in the management of migration flows, the
consolidation of democracy, the rule of law and stability;
11. Urges the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in coordination with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Organization for Migration and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to take into account those elements of the Programme
of Action that are relevant to her mandate;
12. Encourages the involvement of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in the
follow-up to the Conference, and invites them to demonstrate stronger support for the process of the
multinational constructive dialogue among a wide range of the countries concerned and further action with
a view to the full implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
13. Calls upon the Governments of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States as well
as international organizations to strengthen further their cooperation with non-governmental organizations and
to increase their involvement in the implementation of the outcome and the follow-up to the Conference;
14. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to enhance its
relationship with other key international actors, such as the Council of Europe, the European Commission
and other human rights, development and financial institutions, in order to better address the wide-ranging
and complex issues in the Programme of Action;
15. Recognizes the importance of undertaking measures, on the basis of strict adherence to all of the
principles of international law, including humanitarian law and international human rights standards, to
prevent situations leading to new flows of refugees and displaced persons and other forms of involuntary
displacement;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session on
progress achieved in the implementation of the Programme of Action;
17. Decides to continue examination of this question at its fifty-third session.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
