S/2012/254

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 April 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 23 April 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit two letters addressed to me, dated 5 and 9 April
2012, respectively, from Mr. Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo, President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States (see annex I), and Mr. Carlos
Gomes Júnior, Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau (see annex II), on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. As you will recall, the Assistant Secretary-General, Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, mentioned the receipt of these letters during his briefing to the Security
Council on 13 April 2012.
I should be grateful if you would bring the aforementioned letters to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-31351 (E) 260412

*1231351*

S/2012/254

Annex I
Request of the Economic Community of West African States with
regard to the presidential run-off election in Guinea-Bissau
You may be aware that political tension is increasingly mounting in GuineaBissau as the country approaches the second round of the presidential election
scheduled to take place on 22 April 2012.
In the course of a joint fact-finding mission of ECOWAS, the African Union
and the United Nations to Guinea-Bissau on 31 March 2012, the delegation, led by
my humble self, uncovered a number of disturbing developments that could
jeopardize the holding of the election and plunge the country back into another
cycle of instability. Of major concern to ECOWAS are the following issues:
1.
The call by the opposition, led by Mr. Koumba Yalá, the second-placed
candidate in the first round of the election, to annul the results of the election, citing
“massive fraud” and disenfranchisement of a large section of the potential electorate
due to the failure to update the voters register. The opposition threatens to boycott
the poll if this demand is not met.
2.
Fear among a section of the political class of a possible military
intervention and/or threat to their safety and security.
3.
Mounting suspicion and tension between the Guinea-Bissau military and
the Angolan Technical Military Assistance Mission (MISSANG), which is in the
country under a bilateral agreement to support defence and security sector reform.
General Antonio Injai, the Chief of Defence Staff of the Guinea-Bissau armed
forces, has ordered the Mission to leave the country, accusing Angola of secretly
building a military presence in the country, which constitutes, in his view, a breach
of the bilateral agreement.
In view of the preceding, the Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and
Government, at their Extraordinary Summit in Dakar on 2 April 2012, appointed
H.E. Alpha Condé, President of Guinea, as Mediator in the looming crisis, and
directed the ECOWAS Commission to consider the feasibility of deploying a
military contingent in the run-up to the poll to protect candidates and institutions, to
assist the Bissau security forces to ensure security for the electoral process, and to
commence work on the defence and security sector reform programme in the
country.
This is to apprise you of the intentions of ECOWAS with regard to the
impending election and to seek the support of the Security Council for the actions
intended by ECOWAS. It is also to seek your kind opinion on the feasibility of
fielding a joint ECOWAS/United Nations security mission for the purposes outlined
above.
While awaiting your kind response, please accept the renewed assurances of
the ECOWAS commitment to work closely with the United Nations in the interests
of peace and security in West Africa.
(Signed) Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo
President of the Commission

2

12-31351

S/2012/254

Annex II
Letter dated 9 April 2012 from the Prime Minister of GuineaBissau to the Secretary-General
In my capacity as Prime Minister of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, I would
like hereby, on behalf of the Government and in the light of the emergency situation
which the country is undergoing, to inform you that Guinea-Bissau could come to
face a new cycle of internal political instability, owing to the non-acceptance of the
electoral results by five of the candidates who participated in the early presidential
elections held on 18 March.
In a show of clear provocation, those persons are seeking to impede the
holding of the second round of the presidential polls, which, should that happen,
will endanger the democratic gains made to date by the State and the people of
Guinea-Bissau.
Following a period of peace and social calm obtained during recent years
through countless sacrifices made by the people of Guinea-Bissau, it is not
acceptable that a group of individuals, motivated by personal and narrow-minded
interests devoid of any politically justifiable or legal bases, should resort to creating
conditions for the return of instability in our country.
With regard to the presidential polls, the entire international community which
observed the electoral process adjudged it as just, free and transparent.
The National Electoral Commission and the Supreme Court, charged with
respective jurisdictions, at the internal level, to deal with and examine legal
challenges to the electoral process and to make pronouncements on the validity of
the polls, have already publicized their decisions in favour of confirming the results
that were announced and which called for a second round presidential run-off
between candidates Carlos Gomes Júnior and Koumba Yalá.
Apart from representing a total disrespect for the institutions of the Republic,
the behaviour of those who seek to call into question the above-mentioned results
and consequently compromise the holding of the second round of the presidential
elections could be seen as a manoeuvre intended to influence, negatively, the
military who, at any moment, could unleash an uncontrollable situation that would
have negative consequences for peace and security not only in Guinea-Bissau but
also in the countries of the subregion.
In this connection, with a view to containing this situation which is threatening
the peace and security of Guinea-Bissau, with possible subregional consequences, I
would like to hereby request that the Security Council, within its powers enshrined
under Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, in its capacity as the entity
charged with the maintenance of international peace and security, analyse at an
extraordinary meeting the internal situation of Guinea-Bissau resulting from the
non-acceptance of democratic, free, just and transparent elections; and debate the
dispatch of a peacekeeping force to Guinea-Bissau, the latter to be charged with
extensive powers aimed at the maintenance of political stability in the country and
at defence of the democratic gains which the people of Guinea-Bissau obtained at
great sacrifice and desire to preserve for the economic, social and cultural
development of the country.

12-31351

3

S/2012/254

I would like to take this opportunity to recall that Guinea-Bissau and the
Republic of Angola entered into a bilateral Agreement on Cooperation in Defence
and Security, which saw the establishment of MISSANG (Angolan Technical
Military Assistance Mission) which, apart from supporting the ongoing reforms,
constitutes a factor assisting with political and military stabilization in the country.
Further, I would like to inform you that, owing to the internal reaction of the
military, the Republic of Angola announced its intention to end the cooperation
agreement and, consequently, to effect the withdrawal of its troops from our country,
which will put at risk the already grave situation which Guinea-Bissau is facing, and
on account of which we are seeking recourse to the Security Council to request the
taking of necessary measures aimed at guaranteeing the maintenance of peace and
security in our country and in our subregion.
To conclude, I would like to further inform you that the Republic of Angola,
and, eventually Brazil and Ghana, stand ready to form part of such a peacekeeping
force, which could also integrate components from other countries in ECOWAS and
other regions, once the deployment of such a force is approved by the Security
Council in accordance with the Charter and the objectives of the United Nations
Organization.
(Signed) Carlos Gomes Júnior

4

12-31351
