Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2537 (XXIV). Implementation of the recommendations of the A.d Hoc Committee of
Experts to Examine the Finances of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies

A

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit on its activities during the first
eighteen months of its operations, from 1 January
1968 to 30 June 1969, as transmitted by the Secretary-General.16
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.

B
The General Assembly,
Noting the views set forth by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in
its first report, 17 as well as the concern expressed in
statements by the Secretary-General1 8 and the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions 19 about the need to avoid a duplication of effort and a waste of resources in the activities
of control and investigative bodies and of organs concerned with administrative and co-ordination questions,
Noting also the views expressed in the Fifth Committee in this respect, 20
Desiring to know the number of staff engaged in
these activities and the amount of financial resources
being expended by these bodies and organs in relation to the benefits in economy,
Desiring also to ensure adequate co-ordination of
the activities of these bodies and organs in a framework where the appropriate degree of independence
of each such body and organ is preserved,
Conscious of the need to establish and maintain a
proper and considered relationship between the machinery for control and investigation, on the one hand,
and the institutional machinery and functions, on the
other hand,
Taking into account the need to strengthen and
improve the whole machinery of the United Nations
system for control and investigation of administrative
and financia} activities in the interests of economy
and greater efficiency,
l. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare a report setting forth:
(i) Toe bodies and organs established for purposes of administrative and budgetary control, investigation and co-ordination, with dates
of inception for each;
(ii) Toe terms of reference of each such body and
organ;
(iii) Toe annual expenditures for the financia} years
1965 to 1969 inclusive for each body and

----

16/bid., agenda item 81, document A/C.S/1241.
Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/7608
and Corr.1 ).
18 fbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 74,
document A/C.S/1233.
10 Ibid., document A/C.S/1234.
20 /bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Fifth Committee, 1321st,
1324th to 1327th, 1329th and 1332nd meetings.
17 /bid.,

81

organ concerned, in absolute terms and as an
aggregate percentage of the total budget for
the year;
(iv) The estimated outlay of manpower for the
preparation of data for the testimony before or
consultation with each such body and organ;
( b) To invite, in bis capacity as Chairman of the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, the executive heads of the specialized agencies to supply
the same information for inclusion in this report;
(e) To submit this report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fifth session through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
2. Expresses the hope that the commemoration of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
in 1970 will be the occasion for new efforts to resolve
the administrative, budgetary and financia! problems
of the United Nations in the context of renewed dedication and solemn commitment to the purposes and
principies embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.

e
The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
on the review of the administrative and management
procedures concerning the programme and the budget
of the International Telecommunication Union;21
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit that
report, through the consultative machinery of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to the legislative organ and the executive head of the Intemational Telecommunication Union.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2538 (XXIV). Publications and documentation
of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 593 (VI) of 4 February
1952, 789 (VIII) of 9 December 1953, 1202 (XII)
and 1203 (XII) of 13 December 1957, 1272 (XIII)
of 14 November 1958, 1851 (XVII) of 19 December 1962, 1987 (XVIII) of 17 December 1963, 2116
(XX) of 21 December 1965, 2150 (XXI) of 4 November 1966, 2239 (XXI) and 2247 (XXI) of 20
December 1966, 2292 (XXII) of 8 December 1967,
2361 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and 2478
(XXIII) of 21 December 1968,
Reiterating its concern at the growing volume of
the publications and documentation of the United
N ations, which Governments are finding increasingly
difficult to use effectively,
Convinced that, by freeing resources currently being
utilized in excessive documentation and in activities
that may have wholly or largely outlived their usefulness, the United Nations would be better able to
implement programmes of real value to the Govemments of Member States,
21 fbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 81,
document A/7765.

82

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

Convinced that a substantial reduction in the volume
of documentation would enable the Secretary-General
better to comply with statutory requirements for the
preparation and simultaneous distribution within the
required time-limits of documents in the working languages of the various United Nations organs,
l. Appeals to all United Nations organs, bodies
and committees to consider ways of reducing documentation, and in particular the possibility of adopting
a form of records less voluminous and less costly than
that currently being used;
2. Takes note of the recommendations and suggestions for reductions in the volume of documentation contained in the reports of the Secretary-General, 22 in reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 23 in chapter
VII, section B, of the report of the Committee on
the Reorganization of the Secretariat,24 in the report
of the Joint Inspection Unit25 and in the working paper
prepared by the Secretariat for the Economic and
Social Council, 26 notes that many of thcm have been
or are being implemented already, and requests the
Secretary-General, in the light of bis own comments
and those of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on them, to implement as quickly as possible those recommendations
and suggestions that fall within his competence and
authority and to continue his efforts to reduce documentation;
3. Notes that the Economic and Social Council
has already achieved a certain measure of success in
reducing documentation, as described in paragraphs
615 to 631 of its report for the period from 3 August
1968 to 8 August 1969, 27 and that the Trade and
Development Board has examined proposals for improving the machinery of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 28 and urges both
bodies to continue their efforts t0 reduce the volume
of documentation, without impairing effective positive
action on worth-while programmes;
4. Requests the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council, the Trade
and Development Board and the Industrial Development Board to consider, when establishing a new subsidiary body, conference or committee, whether or not
it sbould have summary records of its proceedings;
5. Requests tbe Secretary-General to submit to tbe
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session a list of
tbe resolutions of the Assembly and its subsidiary
organs that call for periodic reports, with an indication of the number of pages of each of these documents, and invites the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to submit any
recommendations. it might wish to offer for shortening
discontinuing or issuing less frequently such reports;
22 /bid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 81
document A/6675; ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes'
agenda item 82, documents A/7579, A/C.5/1247 and AÍ
C.5/1257.
2s /bid., Twenty-third Session, Annexes, agenda item 75
document A/7400; ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexe;
agenda item 82, document A/7789.
'
24 fbid., Twenty-third Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
itero 74 (A/7359), annex.
211 A/7576 and Corr.l, annex.
26 E/L. 1249 and Add. l and 2.
27 Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7603 and Corr.1 ).
28 lbid., Supplement No. 16 (A/7616), part three, chapter VI.

6. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the Committee for
~rogra~me and Co-ordination and the Joint Inspection Umt to watch out for activities that give rise to
documentation which in their opinion is excessive or
of doubtful value, and to include in their reports recommendations for shortcning, discontinuing or issuing
less frcquently such documcntation;
7. Approves the decision of the Special Committee
on thc Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to <;olonial _Countries and Peoples that the proceedings
o_f 1ts meetmgs should be verbatim records in provis1<?nal for~ only, to which addenda and/or corrigenda
m1ght be 1ssued, ami to dispense with summary records;
8. Rea[(irms paragraph l (a) ( ii) of its resolution
593 (VI). by which it invited the Governments of
Mcmbcr Statcs to rcstrict both the number and the
volum_c of _the docur:ncnts submitted for processing to
what 1s stnctly reqmrcd by resolutions and other statutory decisions of .~ United Nations organ, or is
clearly relevant to agenda items under discussion, and
appeals to the Govcrnments of Member Statcs to
exerc_ise. rcstraint in submitting lengthy documents to
be d1stnbutcd as documcnts of the United Nations·
. 9._ Notes that thc traditional system of commis~
s10mng background papcrs for international conferences
s?metimes gives risc to a great deal of documentat1on. and rcquests the Secretary-General to draw to
the attention of bodics concerned with organizing such
confercnces the dcsirability of giving careful considerat!on to empl~ying whencver possible annotated agenda,
IIsts of headmgs for discussion, and the like, instead
of background papcrs, or in conjunction with a rcduced number of such papers;
10. Decides that:
(a) No Unitcd Nations body or organ shall have
both verbatim and summary records;
(~) Verbatim or summary records shall not be
prov1ded for a newly established subsidiary body of
the General Assembly-rulc 60 of thc rules of procedu_re of t~e Asscmbly notwithstanding-or for a
specrnl meet1~g or_ confcrcnce .. unless they are specifically authonzcd m the enablmg resolution;
(e) Verbatim records shall not include the texts
of routine exchang~s of views about the date and place
of the next meet10g. congratulations, expressions of
co!1dolence and thc like, but shall merely report them
bnefly. except that in special circumstances the organ
or body concerned may decide otherwise;
. (d) In the case of verbatim records, the versions
!n languages oth~r than the original shall be prepared
m accordance w1th the following principies:
( i) Translations into and from Russian shall be
used;
(ii) Translations into and from Chinese shall be
used;
(iii) Otherwise--that is, as between English and
French, English and Spanisb, and French and
Spanish-transcriptions of the simultaneous
interpretations, which shall be checked editori~lly and revised, if necessary, to guard
agamst serious errors, shall be used;
(e) Speeches or statem~nts by representatives, by
the Secretary_-General or h1s representative, or by persons presentmg reports on behalf of committees or

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

other bodies, may be reproduced in extenso in summary records or as official documents only if they
serve as bases for discussion, provided that the relevant decision is taken by the body concerned after a
statcmcnt of thc financia! implications has been submittcd in accordance with regulation 13.1 of the Financia! Regulations of the United Nations;
(f) Each report on the administrative and financial
implications of a proposal for a non-recurrent report
to be submitted in accordance with financia! regulation 13.1 shall be prepared in accordance with the
following rules:
(i) I t shall set forth the nature of the document,
the possible number of pages, and the type
and number of copies to be printed;
(ii) It shall state how much time will be required
to reproduce the requested document in all
thc working Janguages;
(iii) It shall indicate whether there is any previous
publication on the same subject in the organizations in the United Nations system which
would duplicate or substantially overlap the
proposed publication;
(iv) Where, in the light of discussion, delegations
consider a particular report so useful that it
should be printed and bound, the report on
administrative and financia! implications shall
state the cost incurred in preparing the mimeographed version, including drafting costs, and
the estimated cost of the proposed new edition;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to widen the existing practice of soliciting bids
for externa! printing of publications of the United
Nations from all Member States;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
short document sctting forth in clear terms the policies
laid down by the General Assembly regarding the
control and limitation of documentation and to ma:ke
this document available to members prior to each
session of a council, board, commission, committee
or other body;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution and to
include in his report:
(a) Any reasons he might have for not implementing the recommendations and suggestions referred
to in paragraph 2 above;
(b) The information requested in paragraph 5
above;
(e) Any complementary recommendations that he
might deem appropriate.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2539 (XXIV),

Composition of the Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2480 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968,
Taking note of the Secretary-General's report on
the composition of the Secretariat, 20
2 9 lbid., Twenty-foutth Session, AnMxes, agenda item 83,
document A/1145.

83

Reafjirming the need for an equitable geographical
distribution of the staff of the Secretariat as betwecn
regions, and within each region, in particular at the
level of senior posts, and the need for a bctter linguistic balance in the Secretariat,
Desirous that the principies and factors enunciated
in its resolution 1852 (XVII) of 19 December 1962
be adequately reflected in the existing system of
desirable ranges,
Recognizing that long-term service is conducive to
greater efficiency in certain posts entailing complex duties and responsibilities,
I
l. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to achieve a better geographical distribution of
the staff of the Secretariat at all levels, bearing in mind
the requirements of the Charter of the United Nations
of efficiency, competence and integrity;
2. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give preference to nationals from countries not yet
represented or inadequately represented, either in the
Secretariat as a whole or specifically at the senior level,
in particular with respect to appointments to higher
posts;
3. Requests that the information included in the
reports of the Secretary-General relating to geographical
distribution of the staff of the United Nations Development Programme and the staff of the United Nations
Children's Fund should reflect the position at the
regional as well as the country level;
4. W e/comes the Secretary-General's intention to
prepare a long-term plan of recruitment as a means
of accelerating the achievement of an equitable geographical distribution of the staff; 30

II
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to achieve a better linguistic balance within the Secretariat.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2540 (XXIV). Amendments to the Staff Rules
of the United Nations

The General Assembly
Takes note of the changes made by the SecretaryGeneral in the Staff Rules in the year ending on 31
August 1969, as set forth in his note to the Fifth
Committee.31
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2541 (XXIV). International salary system

The General Assembly
l. Takes note with appreciation of that part of the
report of the lnternational Civil Service Advisory Board
on its seventeenth session which is concerned with the
principies underlying the intemational salary system ;32
2. Requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of the progress made by the Board in the
examination of the matters mentioned therein.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
3o Ibid., para. 28 (d).
a1 Ibid., document A/C.S/1239.
32 Ibid., document A/C.S/1240, annex.
