S/PV.7327

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7327th meeting

Thursday, 4 December 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/773)

14-67019 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1467019*

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2014/773)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Serbia, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort
him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim
Thaçi to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2014/773, the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Farid Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: Almost six months ago, on 8 June,
legislative elections were held in Kosovo that saw
the politically courageous participation of Serbian
majority municipalities of northern Kosovo, and now
the Kosovo Assembly and Government are finally
expected to be formally constituted in the coming days.
On 18 November, the Democratic Party of Kosovo, led
by Mr. Hashim Thaçi, who is with us in the Chamber
today to represent the Kosovo institutions, and the
2/27

04/12/2014

Democratic League of Kosovo, led by Mr. Isa Mustafa,
reached a power-sharing agreement in principle. That
compromise between Kosovo’s two largest political
parties excluded other parties, which had previously
formed a post-election bloc. The two parties are now
in negotiations on the structure and programme of a
new Government with the participation of the Kosovo
Serbs and other communities in order to reconvene
the Kosovo Assembly. President Jahjaga played a key
role in that respect by engaging with the leaders of
the political parties in encouraging a solution. I urge
Kosovo’s political leaders to complete the process of
constituting the new Government and institutions, and
to focus their efforts on establishing good governance.
It is also imperative that a spirit of inclusiveness and
collective responsibility prevail at this critical time.
The six months’ delay was damaging for Kosovo
and led to increased public dissatisfaction with political
leaders and further delays in bringing about pressing
institutional reforms and the resumption of the political
dialogue with Belgrade facilitated by the European
Union (EU). In the interim, however, technical meetings
have continued under the aegis of the EU, and I note with
appreciation the consistent efforts of the Belgrade and
Priština technical teams and welcome their agreements,
which enhance the implementation of previously reached
agreements on energy, the integrated management of
crossing points, and the freedom of movement. I also
wish to highlight, as an indication of further progress,
the new arrangements for administering official visits
agreed on between Belgrade and Priština, which took
effect on 1 December. Nonetheless, I reiterate that new
momentum must be generated and high-level meetings
must resume as soon as possible, so that both sides can
fulfil the promise of that process and avail themselves
of the opportunities presented by the European Union
integration process.
I welcome the cooperation and coordination
demonstrated by the municipal structures functioning
in northern Kosovo during the preparation of the
2015 municipal budgets, despite the complexity of the
current municipal setup in the northern municipalities.
I trust that all sides have now been convinced of the
value of dialogue at the local level for delivering better
governance. It is high time that the issues relating to
construction in the ethnically mixed North Mitrovica
suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani were resolved through
mutually agreeable steps. It is also essential that
momentum be sustained towards the administrative
integration of the four northern Kosovo municipalities.
14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

In that context, advancing the establishment of a
community/association of Serb-majority municipalities,
in line with the 19 April 2013 agreement, remains vital.
I commend the Kosovo police and security bodies
for their contribution to containing transnational
violent extremism. The police operations of this past
summer have been followed by more investigations and
arrests in the months since. I also note the continued
responsible guidance on those sensitive issues provided
by the Islamic community of Kosovo and its leaders, as
well as the public stance of other religious and secular
leaders, unanimously denouncing extremism.
The protection of the religious and cultural heritage
in Kosovo remains an issue and a concern. I welcome
the cooperation between local authorities and the
International Security Force in Kosovo in addressing
illegal construction in the special protective zone
surrounding the UNESCO World Heritage site of Visoki
Dečani Monastery. Instances of offensive graffiti in the
vicinity of the Monastery in early October are a clear
indication that reconciliation efforts must be sustained
and strengthened further on the ground. In that
respect, I note with appreciation the prompt and strong
condemnations of those incidents by President Jahjaga
and other Priština leaders, as well as by representatives
of other religious communities of Kosovo.
Recent developments reflecting improvements in
community and religious interactions have also been
encouraging. Members of the Islamic community of
Kosovo and the Serbian Orthodox clergy at the Visoki
Dečani Monastery exchanged visits and publicly
emphasized the importance of dialogue for promoting
religious tolerance in Kosovo. Additionally, on
24 November a delegation from the Islamic community
of Kosovo attended the patron-saint day liturgy at
the Monastery, at which the Patriarch of the Serbian
Orthodox Church conveyed messages of tolerance
and appealed to all Kosovo Serb displaced persons
to return. I have also noted the 12 November visit of
32 Kosovo Albanian primary and high-school students
to the Monastery as part of an awareness project of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
promoting cultural heritage preservation among young
people. Such initiatives are vital to instilling mutual
respect and appreciation for the value of cultural
heritage in all communities in Kosovo.
The pace of the returns and reintegration of
internally displaced persons has remained slow. The
matter is of wide concern for both local and international

S/PV.7327

stakeholders. In the light of that issue, I note the initiative
of the Serbian Office for Kosovo and Metohija to create
a new consultative body that includes the Kosovo
Minister for Communities and Returns as well as the
United Nations and other international organizations.
However, the continued occurrence of security
incidents affecting returnees and their properties can
only undermine confidence. I welcome the prompt and
clear condemnation of such incidents on the part of
the relevant Priština institutions. It is imperative that
both local and central authorities demonstrate greater
political will in effectively addressing the issues that
are of most concern to current and potential returnees.
With regard to the progress made in the process
of establishing the fates of persons still missing from
the 1998-1999 conflict and its aftermath, I welcome
the conclusion, on 13 October, of the repatriation of
the bodily remains recovered from the Rudnica stone
quarry in Serbia’s Raška municipality. I commend the
commitment and professionalism of both the Belgrade
and Priština teams of experts, who conducted that
sensitive process without politicization. I urge both
sides to demonstrate greater political will and to be
more proactive in addressing the cases of the remaining
missing persons, allaying the terrible anguish suffered
by their families, contributing to further conciliation
and thereby bringing that painful chapter to a close.
As the Council is aware, the allegations of corruption
made recently against current and former members of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) have drawn a considerable amount of public
and media attention. The new EULEX Head of Mission,
Ambassador Gabriele Meucci, has confirmed that
investigations into the allegations have been and remain
ongoing since 2013. On 10 November, the European
Union’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, appointed
an independent expert to review the implementation
of the EULEX Kosovo mandate, with a focus on the
handling of the corruption allegations. I would like to
emphasize that, regardless of speculation, there should
be no room for questioning the integrity of EU rule-oflaw principles or indeed their central importance for
future progress in Kosovo. At the same time, the work
of the EU Special Investigative Task Force also remains
critical to the process of justice and reconciliation in
Kosovo. I urge the Kosovo Assembly, once it is fully
constituted, to prioritize the adoption of the required
legislation, so that a specialist court can become
operational early next year and begin tackling the cases

14-670193/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

that will be brought before it, in order to swiftly follow
up on the work conducted by the Task Force.
Turning to regional developments, the ethnically
motivated incidents that occurred in various parts of the
Western Balkans in the wake of the interrupted football
match between Albania and Serbia held in Belgrade on
14 October, demonstrated that both the authorities and
the public must act responsibly, so that the momentum
towards enhanced regional cooperation is not reversed.
Despite the incidents, the visit of the Albanian Prime
Minister to Serbia in November, the first of its kind in
68 years, was a welcome step in the right direction.
Likewise, the 23 October informal regional
meeting between the EU and Western Balkan foreign
and economic affairs ministers in Belgrade, with the
participation of Kosovo ministers, was a clear signal of
the improved atmosphere for regional cooperation. The
joint ministerial statement issued by the participants
also holds promise for much needed economic
development in the Western Balkans.
Finally, I wish to express my deepest appreciation to
all Council members for maintaining their engagement
with the parties, particularly in the light of the many
other pressing matters that demand the Council’s
attention. UNMIK will continue working closely with
its local and international partners in accordance with
its mandate, helping to ensure that the progress made to
date will be sustained and further advanced.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vučić.
Mr. Vučić (Serbia): First of all, I am very honoured
to be here. I thank the Council for the opportunity to
present the perspective of the Republic of Serbia on
the situation and events in Kosovo and Metohija in the
period from July to October.
More than anything else, Serbia wants
stability — political and economic — in the entire
Western Balkans. That is the condition for the survival
and progress of our Serbia, as well as of all others. It
is precisely for this reason that Serbia is committed
to peace and life and that, independently and without
pressures from outside, it has commenced difficult
and comprehensive reforms aimed at bringing about a
healthier and more competitive economy and freer and
richer citizens.
We do not invent problems outside the borders of
our country and we do not raise nationalistic tensions
4/27

04/12/2014

in the region because we have enough courage to
face and solve our own problems courageously.
Serbia therefore has stayed away from conflicts in
the region — even verbal ones — for only weak and
irresponsible politicians, whenever they have internal
problems, open old nationalistic wounds and confuse
issues, turning the region backwards. We have no
part in that and we are not weak because of it; on the
contrary, it is the sign of our strength and long-term
strategic thinking.
All who are present in this forum know well the
importance of Kosovo and Metohija to my country
and all its citizens, as well as the attention with which
the Republic of Serbia follows developments in its
southern province administered under resolution 1244
(1999) by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Our genuine and longterm commitment to a peaceful solution of the conflict
in Kosovo and Metohija is well known to all members
of the international community, both those who share
our views on the status of Kosovo and Metohija and
those who think otherwise. I believe that all Council
members recognize just as well the resolve in the steps
that the Republic of Serbia has taken lately to give
momentum to reconciliation among the people living
in Kosovo and to improve the living conditions of all
its residents alike: Albanians, Serbs, Gorani, Roma and
the members of other non-majority communities.
Serbia welcomes the efforts made by the United
Nations and UNMIK, the European Union (EU), NATO
and its presence in Kosovo and Metohija, and the Kosovo
Force, as well as the efforts made by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe that are aimed
at achieving the same goals of reconciliation, economic
progress and security for all residents of Kosovo and
Metohija.
Serbia trusts the United Nations. If it were not
for UNMIK, the world would be without much of the
data on the events in Kosovo and Metohija. We salute
the activities of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. Farid Zarif, Head of UNMIK, who presented
the report on UNMIK for the period from 16 July to
15 October (S/2014/773).
Council members know that Belgrade is firm in
its position not to recognize the secession of Kosovo
and Metohija and its self-proclamation of statehood,
carried out by force and contrary to international law.
Yet that firm position is not an obstacle to negotiations
or the ever more lively communication with Pristina
14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

today. That is so because Belgrade, the Government of
the Republic of Serbia, wants peace and stability in the
entire region; it wants dialogue and a solution, as well
as the ability of people, goods and ever more positive
ideas to circulate freely throughout the region.
It is therefore right to say that our efforts — the
new, positive approach of Serbia to the difficult Balkan
questions — have eased the tensions in the region,
where there is less and less fear among neighbours and
more and more acceptance of the initiatives coming
from Serbia. We have proved by our actions that we
want, more than anything else, peace in the Balkans
as the basis of development. We want a normal, decent
and ordered Serbia and are well aware that it is possible
only in such an environment.
Likewise, we know that dialogue is the only way to
achieve that goal and we shall do all we can to ensure
that it continues in the way that Serbia has promoted it
by taking decisions that improve the lives of the people
in Kosovo and Metohija. Surely that will not prevent
Serbia from continuing to insist on its position that the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo and
Metohija is illegal; yet, probably for the first time in
many years, the position of the Government of Serbia
does not impede life in the province. On the contrary,
we are dedicated to that life, putting it before any other
interest. At the same time, it gives us the right to request
for the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija exactly what we
want for the Albanians — the possibility to live, work,
be safe, communicate and move around normally.
We therefore believe that everything that Serbia
has done in the past two years towards spreading
and promoting those positions deserves attention,
recognition and support. We do so primarily because
our desire for peace and cooperation in the entire
Balkans is the only way to make that region an equal
part of Europe in a manner that will ensure that the
Balkans region is in no way different from the rest
of Europe. We do so also as we are demonstrating,
day in and day out, that centuries-old conflicts, vast
differences and completely opposed positions do not
have to obstruct dialogue and solutions. We only need
to promote dialogue and solutions as our supreme value
and most important goal. That is exactly what this
Government of Serbia has done.
The report is regular, yet far from routine for
the Republic of Serbia. The fact that a document is
submitted regularly must not mean that it is drawn up

S/PV.7327

lightly. We are therefore convinced that the authors of
the report wrote it with special attention, well aware
of its importance for the people of the province, the
Republic of Serbia and the environs. We read the report
carefully, not to maliciously find fault with it, but to
present, with it in mind, proposals for the improvement
of the situation in the province. The report is important
to us; it is being heeded by the entire world today, while
the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija look to it, just as they
look to our response, for the confirmation of their just
demands. I shall therefore touch on a number of issues
brought up in the document.
It is said in the introductory part of the report
that “The priorities of the Mission remain to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights”
(S/2014/773, para. 2) in Kosovo and Metohija. Well, if
the said areas were all right, they would not be priorities.
Yet, regrettably, not even the basic preconditions for
normal life have been created in Kosovo and Metohija
so that today, more than 15 years after the arrival of
international presences, the Security Council needs to
discuss how to ensure in the first place the elementary
living conditions for Serbs and other non-Albanians
in Kosovo and Metohija. We therefore believe that the
role of UNMIK should continue to be strengthened in
the areas of the current competencies of the Mission,
whereas the weakening of the role it has been entrusted
with would lessen its capacity to fulfil its mandate,
particularly in areas of vital importance for Serbs and
other non-Albanians living in Kosovo and Metohija.
We must not disregard the importance of the trust
that the Serbian and other non-Albanian populations
in Kosovo have placed in UNMIK, either. That trust
underscores the need for a more active and visible
presence and engagement of the Mission in Kosovo and
Metohija. Today, in the second decade of the twentyfirst century, there are still people in one part of Europe
who cannot tend their fields or frequent and pray in
their places of worship without fear, while their children
go to school in fear. That dark picture is the defeat of
modern civilization and, sadly, a daily occurrence in
the life of many Serbs and non-Albanians of Kosovo
and Metohija.
In addition to the so-called northern Kosovo,
which was singled out at one point as a separate area
for monitoring, attention should also be accorded in
accordance with the basic priorities of UNMIK, such
as promoting “security, stability and respect for human
rights”, the lives of Serbs and the numerous difficulties

14-670195/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

04/12/2014

they encounter every day in the so-called south of the
Ibar River area and other parts of Kosovo and Metohija.

That is the life and the rights that we demand for Serbs
as well.

The lives of Serbs in enclaves all over the province
are quiet, modest and difficult; they live in today’s
ghettos, to the shame of Europe and the world. That is
the common knowledge of all UNMIK members who
have been there, and it is the obligation of each and
every righteous servant of the United Nations to report
the plight and predicament of those Serbian towns and
villages to the world. That is why the regular UNMIK
reports should focus special attention on the harsh
realities in which Serbs south of the Ibar River live. We
must — and we want to — defend their life and their
right to work, to move freely, to be free, to go to school,
to receive medical treatment and to be able to protect
themselves.

The Republic of Serbia is firmly committed to
continuing its active and constructive participation
in negotiations with Pristina at all levels and to
implementing the agreements reached thus far. We
are ready to continue the process. Yet our willingness
to negotiate does not mean that we are weak; our
constructiveness does not mean that we acquiesce
easily, and our belief does not mean that we are naive.
Unfortunately, we are lacking an interlocutor on the
other side of the table. The administrative organs of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina
have not been formed yet, half a year after the elections.
We expect that they will be formed in the coming days.

It is precisely for those reasons that nobody can
speak of Serbian chauvinism, a new Republika Srpska
or hegemonistic aspirations today. The right to life is
universal and untouchable. Serbia, too, has the right to
fight for this right. That is all the more so as, this time,
Serbia does not demand of its people anything that it is
not ready to give to other peoples. Life, as a foundation,
calls for solutions like this, because, after all, we were
given life to preserve, protect and respect — our lives
and other peoples’. Serbia and its Government have
decided unequivocally to respect each and every life in
Kosovo and Metohija and requests that the term “each
and every life” encompass the lives of the Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija as well.
That is why today, as we await and seek a solution
to the Kosovo knot, we have nothing to be ashamed of
and have no reason to respond to all the conditions that
have been set, overtly or covertly, in any other way than
the way in which we have already responded. Because,
through our attitude and platform, we have done
precisely every single thing that the world has asked us
to do over the years. We have normalized relations with
Pristina. We talk to Pristina, We seek joint solutions
with Pristina. We respect the demands of Pristina, and
our attitude towards Pristina and the Albanians is not
the attitude that we would have towards anyone who did
not have the same rights that we demand for our people.
After a century of conflicts, wars and victims, this
Government has made a step towards the Albanians
that, surely, can be called historic. Instead of conflict,
this Government chose agreement and solutions instead
of problems and, most importantly, life instead of death.

6/27

However, without waiting for a Government
to be formed in Pristina, the Republic of Serbia
has implemented a whole range of measures that it
committed itself to under the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
reached in Brussels. We have amended the Law
on Higher Education and adopted a new Cadastre
Regulation to make the implementation of the relevant
agreements possible. With respect to the freedom of
movement, we have given permission to the bearers
of identity documents issued by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina to cross the
border crossings at Nikola Tesla and Niš Constantine
the Great airports, in Belgrade and Niš respectively, and
the four busiest crossings to Hungary, Croatia, Bulgaria
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Also,
a number of high-ranking officials from the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government attended important
regional conferences and other events in Belgrade
during the reporting period.
We regret the lack of progress in the implementation
of the key segment of the Brussels Agreement related
to the establishment of a community of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo and Metohija. Prior to the
dissolution of the Parliament in Pristina, no preparations
were made for a legal framework for the effective
implementation of the competencies of the future
community in the field of economic development,
education, health and urban and rural planning in the
community’s territory, as provided for by article 4 of
the Brussels Agreement. For its part, the community’s
management team has drawn up a draft statute and is
ready to send it to the Committee on the Implementation
of the Brussels Agreement.

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

Let me highlight in this context the problem of
the integration of 30 former members of the Ministry
of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia from Kosovo
and Metohija into the Kosovo police service in the
municipalities in northern Kosovo and Metohija.
Although the Government of the Republic of Serbia
has fully implemented the relevant agreements and
terminated their employment, those members have
not yet been advised of the status of their applications,
let alone admitted or fully integrated into the Kosovo
police service. Likewise, the integration of the former
administrative staff of the Ministry of the Interior and
the firefighters has not begun either.
The Republic of Serbia cannot accept the part of
the report related to northern Kosovo and Metohija
in which the situation in the locality of Brdjani,
in northern Kosovska Mitrovica, is presented in a
fragmentary manner and therefore inaccurately. To the
disappointment of my country, that part of the report is
silent on the basic problem in the area, which is the fact
that, through land usurpation and illegal construction,
the Kosovo and Metohija Albanians continue to press in
every possible way for changes to the ethnic structure
of northern Kosovska Mitrovica.
According to information provided by the officials
of the municipality of Kosovska Mitrovica north,
the Albanians plan to build 172 housing units in the
locality of Brdjani for the veterans of the so-called
Kosovo Liberation Army, who never — and I repeat
never — lived there prior to 1999, and a small number of
Albanians who did. That serves to put into perspective
the actions of the local Serbian population, which
were taken, rightly, in protest against the attempts
to artificially change the demographic picture on the
ground and paint it in negative colours as unfounded
and unconstructive. On the other hand, it would be
very easy to prove exactly what the previous situation
was and take measures to prevent politically motivated
changes to the demographic structure in northern
Kosovo and Metohija.
Let me also point out here that the criminal
proceedings against Zubin Potok mayor Stevan Vulovic
and other Serbs from the municipality of Zubin Potok
serve to bring political pressure to bear on — and
prevent the running of — the municipality as a local
institution of self-government with a Serbian majority.
The prosecutions also serve to derail the implementation
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations between Belgrade and

S/PV.7327

Pristina, providing for the unencumbered running of
municipalities with Serbian majorities in Kosovo and
Metohija.
With respect to the security situation, the report
does mention problems in the implementation of laws,
in particular at the local level. The Serbs and their
property are targeted in the majority of ethnically
motivated attacks, while personal and property
insecurity remain the main obstacles to the sustainable
return of the Serbian population to localities from
which they were expelled.
I have to bring to the attention of the Council the
tragic death of Gendarme Stevan Sinđelić. He was
shot and killed by members of armed illegal logging
gangs from Kosovo and Metohija in the Ground Safety
Zone along the administrative boundary line between
Kosovo and Metohija and central Serbia on 28 August.
It is impermissible that groups of civilians armed with
automatic rifles roam freely, cut wood illegally and
attack the security forces of the Republic of Serbia as
the latter attempt, quite legally, to prevent them from
doing so.
It is also my duty to bring to the attention of the
Council that, on 28 August, the Feast of the Dormition,
once celebrated by the townspeople of Đakovica as their
patron saint’s day, the displaced citizens of that town
of Serbian nationality were prevented once again from
visiting the holy places in their place of birth because
they had been told that international forces could not
guarantee their security. The people of Đakovica had
the same problem on Christmas Eve, when Albanians
stoned their buses, while on All Souls’ Day they were
prevented from visiting the graves of friends and
relatives.
The Serbs from Suva Reka were also prevented
from marking the same religious holiday in a dignified
manner. A few hundred Albanians in the village of
Mušutište blocked the passage of displaced Serbs to
the local Orthodox church in which they intended to
celebrate the Feast of the Dormition. The extremists
blocking the passage carried Albanian flags and
posters with offensive messages. If the displaced Serbs
cannot visit the towns and villages in which they were
born or the graves of their relatives on even one day a
year without fearing for their safety, the sincerity of the
call of the provincial institutions to displaced Serbs to
return is very much in doubt, as is the capacity of those
institutions to ensure personal and property security
for all residents of Kosovo and Metohija.

14-670197/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

The Government of the Republic of Serbia is
also deeply worried that a flag of the Republic of
Serbia was removed from the fortress at Zvečan in
the night between 14 and 15 October, and that another
Serbian flag flown over the building of the Treasury
Department in northern Kosovska Mitrovica was
burned on 16 October.
The Republic of Serbia calls on all responsible and
active actors in the international community to pay
maximal heed to the conclusions of the Chief Prosecutor
of the European Union’s Special Investigative Task
Force, Clint Williamson. He stated that compelling
evidence has been found to file an indictment against
senior officials of the so-called Kosovo Liberation
Army for the persecution of Serbs, Roma and Kosovo
and Metohija Albanians. The campaign of persecution
included murders, abductions, disappearances, illegal
detentions in camps in Kosovo and Metohija and
Albania, sexual violence and other forms of inhumane
treatment, such as forced displacement and the
destruction of churches and other religious sites. Those
responsible for the most heinous crimes must not be
acquitted due to a lack of evidence caused by the brutal
intimidation of witnesses.
Oliver Ivanović, leader of the civic initiative
Serbia, Democracy, Justice, was apprehended at
the end of January and indicted at the beginning of
August. The first hearing was held in the Mitrovica
Basic Court on 26 August in a case consolidated with
those of Dragoljub Delibašić, the retired Head of the
Police Department of Kosovo and Metohija, Ilija and
Nebojša Vujačić and Aleksandar Lazović, indicted for
grave criminal offences and war crimes committed in
1999 and 2000. All the indictees pleaded not guilty
on all counts of the indictment. The custody of Oliver
Ivanović was extended until 26 October 2014 and then
for another two months.
Yet only two days after the Prosecutor of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) raised the indictment against Ivanović and
requested extension of custody for him, the Court
released on bail Ismet Haxha, one of the indictees in the
Drenica Group case, charged with war crimes against
civilians committed at Likovac in 1998 and 1999. Haxha
was absent for the rest of the trial, hiding in the Pristina
Clinical Centre. The instances of double standards
evident in the Kosovo and Metohija judiciary’s practice
instil fear and a sense of insecurity in Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities in the province.

8/27

04/12/2014

Telling evidence of the corruption and dysfunction
of the Kosovo and Metohija justice system includes
the striking from the record of key witness testimony
in the so-called Klečka case because of changes in
criminal laws; the acquittal of Fatmir Limaj and his
co-defendants, who had been charged with murder,
torture and threats to the health of Serbian and Albanian
civilians and prisoners of war; the subsequent reopening
of the case and the Pristina officials’ untoward reactions
to Limaj’s and his co-defendants’ arrests, which gave
rise to a request for revision of the EULEX mandate
being introduced in the Kosovo Assembly; and, finally,
Limaj’s release from prison to house arrest.
It is clear that the local justice system, like the
international presences in the province, is under the
strong influence of the political elites in Pristina. The
Government of the Republic of Serbia’s concern about
the work of the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija is
relevant in the light of disclosures that bribes have been
given to cease proceedings in dozens of cases against
Kosovo and Metohija Albanians and that evidence has
been fabricated in the increasingly senseless case of
Oliver Ivanović, all of which casts serious doubt on
whether EULEX is immune to corruption.
To fully implement the Brussels Agreement and
the previous agreements in the technical dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, the Republic of Serbia
has fulfilled its obligations. Pristina, however, has so
far failed to take the necessary steps to comply with its
obligations in such key areas as addressing inadequacies
in the Amnesty Law, the Law on the Budget and the
Law on Local Self-Government. Nevertheless, I would
have to say the authorities have also taken a lot positive
steps as well.
In assessing the constitutionality of the Amnesty
Law, the so-called Constitutional Court of Kosovo
found unconstitutional the articles of the Law that
grant amnesty to perpetrators of acts of destruction or
damage to the property of others or to movable property,
arson, damage to items belonging to others, document
forgery and special cases of document forgery, with the
result that such acts are now excluded from amnesty.
Acts that are also excluded from the Amnesty Law are
those that can be used by the judiciary organs of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG)
to prosecute persons of Serbian nationality in Kosovo
and Metohija. In this context, we would point out that
international judges of the Constitutional Court of
Kosovo, Judge Robert Carolan, from the United States,

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

and Judge Almiro Rodrigues, from Portugal, wrote in
dissent from the decision the Court that the amnesty for
the aforementioned acts is not unconstitutional.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia
expresses its deep concern over members of the
majority community in Kosovo and Metohija regularly
provoking incidents that prevent Serbs and other
non-Albanians from returning to their homes from
which they had been expelled. I would like to cite a few
sad examples, which are indicative of kind of attacks
that are being carried out on returnee houses and other
property.
On 22 August, unknown perpetrators fired at the
home of Tomislav Dabetić in the village of Saljinovica,
in the municipality of Istok. Fortunately, the returnee
family was not at home at the time of the attack. Upon
their arrival at their home, however, they noticed
damage to the house — a bullet had gone through a
window and a door and ended up in the bathroom. The
incident spread fear and anxiety among the people of
Saljinovica, as well as among all those intending to
return to that village, all the more so as the victims of
the attack were a family who had never done any harm
to anybody.
At the end of August, five houses were demolished
in the centre of Đakovica. These houses belonged
to the Serbian Stefić family, who were the original
settlers who literally built the town from scratch.
The demolition was carried out at the direct order of
Municipal President Mimoza Kusari Lila, whereby a
clear message was sent to the Serbs that they are not
welcome back. In that regard, I recall that 12,000 Serbs
lived in Đakovica prior to 1999; today, only four elderly
ladies remain, living on the monastery premises.
In the night between 7 and 8 October, unknown
perpetrators broke into the houses and appendant
buildings of the Serbian returnee families of Miletić,
Konić and Tošić in the village of Grabac, municipality
of Klina, stealing much of their movable property and
causing considerable material damage. There is no
doubt that these acts were motivated by the intention
to intimidate potential returnees and discourage them
from returning to Kosovo and Metohija.
Accordingly, it may be noted that the overall trend
of decelerating the returns of displaced Kosovo and
Metohija Serbs continues and that the PISG in Pristina
have not done enough to fulfil their obligations and
facilitate the return of the expellees. The return of the

S/PV.7327

internally displaced persons (IDPs) is being prevented
by numerous administrative obstacles, with the return
procedures adopted being insurmountable practical
barriers to Serbs and other non-Albanians returning to
their centuries-old homes. They are also catalysts for
lasting changes in the demographic picture of the entire
province.
It is my duty to remind the Council that the
Republic of Serbia is the country that has the greatest
number of IDPs in Europe, with 230,000 people having
that status, 18,000 of whom are in Kosovo and Metohija
itself. Even 15 years after the expulsion, only 2,000
out of 4,000 1DPs who have returned home realize
their right to sustainable return, as the lack of basic
security, economic and social preconditions are a major
impediment to it.
Of particular concern is the situation with respect
to the protection of cultural and religious heritage
in Kosovo and Metohija in the reporting period,
as Mr. Farid Zarif has already mentioned. At the
beginning of September, unknown persons removed
the plaque on the Velika Hoča-Zočište road, which had
been unveiled on 21 August by members of the Serbian
Association of Journalists to honour the memory of
abducted colleagues Đura Slavuj and Ranko Perenić at
the place where the two Radio Pristina reporters were
kidnapped in 1998. It is most likely that plaque and
the concrete pedestal were uprooted with a tractor or
a construction-type vehicle; the removal was noted on
11 September. It is the third time that the plaque has
been vandalized and removed since it was first put in
place.
The threat to the security of, and the pressure
being constantly brought to bear on, the monks of one
of the holiest Serbian places of worship, Visoki Dečani
monastery, which is included in the UNESCO World
Heritage List, is particularly worrisome. In the night
between 11 and 12 October, red and black graffiti was
scribbled on the walls of the appendant buildings on
the monastery estate. The graffiti included the words
“ISIS”, “The Caliphate is coming”, “UÇK” — the
Albanian-language acronym for the Kosovo Liberation
Army — and “AKSH” — the Albanian-language
acronym for the Albanian National Army; two of the
pieces of graffiti were written in Arabic. The Kosovo
Police and KFOR were notified of the incident and they
carried out an investigation. During the investigation,
a group of Albanian extremists congregated in front of
the monastery, provoking and intimidating the Serbian

14-670199/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

monks as they shouted “UÇK”. As early as the next
evening, the graffiti “ISIS” and “AKSH” were scribbled
on the monastery gate all over again.
There is no doubt that, if allowed, the authors of
the graffiti would conduct in Kosovo and Metohija
the same policy of evil, hatred and death that is much
in evidence these days in parts of Iraq, Syria and
Lebanon, the so-called realm of the terrorists of ISIS,
even though it is condemned by the entire civilized and
justice- and freedom-loving world. The experience of
decades past and the present practice frighten Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija. If the United Nations is unable to
provide protection to a site that its specialized agency
put on the World Heritage List, how safe then are the
houses, schools and places of worship of non-Albanian
residents of the province?
In our view, the report is deficient in the segment
related to the protection of the property rights of the
residents of Kosovo and Metohija. Apart from a short
account of the work of the Kosovo Property Agency
and information on the number of cases dealt with in
the reporting period and the number of unsolved cases
before the Agency, the report is silent on the situation
of the property of Serbs and other non-Albanians.
No mention is made of the manner in which property
cases are solved by this Agency, that is, whether the
expropriator has left the property in question, whether
the owner has entered into possession of his or her
property or whether the request for the restitution
of property has been rejected. Also, in line with
previous reports, no mention is made of the fate of the
abandoned property of Serbs and other non-Albanians
in Kosovo and Metohija, which is liable to renewed
expropriation by Albanians as a result of fraudulent
transactions between Albanian buyers and alleged
owners and exposed to destruction and damage, as well
as unfounded expropriation by municipal authorities
without proper compensation or with no compensation
at all.
The fate of the 18,500 complaints of Serbs and
non-Albanians for compensation for destroyed or
damaged property is mentioned nowhere in the report.
Those complaints have been rejected en masse by the
courts on account of the complainants’ failure to pay
high litigation fees —despite the fact that they are IDPs
in a difficult financial situation and had requested to be
excused by the courts from paying the fees.
The report for this period also does not provide
anything more than an accounting of the number of
10/27

04/12/2014

completed cases before the Kosovo Property Agency: it
indicates the number of decisions rather than the number
of enforcement actions — the number of owners who
entered into possession. A property restitution decision
in Kosovo and Metohija still falls far short of the actual
restitution of the property: an original owner’s entry
into possession. In addition to personal insecurity, this
is one of the main reasons that IDP returns to Kosovo
and Metohija are far from satisfactory.
The privatization process conducted by the
Kosovo Privatization Agency continues to evolve
in contravention of international and European
conventions on human rights. Public and socially owned
companies in Serbian communities are privatized much
more frequently. Their sale to persons of Albanian
nationality deprives those communities of economic
resources, thereby providing an additional impetus for
the exodus of the Serbian population from Kosovo and
Metohija.
Let me recall that in its reply of 22 April 2013 to
the letters of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija of
the Government of the Republic of Serbia, in which it
was requested that an end be put to the privatization
conducted contrary to resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK
stated that indeed the privatization through the Kosovo
Privatization Agency was contrary to the resolution
and UNMIK regulations, as the Agency was not a legal
successor of the Kosovo Trust Agency and it was not
established on the basis of a law that was in force in
Kosovo and Metohija in accordance with the resolution.
A specific problem has been created by the decision
of the Kosovo Privatization Agency to liquidate Hotel
Junior in the municipality of Štrpce. The hotel is the
site of a collective accommodation centre for 85 IDPs.
Should it be sold, those persons would be displaced
once again, which would be morally unacceptable from
a humanitarian point of view.
I must also inform the Council of the serious
intention of the PISG in Pristina to expropriate the
immovable property of physical persons and legal
entities in the territory of the municipality of Štrpce,
under the pretext of the construction of a tourist centre.
The property is owned by more than 820 physical persons
and legal entities — including the Inex ski centre in
Brezovica — preponderantly of Serbian extraction and
the majority population in the municipality.
Bearing in mind that almost all owners and
property holders are of Serbian nationality, we are

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

of the opinion that the intended expropriation is
discriminatory and that confiscating land from persons
of Serbian nationality will result in an exodus of the
remaining Serbian population and a change in the
ethnic structure of the municipality of Štrpce. The
actions of the PISG are violating the rights of the Serbs
from Štrpce guaranteed by the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms.
Also, the PISG in Pristina are attempting to
appropriate the property of the Republic of Serbia in
Kosovo and Metohija in an unlawful way, in disregard
of the fact that the question of the property of the
Republic of Serbia and of the economic entities in the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija will be the subject of
the negotiation process conducted by the Republic of
Serbia with the PISG, with mediation provided by the
European Union.
Serbia looks forward to the resumption of
negotiations with Pristina, because it brings peace and
stability to the entire region. Serbia is committed to
reforms and will make no compromises in that regard.
Count on Serbia as a pillar of stability and, very soon, a
modern and successful country.
I would just like to say a word in reference to what
was said by Mr. Farid Zarif with regard to the drone
incident that happened during a football match between
Serbia and Albania. Serbia had nothing to do with that
incident. We reacted very appropriately. Fourteen days
after the incident, a flag made by Albanian supporters
was placed in the centre of Belgrade. One can imagine
what would have happened in some other countries
under similar circumstances. I daresay as well — as
Mr. Zarif also mentioned, and I thank him for doing
so — that we received and were great hosts to the
Albanian Prime Minister, who visited for the first time
in 68 years.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (interpretation from Albanian; English
text provided by delegation): Allow me, first, to
express my gratitude for this opportunity to address
the members of the Security Council as the year ends to
inform them about the progress achieved in Kosovo in
recent months and the challenges ahead of us.
The year 2014 marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the end of the war in Kosovo, which was immediately
followed by the establishment of a United Nations

S/PV.7327

protectorate. Fifteen years seems like a long time.
However, as compared to many frozen conflicts that
burden international relations across all continents,
I believe that we can safely conclude that the United
Nations in Kosovo has indeed been of the most
successful missions in the Organization’s entire history.
Kosovo is today a free and stable democracy with
a growing economy, a Constitution and modern laws
that guarantee the rights of all citizens, especially the
rights of minorities. Kosovo has undertaken a genuine
decentralization of power. Kosovo has formally entered
into the European Union (EU) integration process by
initiating the signing of a stabilization and association
agreement, which just a few years ago was considered
a very difficult task. Thanks to dialogue with Serbia
and the historic Brussels Agreement, Kosovo has been
transformed from an importer of security resources to
an exporter of global initiatives for peace and tolerance.
On this occasion, I would like to extend my thanks
to EU member States and the United States, as well
as to our neighbours in Serbia, for their courage and
commitment. That courage and commitment to the
future of our children was in evidence when we decided
to normalize relations between our two countries and
to look to the future of our two States as neighbours
that aspired to the ideals of the family of Euro-Atlantic
nations.
The Council is already aware that, in the course
of all of the meetings we have had here in the Security
Council, the north of Kosovo has been in a constant
state of crisis. That has raised concerns about a possible
escalation of violence, as well as uncertainty as to what
laws are in force and which constitution is applied there.
We are aware that Kosovo Serb citizens have feared
and distrusted the Government of Kosovo because of
everything that has happened in the past decades. But
let me also tell the Council that this year has been the
year of the cementing of the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Kosovo.
The participation of Serbs from the northern
part of Kosovo for the first time in national elections
organized under the laws of Kosovo, as well as the
Serbian leadership’s participation in negotiations for
the establishment of governing institutions following
the June elections, is a good omen and inspires great
hope that even this painful chapter is beginning to be
resolved. That is based on the wishes of the people of
Kosovo, Albania, Serbia and others, who all share the
same dreams, the same hopes and the same rights to

14-6701911/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

04/12/2014

a secure future with a focus on the economy and the
creation of new jobs. The citizens of Kosovo today — be
they Albanian, Serb, Bosniak, Turk or Ashkali — are
not interested in nationalistic speeches and their old
ethnic dreams. They want jobs, they want progress and
they want to see peace after decades of discrimination,
war and uncertainty.

majority or in the minority, the political class respects
the Constitution and obeys the law; it respects the
decisions of the Constitutional court; and it respects
the country’s president, Mrs. Jahjaga. Our President
happens to be the first woman President in the entire
Balkans. All of this is a sign of Kosovo’s political
emancipation.

Therefore, the year 2014 will go down in Kosovo’s
modern history as the year when the entire territory
of Kosovo, the north and the south, participated in
the democratic process and worked together to create
institutions that are responsible for reflecting and
working for the welfare of the citizens of Kosovo. I
would like to thank the missions of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United
Nations, the EU and the United States, as well as the civil
society organizations that helped us organize excellent
elections with the highest democratic standards on
8 June, elections that saw the participation of all the
communities in Kosovo.

We had our share of disagreements during the
months after the election. The winning party and the
opposition could not find common ground. We had
moments of uncertainty, but they never led to violence
or threats to our common goal, which is to be future
members of the EU family and the NATO alliance.

There are five major developments that I wish to
emphasize during my appearance before the Council
today, on behalf of the Republic of Kosovo, that will
confirm that along with us, it, too, can be proud of this
joint success in Kosovo.
The first one, as I mentioned earlier, is that Kosovo,
in the span of six months, organized two successful
elections: local ones at the end of 2013 and national ones
in June 2014. They were considered by international
observers to be free, well organized and democratic
elections.
The elections included the election of Serb mayors
in the north, who are now integrated into the Kosovo
legal system and, above all, enjoy legitimacy and
are accepted by the entire community living in the
north. The results of the national elections were even
better, because they were tallied throughout the entire
territory of Kosovo. Kosovo today can be considered
an established democracy capable of fully organizing
elections independently and respecting the results.
The second thing I wanted to mention is that
although we have experienced political gridlock,
it never evolved into a violent crisis. While violent
protests have occurred in neighbouring countries, with
police violence and the delegitimizing of independent
institutions such as the supreme and constitutional
courts, Kosovo has proved that whether we are in the
opposition or in the Government, whether we are in the

12/27

I am happy to inform the Council that through
respect for the decisions of the Constitutional Court
and, thankfully, the role of the President as facilitator,
the two largest parties in Kosovo, the Democratic
Party of Kosovo — the winning party — and the
Democratic League of Kosovo, along with the parties
representing minorities, have reached an agreement to
form a government. I believe that this formula will be
implemented next week, with new institutions of the
Republic of Kosovo.
It is of particular importance that this coalition
was achieved by Kosovo political parties without
outside interference, which is a great achievement if
we compare it to the United Nations protectorate or
the situation at the beginning, when the international
community played an important role. Now we finally
have a process and local results that make us proud
of the fact that Kosovo has passed the test of political
maturity.
The third point I wanted to mention is that political
stability has also helped Kosovo succeed internationally.
This year was one of transition during which elections
were held in Serbia, our partner in dialogue, as well
as in the European Parliament, as I noted in Kosovo.
There was also a change in EU commissioners, but
despite all of this, international recognition of Kosovo
remained an undeniable element of the Balkans policy
architecture.
On this occasion, I would like to thank the countries
of Tonga, Lesotho, Togo and the Solomon Islands, which
recognized the independence of Kosovo, bringing the
number of recognitions to 108. Our diplomacy called
this a year of multilateral inclusion, during which
Kosovo became a member of the Venice Commission of
the Council of Europe and many regional organizations.

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

The dialogue with Serbia has continued. At the
technical level, we have achieved many successes
in the normalization of relations, although, to be
honest, much remains to be done. Serbia has signed an
agreement with Kosovo that ensures the normalization
of relations, but there is still much resistance to its
full implementation. I know that it is not an easy
task. I wish to reaffirm that the Republic of Kosovo
will implement every agreement and every obligation
that we have undertaken in order to integrate the Serb
minority. I often meet with Serb leaders, and there have
been tendencies to locate Kosovo in the international
arena, which does not help either Serbia or Kosovo.
Allow me to state with particular pride that Kosovo
has become a member of the International Olympic
Committee. The youth of Kosovo, from the world judo
champion, Ms. Majlinda Kelmendi, to the thousands
of young people who have dreamed of representing the
colours of Kosovo in the international arena, will now
have the opportunity to compete anywhere in the world
as equals with other athletes. Just imagine; only six
years after Kosovo became independent, we are already
a part of the Olympic family and will have the Kosovo
flag flown at the Rio Olympics.
On behalf of the Republic of Kosovo and its
institutions, I would like to thank in particular all of
the States members of the International Organization
of la Francophonie for supporting Kosovo’s recent
accession. The organization offered its strong support
during the Senegal summit in November, unanimously
supporting Kosovo’s membership as an observer in
the large francophone family. Kosovo’s membership
in this community will reflect its cultural values and
standards and best practices in terms of international
cooperation.
The fourth point I wanted to make is related to
global developments and the respective role of Kosovo.
The global fight against terrorism and the spread of
religious radicalism has affected Kosovo in the same
way as it has many countries of the world. There are
also marginal groups in Kosovo, as in all European
countries, that are recruiting and advocating for the
participation of Kosovars on the side of the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria in Syria and in Iraq. This phenomenon
is a source of concern, but the Government has taken
important steps to put an end to such tendencies. We
have arrested several dozen suspected militants and
those who inspired them, including a number of imams
who are believed to be inciting hatred. We will not

S/PV.7327

compromise with radicalism. We have already prepared
a law against Kosovar participation in foreign wars and
are working actively to promote Kosovo as a global
dialogue platform for religious tolerance.
I want to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the United States Department of State,
which in their reports this year have praised Kosovo’s
role in promoting religious tolerance. Kosovo is an
example of peacemaking and of the building of a
genuine democracy following genocide and war.
Yes, I am aware of and strongly condemn the
occasional attacks against the Serbian Orthodox
Church. Bishop Teodosije and other Serbian priests are
an essential part of Kosovo, and Serbian churches are an
important basis of our common heritage, but let me say
that not every incident that is reported here has religious
or ethnic connotations. Often they are acts of vandalism
carried out by provocateurs or attacks for economic
benefits. There are fewer interreligious incidents in
Kosovo than in many neighbouring countries. I know
one thing: that Kosovo will not be 100 per cent free if
all of its citizens are not able to speak openly, to move
fearlessly and to practice their religion freely. But I can
promise the Council here today that Kosovo is and will
remain free.
The last point I will discuss here today is our
commitment to future projects. I also thank all present
for their patience and for the concerns they have
expressed in the course of this discussion.
Kosovo has achieved phenomenal success in the
context of the World Bank’s doing business index. In
the last six years, Kosovo has had the highest economic
growth rate in all of Eastern Europe, with an average
rate of 4.5 per cent. Kosovo also has the lowest public
debt in the Balkans, which does not exceed 10 per cent of
the gross domestic product. Kosovo is the country with
the most Internet connectivity in the Balkans; close to
90 per cent of the population has access to high-speed
Internet, a result of our young demographic profile
and of a large diaspora and the need to be in touch
with our families. We are now in the final stages of
bringing foreign investors into the tourism and energy
sectors, and in the past eight years we have built 1,500
kilometres of roads and highways as well as 120 new
schools. Thus, the old image that Council members may
have for Kosovo has changed and is changing every day.
In digital diplomacy, culture, sports and peacemaking,
we have demonstrated innovation and vision.

14-6701913/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

Nevertheless, we still have many challenges ahead
of us. We will establish a specialist court to shed light
on the allegations concerning war crimes. Kosovo has
faith in justice. We are working to combat corruption
and organized crime. Those challenges also have a
regional element of cooperation and the exchange
of information. I therefore ask the Council today to
recognize Kosovo’s progress and our willingness to
face new challenges. If Kosovo is to enjoy complete and
irreversible success, Council members need to confirm
the progress that we have made throughout the years
since the late and much respected Sergio Vieira de Mello
first led the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo. The new reality requires courage
from Council members in order to open a new, normal
political relationship between the United Nations and
Kosovo. I am convinced that, thanks to the Council’s
understanding, that will happen very soon and Kosovo
will be an equal member of the United Nations family.
The President (spoke in French) I shall now give
the floor to members of the Security Council.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Mr. Aleksandar
Vučić, Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo, for their
statements. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif for his briefing.
Nigeria takes positive note of the continued progress
in technical talks between the parties. It is significant
that through the dialogue both sides have reached an
agreement on the integrated management of border
crossing points, on telecommunications and energy, and
on the use of Kosovar identification documents. These
agreements, we believe, will go a long way towards
strengthening bilateral relations between the parties.
We urge both sides to work diligently towards an early
resumption of high-level talks on the normalization of
relations.
The absence of a Government in Pristina is
delaying the resumption of negotiations on issues
concerning municipal governance. That is an outcome
of the ongoing political crisis in Kosovo. We encourage
the political leaders to reach an early agreement on
the election of the President of the Assembly and
the formation of a Government. We believe that this
would help to consolidate the gains made in Kosovo’s
democratic process. We welcome the engagement
of the four Serb-majority municipalities in northern
Kosovo with the central authorities in Pristina in the
preparation of the municipal budgets. We note that the
14/27

04/12/2014

process also involved consultations with the authorities
in Belgrade. Those are positive developments, and we
urge all concerned to maintain their engagement.
The problem of foreign terrorist fighters is an
ongoing threat to international peace and security.
Resolution 2178 (2014), which the Council adopted in
September, underscores the urgent need to prevent the
movement and recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters.
In that regard, we commend the Kosovo police for
its operations conducted to detain suspected former
combatants and supporters of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front. We look
forward to the debate on the draft law prohibiting the
participation of Kosovars in armed conflicts outside
Kosovo. Its early adoption, we believe, would help to
strengthen the legal framework and aid the fight against
foreign terrorist fighters.
During the debate in August (see S/PV.7257), we
encouraged the return of internally displaced persons
and called for projects that would promote their
reintegration, education and access to services. We
are therefore pleased to note that a new consultative
body has been launched to promote discussion on
improving outcomes for internally displaced persons.
Of particular significance is the inclusive nature of the
body’s composition. It involves Serbian and Kosovar
institutions, as well as the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations. We see this
multi-stakeholder approach as having the potential
to help in resolving the many challenges faced by
internally displaced persons in Kosovo.
Reconciliation remains crucial to strengthening
cohesion and laying a foundation for peace and progress
in Kosovo. In that regard, we take positive note of the
outcome of the meeting of the Interministerial Working
Group on Dealing with the Past and Reconciliation,
which met on 16 October and established various
working groups to assist in the design of a comprehensive
strategy on transitional justice. With a focus on
institutional reform, as well as the right to truth, justice
and reparations, we are hopeful that the working groups
will help to identify ways of promoting reconciliation
among the different communities in Kosovo.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar
Vučić, and we share his concerns. We take note of the
statement of Mr. Hashim Thaçi. We thank Mr. Farid Zarif
for submitting the report (S/2014/773) of the Secretary14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

General on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as his a assessment of the situation in the region.
Much of what happened in Kosovo during
the reporting period demonstrates the failure of
State-building in Kosovo. The clear and protracted
political crisis has been provoked by the inability of
local elite and engendered by the infamous Kosovo
Liberation Army to find agreement without guidance
from the outside. We believe that, in the building of new
institutions of State, the ideas and approaches of Serbian
and other non-Albanian communities must be fully
taken on board. To uphold the interests of the Kosovo
Serbs, there is also a need for the swift establishment
of the community/association of Serb municipalities
in Kosovo, in line with the Brussels agreements. For
the time being, unfortunately, no progress has been
forthcoming. Delays in the constitution of Government
structures also slow down the resumption of negotiations
between Belgrade and Pristina.
We are concerned by the negative consequences
of the political crisis in establishing the specialist
court to investigate the allegations of crimes against
humanity committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army
during the armed conflict. The interim findings of the
investigations conducted by the Special Investigative
Task Force, led by Mr. Williamson, clearly point to
a sufficient body of evidence corroborate reports of
numerous murders, kidnappings, rapes, unlawful
detentions, inhumane treatment and the desecration of
churches, leading to the ethnic cleansing and expulsion
of Serbs from southern and central Kosovo, as well as
the trafficking in human organs. The perpetrators must
be brought to account, irrespective of their current
standing. It is also crucial that the protection of all
the witnesses be duly ensured during the trial. We call
on the Secretary-General to actively follow-up on the
situation regarding the constitution of the specialist
court.
Many years have passed, yet Kosovo has made
no manifest progress in the judiciary or in combating
corruption, organized crime, including drug trafficking
and human beings, restrictions on freedom of speech and
political influence on the judiciary. That is confirmed
by recent reports of the European Commission and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
There are also clear signs of backsliding in other
areas, including the social and economic fronts. The

S/PV.7327

unemployment rate remains very high, and people are
leaving Kosovo en masse to seek better lives.
We express our serious concern over reports that
high-ranking staff members of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) have been implicated in
corruption. These are the very individuals who should
be encouraging Kosovar Albanians to commit to the rule
of law. We call for an impartial investigation into these
cases since, according to available data, perpetrators
of serious crimes could remain at large as a result of
corrupt arrangements. We welcome the appointment of
Italian diplomat Gabriele Meucci as Head of EULEX.
We hope that he will be able to address these issues
related to the Mission, and spare no effort to fulfil, in
an impartial and consistent manner, the tasks entrusted
to him by the Security Council to ensure law and order
in Kosovo.
We are disturbed by a wave of ani-Serbian actions
in Kosovo following the football match between
Serbia and Albania on 14 October. We have heard the
usual formal condemnations of the anti-Serb attacks
from Pristina, but no more. Yet Serbian houses in the
region continue to burn, and there is no sign that the
perpetrators are being brought to justice. In addition
to the desecration of Orthodox monasteries in the
region, including the gem of cultural heritage — the
Visoki Dečani Monastery — this is a clear indication
that interethnic intolerance endures among Kosovar
Albanians. It is no accident that there is an ongoing
exodus of ethnic minorities from the region. Mere laws
ensuring their rights will not suffice; laws have to be
enforced.
With regard to the participation of Kosovars in
the conflict in the Middle East, ongoing and decisive
measures are required to halt that dangerous trend.
The United Nations Mission remains the primary
international presence in Kosovo. The European
Union’s mediation between Belgrade and Pristina and
the handover of part of UNMIK’s functions to EULEX
does not mean that the United Nations role is in any way
diminished. Given the wide array of problems, we call
upon the United Nations Mission in Kosovo to carry out
its mandate fully and dynamically. That means that it
must have all the necessary resources and staff to do so.
We categorically object to attempts to devalue the role
of UNMIK, and we call on the Kosovar Albanian side
to fully cooperate with the United Nations presence.

14-6701915/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

To conclude, I would like to stress that the
Russian position regarding the matter of Kosovo and
the territorial integrity of Serbia has not changed.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully relevant and
obligatory as the internationally accepted legal basis
for a settlement to the situation in Kosovo.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif for his briefing. We also welcome Serbian
Prime Minister Aleksandar Vučić and Mr. Hashim
Thaçi.
We are concerned by the scant progress in the
negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade. Although
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union is
continuing, there have been only technical meetings
with regard to specific sectoral issues. It is essential for
the political leaders on both sides to continue to pursue
dialogue at the highest level.
Along those lines, we urge all the actors in Kosovo,
especially the political parties, to make every effort to
find compromise solutions that will end the stalemate
we have seen in recent months. In that regard, we
welcome the in-principle reached by the main political
parties on 18 November. We hope that their dialogue
will reach a successful conclusion.
It is also urgent to resume the dialogue facilitated
by the European Union in order to tackle contingent
issues that involve the municipal administration of the
region in order to ensure that the tense climate between
the Albanian and Serbian communities of Kosovo does
not persist. The lack of a political agreement following
the elections has direct repercussions on the stability
and governance of the north of Kosovo.
Turning now to security, we are concerned by
incidents on the administrative border of Kosovo,
a situation that requires close follow-up and the
continued implementation of effective measures to
prevent recurrences. It is essential to maintain a climate
of security while negotiations proceed.
On a related theme, with a view to the global
character that terrorism has recently acquired, Chile
welcomes the measures Kosovo has adopted to
address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
particularly in Syria and Iraq. We urge the political
and religious leaders of Kosovo to continue working to
combat violent extremism and terrorism with a view
to dissuading young people from those narratives and

16/27

04/12/2014

from the danger of joining groups identified as terrorist
by the Security Council.
We wish to highlight the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
supporting decisive post-conflict actions. Specifically,
we mean the quest for truth and justice. It is difficult to
speak of reconciliation policies without addressing the
need to search for the more than 1,600 people missing
as a result of the conflict. Such facts are fundamental
in order to begin healing the wounds left by the war.
We call on all authorities, political leaders and civil
society to continue to communicate any information
that could lead to the location of missing persons. The
forensic collaboration of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo is also helping to make this a
comprehensive rehabilitation process.
To conclude, as we have noted on other occasions
in the Security Council, we would like to call attention
to the work and central role that UNMIK continues to
play in promoting security, stability and respect for
human rights, which is a priority for progress towards
reconciliation among the communities. Only in the
context of respect for and appropriate protection of
fundamental human rights will it be possible to hope
for reconciliation and to imagine a peaceful future.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif for his briefing. I welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister of
Serbia, who has also made a statement. I also listened
attentively to the statement by Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands Serbia’s legitimate
concern on the question of Kosovo.
China believes that resolution 1244(199) provides
the key legal basis for resolving the crisis in Kosovo.
The best way to resolve the issue of Kosovo is to
engage in dialogue and negotiations according to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, within the framework of the relevant Council
resolutions, in order to reach an appropriate solution
acceptable to all parties.
Recently, the overall security situation in Kosovo
has remained stable, but it still presents a number of
complex factors. China appreciates the positive efforts
made by the Serbian Government and Prime Minister
Vučić himself to seek a political settlement to the

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

issue of Kosovo. We support continued practical and
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
to implement the agreed bilateral agreements and to
concretely protect the legitimate rights and interests of
ethnic communities in Kosovo so that its people can
enjoy the dividends of peace and development as soon
as possible. Staying the course of dialogue to resolve
differences and conflicts and avoiding action that
might complicate or even escalate the situation, and
seeking a lasting solution to the issue of Kosovo, will
be conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability
in the Balkans and Europe at large. The international
community shares the goal of appropriately resolving
the issue of Kosovo.
China appreciates the work done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative Zarif and supports UNMIK’s continued
implementation of the Council’s mandate. We hope that
international presences such as UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force will produce a synergy based on their mandates
and that they will play a positive and constructive role
in pressing for an appropriate settlement to the issue of
Kosovo.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to express my gratitude to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
Farid Zarif for his comprehensive briefing. I would also
like to welcome Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister
of Serbia, and Mr.Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Kosovo. I thank them for their statements.
The announcement that elections for the presidency
of the Kosovo Assembly would be held on 8 December is
a sign that political tensions in Kosovo have eased. The
subsequent constitutional steps to be taken, specifically
the election of a new President and the members of a
new Cabinet, are further indications of Kosovo’s serious
commitment to a democratic constitution and civilized
path forward. The level of political maturity enjoyed
by the politicians of Kosovo is reflected in the way
they have handled the constitutional tasks before them
and is cause for optimism in the future of the country.
Although the announcement was made rather late, the
lengthy consultations among the various party blocs on
the accompanying complications did eventually led to a
more stable political environment.

S/PV.7327

In that context, Jordan commends the role of the
Constitutional Court of Kosovo and the way it dealt
with the complications referred to it following the
announcement of the results of the most recent elections
for the Assembly of Kosovo, which led eventually to the
formation of alliances among the winning parties. The
spirit of professionalism exhibited by the Court in its
dealing with the complications was clear-cut evidence
of the major progress achieved in the administrative
system in Kosovo.
Security and stability in the region can be achieved
only through good neighbourly relations built on
the basis of mutual respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of each State and on the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States. We therefore emphasize the important need to
make progress on the implementation of the 19 April
2013 Agreement between the two neighbouring States
of Kosovo and Serbia. We also welcome the continued
technical discussions between the two countries,
especially during the recent elections in Kosovo. We
reiterate our call for the high-level dialogue under the
auspices of the European Union to continue as soon as
possible.
I would like to welcome what was mentioned by the
Prime Minister of Serbia regarding the willingness of
his country to resolve the conflict peacefully through
dialogue and the readiness to engage in negotiations
with Pristina to that end.
Jordan commends the continued development
and progress achieved by Kosovo in various areas,
especially when it comes to the rule of law and human
rights. We urge Kosovo to continue on that path.
We reaffirm the importance of the activities of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo in
assisting the country in consolidating rule-of-law and
justice institutions. We call on the authorities to step up
efforts to achieve comprehensive reconciliation among
all sectors of society in Kosovo and to give particular
attention to the treatment of all citizens on an equal
basis in accordance with the law. We also urge them to
protect the rights of minorities effectively, in particular
those of the Serbian minority. The State of Kosovo must
also try to prevent attacks against holy sites belonging
to any religious group or sect.
Since its independence, Kosovo has taken major
strides towards strengthening its international standing.
To date, 108 States Members of the United Nations have

14-6701917/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

recognized Kosovo. Jordan therefore calls for Kosovo’s
accession to the various international organizations and
forums to be facilitated. We also support the proposal
to lengthen the period between progress reports of
the Secretary-General on UNMIK, in the light of the
stability of the situation Kosovo.
In conclusion, we express our appreciation to the
Head and the personnel of UNMIK for their efforts in
carrying out their mandate.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his briefing. I also
acknowledge the report by the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security on
the activities of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and EULEX continue to promote peace, security,
human rights and the rule of law in Kosovo, in close
cooperation with the relevant international partners,
including the Kosovo Force and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
I welcome Prime Minister Vučić of Serbia and
Prime Minister Thaçi of Kosovo.
Robust debate in the formation of Governments
can be a sign of vibrant and mature democracies, but
the prolonged political deadlock in Pristina following
the successful elections on 8 June has risked diluting
the progress achieved so far in the dialogue with
Belgrade and damaging Kosovo’s economy. We
therefore welcome the in-principle agreement reached
recently to form a coalition Government in Pristina and
the announcement that the Assembly of Kosovo will
reconvene on 8 December. We urge the new Kosovar
Government to re-engage as a matter of priority in a new
phase of dialogue with Serbia. We also urge it to focus
on responsible Government and fighting corruption,
and to work to stabilize the country’s economic and
fiscal situation.
Australia welcomes the recent progress achieved in
technical talks between Kosovar and Serbian authorities
despite the stalled high-level political dialogue. The
agreements on crossing points, telecommunications
and energy should make a real difference to people’s
lives and facilitate economic activity. The progress
and cooperation in municipal governance, including
between the four Serb-majority municipalities and
authorities in Pristina, and in police integration are
also welcome developments. The full establishment

18/27

04/12/2014

of the Community of Serb Municipalities should now
be a priority, along with concrete improvements in the
overall situation facing Kosovo’s internally displaced
persons.
The security situation in Kosovo continues
to normalize, with a steady decline in politically
motivated security incidents. But the intensification
of inter-ethnic tensions in Kosovo following the
suspension of the 14 October football match between
Serbia and Albania in Belgrade, including incidents
directed at Kosovo-Serb returnees and their property,
shows that much more needs to be done to strengthen
inter-ethnic harmony. We commend Kosovar security
authorities and EULEX for their prompt and effective
handling of incidents in the aftermath of the match.
We urge Kosovo’s leaders to continue their efforts to
build understanding and reconciliation among different
ethnic communities.
Australia appreciates the efforts of the Kosovar
authorities to safeguard the country’s cultural and
religious heritage, but we remain concerned that
episodes of desecration of sites of particular significance
continue to occur. The spraying of provocative messages
praising the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant at
the Visoki Dečani Monastery on 12 October was of
particular concern.
In that context, Australia also appreciates the steps
taken by Kosovo to address the problem of extremism
and foreign terrorist fighters. We, like the SecretaryGeneral and others, commend all those Kosovo
moderate religious and secular groups who work to
address the root causes of extremism and to combat
foreign fighters.
We note the steps taken by UNMIK and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to monitor the situation and assist in the voluntary
return of displaced persons. The return of displaced
persons and refugees from the Kosovo conflict is an
essential component of long-term reconciliation, and
we once again call on all parties to increase efforts in
that regard.
As this will be Australia’s final statement on
Kosovo in the Security Council during our term of
membership, it is appropriate to reflect on the past two
years — a period of substantial progress in the relations
between Serbia and Kosovo. For both, the 19 April
2013 Agreement and the concrete results delivered by
technical talks set a high benchmark for Serbian and

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

Kosovo leaders elected over the past year to achieve
the full normalization of relations in a new phase of
high-level European Union-facilitated dialogue. We
welcome the recent visit by Foreign Minister Hoxhaj to
Belgrade as a sign of the determination of both parties
to make that happen.
In the light of such progress, there is now scope to
reduce the frequency of Security Council debates on
Kosovo so as to redirect Council resources — already
facing unprecedented demands — to other, more acute
challenges to peace and security. A good first step
would be requesting the Secretary-General to submit
his reports on UNMIK at six-monthly intervals. The
Council could also start to consider whether the current
mandate of UNMIK is appropriate for the contemporary
political and security situation of Kosovo.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zarif for his briefing. We welcome Prime
Minister Thaçi and Prime Minister Vučić to the Security
Council and we thank them for their statements.
The European Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia
dialogues in implementation of the April 2013
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations continue to be critical elements for building
a strong, inclusive and integrated democracy in Kosovo.
We are eager to see high-level meetings resume and
expeditious progress continuing towards the full
implementation of the Brussels Agreement, including
the full functioning of all of Kosovo’s municipalities
in accordance with Kosovo law. In that regard, the
United States welcomes the recent progress by Kosovo
political leaders to overcome the political impasse that
has prevented the formation of a Kosovo Government
following the June elections.
We call on Kosovo’s political party leaders to
move lawfully and quickly to constitute the Assembly
and form the Government fully in line with Kosovo’s
Constitution, laws and rulings by its Constitutional
Court. As the Secretary-General observes in his report
(S/2014/773), there are many pressing issues affecting
the future of all people living in Kosovo, and there
are opportunities to continue the historic process of
normalization with Belgrade and to reconcile with the
past. Sustaining momentum in the Belgrade-Pristina
dialogues and the full implementation of all agreements
reached to date remain integral to the welfare of the
people of Kosovo, to both Kosovo and Serbia’s progress
on their respective paths towards European integration,

S/PV.7327

and to a stable, peaceful and prosperous region.
To that end, we will continue to back the intensive
engagement of the European Union (EU) and the EU
High Representative in advancing the dialogue.
While there has been a pause in progress at the
political level while awaiting the Kosovo Government’s
formation, progress does continue to be made on the
technical level, including on important agreements
on integrated border management, the freedom of
movement, energy and reciprocal recognition of vehicle
insurance, which will allow citizens of both countries
to travel easily across the borders. We welcome the
cooperation between international and local authorities
that helped facilitate visits by Serb pilgrims to Kosovo
for religious holidays in November.
The United States condemns those who seek to
oppose the work of building an inclusive democracy in
Kosovo by committing acts of violence or intimidation
or by sowing tension, mistrust and fear among the
communities. Threats against returnees and their
property, the deplorable acts of vandalism at the
Visoki Dečani monastery on 11 and 12 October and
the incendiary rhetoric that surrounded the suspension
of the soccer match in Belgrade between Serbia and
Albania are all grounds for concern. Those incidents
demonstrate the need to intensify outreach, redouble
efforts to promote dialogue and understanding and to
further strengthen security where it is needed.
The Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continue to
exercise indispensable roles in cooperation with Kosovo
authorities in ensuring security and strengthening the
rule of law throughout the country. Their work has
also been instrumental in ensuring an environment
conducive to advancing the implementation of the
dialogue agreements between Kosovo and Serbia.
KFOR’s support for security and its presence as a third
responder in Mitrovica following the Serbia-Albania
soccer match helped prevent tensions from escalating
into violence.
EULEX personnel remain essential in mentoring
and training Kosovo’s judicial and police personnel.
Their work continues to facilitate the identification
and repatriation of remains from previous conflicts, as
we witnessed in September and October. Colleagues
have raised recent allegations against certain EULEX
officials. Those allegations should be the subject of
a full and transparent investigation. Nonetheless,
inflammatory language directed against EULEX and

14-6701919/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

the lack of full cooperation in certain law enforcement
matters are unacceptable. We continue to support the
important European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo.
Finally, the United States notes and welcomes
Kosovo’s growing involvement in regional cooperation
forums and commends the 10 October decision of the
multinational advisory group of the Regional Arms
Control Verification and Implementation Assistance
Centre for Security Cooperation in South-East Europe
to invite Kosovo’s full participation in the organization.
Increased dialogue among the countries of the region is
vital to addressing shared concerns such as the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters. We call upon the countries
in the region to work together to ensure that effective
preventative and response mechanisms are in place to
counter extremist individuals and violent extremist
ideas. In connection with those efforts, the United
States commends the work of Kosovo and Serbian
law enforcement agencies in response to the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters. Those are important lines of
effort in the coalition to counter the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, of which we thank both Kosovo
and Serbia for being members.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): We welcome Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vučić of Serbia and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo to the Security
Council and we thank them for their statements. We
also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Farid Zarif for his briefing.
Every three months over the past two years, Council
members invariably note the positive developments in
the region and the irreversible changes taking place
on the ground. We commend the Kosovo authorities
on the agreement on the coalition Government, which
we hope will be formed swiftly. We believe that a
new Government will continue building a democratic,
peaceful, economically successful and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. We look forward to the new Government
continuing along the path of reforms and the process
of normalization of relations with Belgrade. The
Government will have to focus on the rule of law, the
fight against corruption and organized crime as well
as on the comprehensive reforms required for further
progress along the State’s Euro-Atlantic path. Regional
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations are an
essential part of Kosovo’s process of moving towards
the European Union (EU). We gladly note the inclusion
of Kosovo in various forms of regional cooperation,
and we look forward to the next informal regional

20/27

04/12/2014

conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Finance
to be organized in Pristina.
Serbia and Kosovo need to move ahead with the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
while building trust among the communities. We
note the progress achieved on integrated border
management, telecommunications and energy through
the EU-facilitated dialogue. We encourage the
resumption of high-level talks as soon as possible. We
also welcome the Mitrovica-Pristina cooperation in the
preparations for municipal elections. We encourage
resolving differences through dialogue, including over
construction in the ethnically mixed areas of Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani, North Mitrovica.
Ensuring justice is essential for reconciliation.
In that regard, we welcome the meeting of the
inter-ministerial working group on dealing with the
past and on reconciliation, the first one in almost
10 months, as well as steps taken towards the adoption
of a comprehensive strategy on transitional justice.
We commend Serbian, European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and Kosovar experts
on the professional completion of the repatriation of
remains recovered in the mass grave in Rudnica. We
call on the parties to expedite the process of enabling
the specialist court to look into cases stemming from
the work of the EU Special Investigative Task Force in
2015.
We commend the efforts of Kosovo police and
security institutions in fighting terrorism through a
series of anti-terrorist operations, as well as legislative
measures against foreign terrorist fighters.
The situation in Kosovo remains calm, and we
commend the cooperation among the Kosovo police,
EULEX and the Kosovo Force, including in managing
incidents and launching measures to counter illegal
logging. However, my delegation would like to recall
that a year ago a Lithuanian officer serving in EULEX
was killed while on duty in northern Kosovo. We call
on the respective authorities to find the perpetrators
and bring them to justice.
We continue to support the successful implementation
of the EULEX mandate and the mission’s impartial
assistance to Kosovo in the consolidation of a
sustainable and accountable rule-of-law sector. The
recent allegations of corruption against EULEX staff
members must be looked into immediately. We welcome
14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

the decision by EU High Representative Federica
Mogherini to appoint an independent legal expert in
that regard.
Finally, having noted the progress on the
implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina Agreement
and on resolution 1244 (1999), Lithuania once again
calls on the Council to review the current reporting
and debating cycles of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) with a
view towards reducing their frequency in 2015, as well
as to consider a drawdown of UNMIK that reflects
developments on the ground.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, for his impressive briefing and
continued leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. I would also like to
thank Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo for their statements.
During the Council’s last debate on Kosovo, held
on 29 August (see S/PV.7257), Rwanda welcomed the
peaceful, transparent and reorganized elections to
the Kosovo Assembly, held on 8 June following the
dissolution of the previous Assembly. But today we are
concerned about the current impasse over the election
of the President of the Assembly and the formation of
a Government, which may prevent the authorities from
taking measures needed to enhance security, foster
reconciliation and promote the economic well-being of
the people of Kosovo. We encourage all the political
parties to intensify their efforts to end this institutional
gridlock.
We note that during the period under review no
high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
was organized through the facilitation of the European
Union (EU). However, we commend the EU for its
continued efforts to promote dialogue, including
holding technical and working-level meetings that
have led to agreements on crossing points, freedom
of movement, telecommunications and energy. In that
regard, since Rwanda believes in regional integration,
we welcome the progress made by both Belgrade and
Pristina towards their integration into Europe, and
we hope the challenges pointed out in the European
Commission’s 2014 progress report for both countries
will soon be overcome.
Regarding the situation in northern Kosovo,
Rwanda welcomes the close cooperation between

S/PV.7327

both communities and the progress being made in
municipal governance, including the coordination and
harmonization of budgets between the North Mitrovica
municipality and the Mitrovica North Administrative
Office, and between the four Serb-majority
municipalities in northern Kosovo and the central
authorities. We also welcome other achievements, such
as the integration of former Serbian Ministry of Interior
police officers into the Kosovo police. In that context,
we call on all sides to build on that momentum and
resolve pending issues such as the construction in the
ethnically mixed area of Brdjani in North Mitrovica.
We note that the security situation in Kosovo has
generally remained calm and stable, despite deplorable
incidents such as those related to illegal logging
and those against cultural and religious heritage.
We commend the Kosovo police, supported by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the International Security Force in Kosovo, for their
continuing action in maintaining peace and security, as
well as their resolve in combating violent extremism
and the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters, as
demonstrated in their action against supporters of the
Islamic State. We would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the important role of the Kosovo Islamic
community, which has denounced the participation of
Kosovan Albanians in foreign conflicts, and we hope
that the draft law prohibiting Kosovar participation in
armed conflicts outside Kosovo will soon be adopted
by the Kosovo Assembly.
Rwanda is concerned at the continuing slow pace
of the process of voluntary return of displaced persons
to Kosovo. In that regard, we commend the Kosovo
authorities on the confidence-building measures that
have been undertaken with the aim of promoting
reconciliation among the communities, including
the integration of minority communities into public
institutions and the police. We nonetheless believe it
is important that all stakeholders continue to engage
with communities in identifying and eradicating all
obstacles to the return and safe settlement of displaced
persons.
In conclusion, Rwanda recognizes the commitment
of Belgrade and Pristina to the EU-facilitated dialogue,
as well as the progress they have made towards their
shared goal of European integration. We hope that
the deadlock in electing the President of the Kosovo
Assembly will soon be resolved and that both
communities will remain constructively engaged

14-6701921/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

in finding long-term stability, reconciliation and
prosperity for Kosovo and all its citizens.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presentation of the report (S/2014/773) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also welcome the participation of
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
Argentina would like to emphasize the fundamental
role the United Nations plays in Kosovo through
UNMIK in promoting security, stability and respect
for human rights, as well as in its cooperation with
the International Security Force in Kosovo and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
maintaining a neutral position with regard to the statute
and under the auspices of the United Nations. I should
point out that in 1999, when Argentina was also a
member of the Security Council, we voted in favour of
resolution 1244 (1999), and we believe it continues to
form the international juridical foundation for Kosovo’s
efforts to achieve a comprehensive settlement through a
political process and negotiations.
Regarding the security situation, we deplore
the serious incidents that have occurred near the
administrative border, although the situation has
generally remained stable. However, we are concerned
about the fact that we continue to see incidents
affecting Serbian Kosovars, particularly in Pejë/
Peć, in the western part of Kosovo. We condemn the
repeated acts of vandalism in cemeteries and Serbian
Orthodox church property. We note that the response of
the Kosovo police to crimes against ethnic minorities
continues to improve, and we urge that measures be
taken to ensure that such acts do not recur.
We welcome the progress that Serbia has made in
reforming Serb institutions and in taking steps towards
integration with the European Union. We call on the
parties to resume their European Union-facilitated
high-level dialogue, and we would like to emphasize
the significant progress that has been made in
implementing the historic agreement of 19 April 2013.
We urge the parties to continue their efforts and build
on that progress. We would also like to stress the
importance of UNMIK’s work, which we believe is
critical to ensuring maximum support for the political
process and focusing particular attention on matters
related to the 19 April agreement.
22/27

04/12/2014

We highlight the progress that has made in
integrating personnel from the Serbian Ministry of the
Interior into the Kosovo police, a very sensitive area of
the agreement. We call on the parties to continue on the
path of dialogue and implementation of the agreement
in order to make progress on the related issue of the
judicial and rule-of-law issues. We encourage all those
with an international presence on the ground to continue
to work together in accordance with their mandates to
consolidate the achievements that have been made and
resolve outstanding issues.
Argentina believes it is critical that we work to
ensure full respect for the human rights of displaced
persons and minorities, regardless of their origins,
so that they can enjoy their substantive rights and
are not subject to discrimination. We also continue
to be concerned about the low numbers of voluntary
returnees to Kosovo since their displacement in 1999.
We call on the competent authorities to continue
to work and implement measures to resolve these
outstanding issues, which impede the return and full
reintegration of internally displaced persons. The work
being undertaken by the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the Danish Refugee Council and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
with the support and cooperation of UNMIK, is of the
greatest importance in that regard.
We also note the establishment by the Serbian
Government’s Office for Kosovo and Metohija of a new
consultative body, including the United Nations and
the Kosovo Minister of Communities and Returns. We
must also continue to prioritize the tasks to resolve the
other legacies the conflict, including the outstanding
cases of 1,690 missing persons. In that connection, we
stress the need to repatriate the remains of those found
in a mass grave discover in Rudnica on 13 October.
UNMIK must pursue and enhance its efforts to identify
the fate of missing persons, and redouble its efforts and
cooperation to ensure that no violation of human rights
enjoys impunity.
We highlight the work of UNMIK in support of the
rule of law, especially through its collaboration with all
relevant interested parties with respect to the principal
problems on the ground. There is also the need to ensure
that the international presences in Kosovo continue to
strengthen their mutual cooperation as they seek to
establish conditions appropriate to the implementation
of the agreement of 19 April 2013. We commend the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

General to promote security, stability and respect for
human rights in Kosovo, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
briefing. We also warmly welcome Prime Minister
Aleksandar Vučić and Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi to
the Council, and thank them for their statements today.
Since the elections in June, it has been expected
that those first Kosovo-wide general elections would
lead to the country’s democratic stability. However,
six months after the elections, we are still witnessing
a continued stand-off among the political actors
and the subsequent delay in the formation of a new
Government. At this critical stage of Kosovo’s path
towards the normalization of relations with Belgrade
and European Union (EU) integration, we hope that the
next parliamentary session in the coming week will be
an opportunity to find a way for a new Government to
be established.
While there has been no high-level dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina due to the domestic
political process, we do believe that both sides are
steadily moving forward in their implementation of
the 19 April 2013 agreement. Most importantly, the
talks on a technical level remain ongoing, and progress
on the ground has also been sustained in the areas of
integrated border management, telecommunications
and energy. It is also encouraging that the recent
progress in the implementation of the agreement on
freedom of movement, with additional border crossings,
has brought substantial benefits to the people’s daily
life.
In order to maintain this positive momentum, it
is vital that the EU-facilitated high-level dialogue
resume without delay. There are remaining key
issues — such as the integration of the judiciary in
northern Kosovo — that need a political dialogue if
they are to be resolved. In this regard, we encourage
Belgrade and Pristina to continue to scale up their
efforts towards the normalization of their relations.
Despite these positive developments in the political
dialogue, we should not lose sight of the difficult road
ahead in dismantling the emotional barriers between
the ethnic communities. In that respect, the work of
the Commission on Missing Persons and joint efforts
to protect cultural and religious heritage are a good

S/PV.7327

starting point for promoting inter-ethnic tolerance and
enhancing the culture of mutual respect.
Furthermore, more vigorous efforts should be
made to ensure the full safety of ethnic minorities.
In particular, a series of security incidents targeting
ethnic minorities and their property continues to
be of grave concern. With this shared concern, we
encourage the Kosovo authorities to engage more
with minority communities, including Kosovo Serbs,
and to investigate any instances of violence against
them. Close cooperation between the EU Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo police is
also highly important in this regard.
At the same time, we would like to commend the
Kosovo authorities in continuing to address the issue of
extremism and the participation of Kosovars in foreign
conflicts, mainly in Syria and Iraq. We also welcome
the public dissociation of religious leaders in Kosovo
from violent extremism, radicalism and terrorism.
Finally, we once again commend the entire staff
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, EULEX and other international partners
for their tireless efforts for the peace and stability of
Kosovo and the wider region.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I welcome to the
Council Prime Ministers Thaçi and Vučić.
The United Kingdom welcomes Kosovo’s continued
progress on the international stage, including the recent
statement by the International Olympic Committee
that Kosovo should be able to participate in the next
Olympic Games. Kosovo is now recognized by well over
half of the States Members of the United Nations. We
encourage those countries that have not yet recognized
Kosovo to do so.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
the progress of both Kosovo and Serbia towards
membership of the European Union. The normalization
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia is integral to
both countries’ European Union accession paths and,
as we have said before, full implementation of the
dialogue agreement is necessary to unlock progress. I
welcome the expressions of commitment to the dialogue
that we have just heard from both Prime Ministers. We
encourage both sides to implement existing agreements
and to continue progress at the working level. It is

14-6701923/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

welcome that technical talks have continued to make
some progress through working level meetings,
including on the integrated management of crossing
points and on telecommunications and energy.
But it is clear that there needs to be a resumption
of high-level meetings once the new Government
of Kosovo is in place. The formation of a new
Government in Kosovo can give renewed momentum
to implementation of the dialogue. We hope that there
will be decisive progress to this end at the constitutive
session of the Kosovo Assembly, which we expect to
take place on 8 December.
The United Kingdom notes with concern continuing
inter-ethnic incidents, including an increased number
of thefts targeting the Kosovo Serb community in
western Kosovo and reports of violence against
Serb returnees and their property. There can be no
tolerance of such incidents or complacency about the
need to tackle them vigorously and hold perpetrators
accountable. We commend the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities, in particular the Kosovo police, to address
these incidents promptly. As the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/773) notes, their timely intervention in
Mitrovica on 14 October to disperse crowds following
the suspension of the Serbia-Albania football match
successfully averted an escalation and possible violence.
The United Kingdom continues to give strong
support to the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). The allegations in the press about
EULEX need to be looked into. The High Representative
has announced an external, independent investigation
into EULEX, which we fully support.
The United Kingdom joins the Secretary-General
in welcoming the shared determination of the Kosovo
authorities and the leadership of the Islamic community
in Kosovo to tackle the issues of extremism and foreign
fighters. The multiple arrests carried out by the Kosovo
police on 11 August and 25 September underline their
commitment to preventing Kosovars travelling overseas
to participate in conflicts. We encourage the continued
close cooperation of police and security services in
the region to tackle those risks. The role played by
the leadership of the Islamic community of Kosovo
and other religious and secular leaders in dissociating
themselves and their communities from extremism has
been a very positive one.
Finally, the United Kingdom reiterates its view
that a reduction in the frequency of these debates is

24/27

04/12/2014

overdue, given the progress in Kosovo over the last
15 years and the improved relations between Pristina
and Belgrade. As the workload of the Security Council
continues to expand, the Council needs to be focusing
on situations and issues that constitute a genuine threat
to international peace and security. Kosovo is not, in
our view, one of them. The current frequency of these
debates, during which we tend to hear largely familiar
restatements of well-established positions by Council
members, does not strike us as a productive use of
Council time.
I also support the suggestion made by other
representatives that the time has come to consider
whether the configuration of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
requires downward adjustment to reflect the current
circumstances in Kosovo.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I want
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing and the Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vučić, and the Prime Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Thaçi, for their statements.
Today we are reviewing the events of 2014, the
year of the implementation of the historic Agreement
of 19 April 2013 reached between Serbia and Kosovo
and facilitated by the European Union. As it happens,
there have been fewer major advances in the past
year, but the dialogue between the two countries has
continued, enabling technical enhancements necessary
for the normalization of their relations. We would like
to congratulate and encourage the parties to continue
their discussions despite the slowdown caused by the
electoral context in both countries. The hopes that were
raised continue to be fulfilled by the facts.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/773)
covers the period after the elections of 8 June in
Kosovo, which took place, we would recall, calmly
and in a transparent matter. Three months ago in this
very Chamber (see S/PV.7257) we were expressing
the hope that a compromise could be found for the
rapid formation of a Government. It seems that today
the Kosovo parties are finally about to achieve it. An
agreement was reached in principle among the main
political parties for a formal Government agreement,
and we look forward to the appointment of a Cabinet, if
possible as soon as 8 December.
That process took time, therefore requiring
increasing attention by the Council, but it took place

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

in line with democratic procedures. Today it seems
that the political crisis has been avoided, and we see in
this a new sign of the Kosovar parties’ maturity. While
continuing to carefully observe their work to come in
Pristina, we reiterate our trust in them.
Kosovo needs a stable Government. Having one is
in the interest of Kosovars, given the pressing economic
challenges facing the country and the expectations that
the entire population, including the north, has expressed
through its appropriate participation in the national
elections. It is also an expectation that the Council has.
We will remain particularly attentive to issues
beyond internal reforms, such as the rapid resumption
of political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
Technical progress certainly continues to be made, but
it is essential that the Governments of both countries
restore political momentum towards a normalization
process, as such a process will not drive itself. This also
involves the pursuit of their European rapprochement, a
subject to which I will return.
Kosovo will not be able to calmly face the future
without light being shed on its past. It is now up
to Kosovo to take responsibility and facilitate the
establishment of a tribunal to follow-up on the work of
the Special Investigative Task Force. Again, given the
gravity of the alleged crimes, the expected formation
of a Government and the resumption of the work of the
Parliament in Pristina are necessary developments for
a situation that should not, in any case, be neglected.
We have no doubt about the willingness of Kosovars
to engage in a legal process that will address all the
aspects of the difficult times experienced by Kosovo in
the late 1990s. We again count on the political parties
in Pristina, who must show their maturity and their
determination as they have done in the past.
I will not go over the incidents that occurred at the
end of August or the police operations in the country
against possible support to the terrorist group Daesh,
but would simply like to acknowledge how responsible
the Kosovo security forces were in their effective and
measured response. For us, the security situation in
Kosovo remains stable.
We note with satisfaction the progress made in the
integration of former Serb policemen into the Kosovo
police, which is a sign of the effective implementation
of the Agreement of 19 April 2013. The establishment
of a common Serbian community with real authority
was another sign of progress, which the Special

S/PV.7327

Representative of the Secretary-General urged us
to consider early this year. Those two processes are
inseparable and will serve to strengthen the confidence
of the local population in Kosovo’s institutional
framework. We hope to quickly see progress on that
front as well.
Finally, we encourage the parties to ensure respect
for the rights of persons belonging to minorities. The
low numbers of refugees returning to Kosovo remains a
concern. The restoration of mutual confidence between
communities remains the only way to allow Kosovo
and Serbia to open a new chapter in their history.
I will conclude by commending the joint progress
by Kosovo and Serbia towards the European Union.
Important steps have been taken. Serbia has made
substantial institutional changes, and we welcome
the efforts already made. The technical process of
negotiations for accession to the European Union,
formally launched on 21 January, continues. We now
hope that the efforts by Serbia will be recognized and a
first round of negotiations can soon begin.
The European Commission has in turn welcomed
the commitment of Pristina to the conclusion of a
stabilization and association agreement, which we hope
will be finalized soon. It is important that the progress
by each of the two sides be made in step, so as to avoid
any delay of one slowing the progress of the other.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister
of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaçi,
Prime Minister of Kosovo, and thank them for their
contributions.
We welcome the fact that the security situation in
Kosovo remained calm and stable during the period
since our most recent debate in the Security Council
(see S/PV.7257), including in the four Serb-majority
municipalities in the north of the country. Another
positive fact is that Serbia and Kosovo have continued
the process of normalizing their relations at the technical
level through the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union pending the formation of the new Government of
Kosovo following the elections of 8 June.
We encourage those newly elected to establish
as soon as possible conditions for the resumption of

14-6701925/27

S/PV.7327

Kosovo

the high-level dialogue facilitated by the European
Union. Recent progress in the talks between the two
parties that received the most votes in the elections
offer the hope that a Government supported by a stable
majority in Parliament will be formed shortly. It is the
responsibility of those newly elected to show a spirit of
compromise and to give priority to the national interest
and respect for Kosovo’s Constitution above and beyond
other considerations.
Luxembourg welcomes the important steps taken
by the Kosovo police and security agencies to contribute
to the fight against the global problem of violent
extremism. I am speaking in particular of the measures
taken to prevent Kosovo’s citizens from participating
in conflicts abroad. We encourage the new Parliament
to make the adoption of the draft bill prohibiting the
participation of Kosovars in armed conflict outside
Kosovo one of its priorities.
Other priorities that await those newly elected, in
addition to the 2015 budget, include the establishment of
a specialist court to follow up on the work of the Special
Investigative Task Force of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo on the allegations set out in
the report by Dick Marty. That court will prosecute the
perpetrators of any crimes committed while allowing
those wrongly accused to prove their innocence.
With respect to the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), given that some
delegations referred to the allegations of corruption
against EULEX judges, I would like to emphasize
that we have full confidence in the ability of Jean Paul
Jacqué, the independent expert appointed 10 November
by High Representative of the European Union
Federica Mogherini to shed light on those allegations.
These allegations should not be used to undermine
the important role that EULEX continues to play in
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo.
The imminent formation of the new Government in
Kosovo should be followed by an immediate resumption
of high-level dialogue facilitated by the European
Union in order to ensure the full implementation of
the historic agreement concluded on 19 April 2013. In
that regard, special attention needs to be given to two
points: the establishment of a community/association of
Serb-majority municipalities and the full dismantling
of parallel structures, in particular security structures.
The process of normalizing relations between
Belgrade and Pristina under the auspices of the

26/27

04/12/2014

European Union has permanently changed the nature
of relations between Serbia and Kosovo. Gradually, as
the two countries advance along the path of European
integration, United Nations involvement in the field will
become less and less relevant. We encourage the United
Nations to adjust its presence to the lasting stabilization
of the situation in Kosovo, as the European Union has
done, inter alia, by reconfiguring EULEX. It would
also be appropriate to review the Security Council’s
reporting and meetings cycle devoted to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
To conclude, while our Security Council mandate
is nearing completion, I would like to take this
opportunity to encourage again the leaders of Serbia
and Kosovo to continue to demonstrate the political will
and courage needed to achieve reconciliation between
their countries and bring them closer to the European
Union. Kosovo and Serbia can continue to count on the
active support of Luxembourg to realize their European
future.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Chad.
First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Aleksandar Vučić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo, to the
Security Council and thank them for their statements.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/773) describes a tense
political situation with an institutional impasse that is
a challenge to the democratic process in Kosovo. We
note with concern that in the five months since the early
legislative elections of 8 June, which took place in a
unified legal framework, Kosovo has still not formed a
new Government. The crisis provoked by the search for a
balance of forces has not found a solution either, despite
the matter’s having been referred to the Constitutional
Court. Furthermore, Kosovo organized municipal
elections on 3 November, which took place, according
to international observers, in a proper manner, except
in the north, in northern Mitrovica, where violence and
low voter turnout were reported.
We believe that this ongoing political tension and
the institutional vacuum could exacerbate an economic
situation that is already quite difficult. Chad calls upon
Kosovo’s political actors to enter into a dialogue to find

14-67019

04/12/2014

Kosovo

a way out of the impasse, with a view to allowing a
Government to be formed, and thereby preserve the
country’s fragile cohesion. In a similar vein, Chad
encourages the authorities to pursue the dialogue being
facilitated by the European Union, in accordance with
the 19 April 2013 agreement on the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
Chad welcomes and encourages the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in fulfilling its mandate and specifically reiterates its
support for the work on disappeared and displaced
persons. According to High Commissioner on Refugees,
there are still more 17,200 internally displaced persons
in Kosovo. We note the progress made on the issues
of return and identification as well as the improvement
of access of minority communities to employment
opportunities in the Kosovo public institutions.
With respect to the judiciary, Chad also notes
the progress achieved on the issue of war crimes, the
fight against organized crime and corruption, human
trafficking, property rights and institutional capacity-

S/PV.7327

building in the justice sector. We invite the Kosovo
authorities to further strengthen the appropriate
measures to curb the phenomena of foreign terrorist
fighters and the desecration of holy places.
Finally, we recall that the Mission’s highest priority
remains the promotion of security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. In this
regard, we welcome the fruitful cooperation between
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and UNMIK as they pursue
their efforts to achieve peace, stability and development
in Kosovo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

14-6701927/27
