UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/23
25 April 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3772nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 April 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 14 April 1997 (S/1997/311) concerning the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Prevlaka and expresses its disappointment at the general
lack of improvement in the situation in Prevlaka.
"The Security Council is concerned by the assessment of the SecretaryGeneral that, while the situation generally has been stable, several
developments have led to an increase in tension in the area. The Council
is particularly concerned by the descriptions in the report of continuing
violations of the demilitarization regime, including movements of heavy
weapons and of special police of the Republic of Croatia, and the entry by
a navy missile boat of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into the
demilitarized zone, in disregard of the concerns and requests previously
expressed by the Council.
"The Security Council calls upon the parties to refrain from
provocative actions of all kinds, to cease violations of the demilitarized
zone and to cooperate fully with the United Nations military observers.
"The Security Council also notes the observations in the report of the
Secretary-General about the lack of any progress towards adopting the
practical options proposed to the parties by the United Nations military
observers in May 1996, as referred to in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 31 December 1996 (S/1996/1075), to improve the safety and
security of the area. The Council reiterates its call upon both parties to
adopt these practical options with a view to their early implementation, to
remove landmines from areas patrolled by the military observers, and to
stop their interference with the freedom of movement of the military
observers and with the implementation of the mandate of the observers.

97-11162 (E)

250497

/...

S/PRST/1997/23
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls upon the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to resolve the disputed issue of Prevlaka
through bilateral negotiations pursuant to the Agreement on Normalization
of Relations, signed by them in Belgrade on 23 August 1996, and in the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and good neighbourly relations.
"The Security Council emphasizes its confidence in and support for the
work of the United Nations military observers. It expresses its
appreciation to the military observers and to the Member States who have
provided personnel and other forms of support.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
