UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/28
30 May 1994
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH/FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council,
at its 3383rd meeting, held on 30 May 1994, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled "Note by the Secretary-General transmitting a
letter dated 27 May 1994 from the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) addressed to the Secretary-General (S/1994/631)":
"The Security Council recalls the statements made by the President of
the Council on 8 April 1993 (S/25562) and 31 March 1994 (S/PRST/1994/13)
and its relevant resolution.
"The Council has noted the fact that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea (DPRK) has allowed the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
inspectors to complete the inspection activities agreed between the IAEA
and the DPRK on 15 February 1994, thus taking one step in fulfilling its
obligations under the IAEA-DPRK safeguards agreement and in honouring its
non-proliferation obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
"The Council reaffirms the critical importance of IAEA safeguards in
the implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the contribution which progress in non-proliferation makes to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
"The Council has considered the letter from the Director General of
the IAEA to the Secretary-General dated 27 May 1994, and is gravely
concerned by the IAEA’s assessment that if the discharge operation at the
five megawatt reactor continues at the same rate, the IAEA’s opportunity to
select, segregate and secure fuel rods for later measurements in accordance
with IAEA standards will be lost within days.
"The Council strongly urges the DPRK only to proceed with the
discharge operations at the five megawatt reactor in a manner which
preserves the technical possibility of fuel measurements, in accordance
with the IAEA’s requirements in this regard.

94-23320 (E)

300594

/...

S/PRST/1994/28
English
Page 2

"The Council calls for immediate consultations between the IAEA and
the DPRK on the necessary technical measures.
"The Council requests the Director General of the IAEA to maintain
IAEA inspectors in the DPRK to monitor activities at the five megawatt
reactor.
"The Council decides to remain actively seized of the matter and that
further Security Council consideration will take place if necessary in
order to achieve full implementation of the IAEA-DPRK safeguards
agreement."

-----
