A/60/PV.91

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

91

st plenary meeting
Wednesday, 28 June 2006, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Sweden)

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Agenda item 112 (resumed)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(d) Election of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme
Note by the Secretary-General (A/60/895)
The President: As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s note (A/60/895), the General Assembly, in its
resolution 56/206 of 21 December 2001, decided to
transform the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements into the secretariat of the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).
In the same resolution, the Assembly also decided
that the UN-Habitat secretariat should be headed by an
Executive Director at the level of Under-SecretaryGeneral, to be elected by the Assembly for a term of
four years upon nomination by the Secretary-General
after consultation with Member States.
It is further stated that the General Assembly, by
its decision 56/324 of 23 July 2002, on the proposal of
the Secretary-General, elected Ms. Anna Kajumulo
Tibaijuka of the United Republic of Tanzania as
Executive Director of UN-Habitat, at the UnderSecretary-General level, for a term of office of four
years beginning on 1 September 2002 and ending on
31 August 2006.

In accordance with General Assembly resolution
56/206, the Secretary-General nominates Ms. Anna
Kajumulo Tibaijuka as Executive Director of
UN-Habitat for another term of four years, beginning
on 1 September 2006 and ending on 31 August 2010.
Accordingly, may I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to elect Ms. Anna Kajumulo
Tibaijuka as Executive Director of UN-Habitat for
another term of four years, beginning on 1 September
2006 and ending on 31 August 2010?
It was so decided.
The President: I now call on the representative
of South Africa, speaking on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
Mrs. Zia (South Africa): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, we would like to concur with the
Secretary-General’s decision to nominate Anna
Kajumulo Tibaijuka as Executive Director of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UNHabitat) for another term of four years.
Since her appointment as Executive Director of
UN-Habitat, she has proven herself worthy of leading
that important Programme by working hard to analyse
the issues and challenges to sustainable urbanization —
an issue that is of great relevance to the developing
world. Her leadership qualities, which have guided
issues of sustainable urbanization, prompted the
General Assembly to upgrade the old United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements into a full-fledged
programme of the United Nations. The Group of 77

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-40901 (E)

*0640901*

A/60/PV.91

and China hold that decision dear, as it was sponsored
by the Group.
The Group of 77 and China commend the
progress made in the first four years of UN-Habitat in
its new capacity as a Programme. Ms. Tibaijuka has
untiringly raised the visibility of the issues and the
Programme. In particular, we have noted with
satisfaction the active role being played by UN-Habitat
in assisting Member States to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, especially target 10 on water and
sanitation and target 11 on slum upgrading. In that
regard, we urge our development partners to give the
Executive Director of UN-Habitat the financial support
required.
The youngest programme in the United Nations
system plays an important role towards achieving
sustainable development. Unfortunately, the resources
dispensed to the Programme are disproportionate to its
task.
We are all acutely aware of the problems facing
the world. Recently, at the third session of the World
Urban Forum in Vancouver, Canada, we were once
again alerted to the fact that one of the most pressing
issues we face today is rapid urbanization in a world
where half of humanity lives in cities and where, in the
next 50 years, that proportion is expected to reach two
thirds of the global population. Most of that urban
growth is taking place in developing countries, where
the major challenge is to combat poverty and provide
better access to basic shelter and services, such as
clean water and sanitation.
The Group of 77 and China would like to
emphasize that, during the ongoing reform process
within the United Nations, such programmes as UNHabitat, which have a clear and unique mandate,
should not be sacrificed or diluted by that exercise.
Instead, such programmes, which are so intricately
linked to sustainable development in a rapidly
globalizing world, should be bolstered and
strengthened.
Once again, we wish to renew our confidence in
the leadership of Ms. Anna Kajumulo Tibaijuka, as she
has proven herself in her last term to be a champion of
the cause of sustainable urbanization. We particularly
commend her participation in the follow-up to the work
of the Commission for Africa on urbanization in
Africa. Her humanity and humility were so aptly
expressed at the third session of the World Urban

2

Forum, where she introduced to the gathering her
student and her old teacher, to whom she attributed her
professional success, as it was due to that person’s
encouragement that Ms. Tibaijuka excelled in her
debating team and so developed the requisite skills for
promoting and creatively leading such a programme.
We look forward to the next four years of her
visionary approach around issues of sustainable
urbanization, as well as to finding the balance between
urban-rural linkages, so touchingly depicted by the
little Kenyan Moipei sisters singing at the third session
of the World Urban Forum.
The Group of 77 and China wish Ms. Tibaijuka
every success in her new term, and we look forward to
working with her once again.
Ms. Bahemuka (Kenya): My delegation
associates itself with the statement just delivered by
the representative of South Africa on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
I take this opportunity to welcome and
congratulate Ms. Anna Tibaijuka following her
reappointment to the post of Executive Director of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UNHabitat) at this morning’s 91st meeting of the General
Assembly.
The appointment of Ms. Tibaijuka is a true
indication of the trust and confidence we, the States
Members of the United Nations, have in her abilities.
Of course, she has eloquently justified that trust and
confidence through her diligent, dedicated and
unwavering engagement at the helm of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme since her first
appointment in 2001.
The importance of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme cannot be overemphasized,
given the issues that it is handling. Issues of human
settlements are at the core of sustainable development,
as they are closely linked to shelter, which, in its true
sense, is indeed a basic need.
We well know that millions of people in the
world today either have no shelter at all or live in
substandard and inhuman conditions. Equally
important are the very worrying rate of urbanization
and the associated threatening rate of slum
development. It is estimated that, today, over 1 billion
people live in slums, and that number is likely to
double in about 10 years unless urgent measures are

06-40901

A/60/PV.91

taken. We know well that those are issues on which
UN-HABITAT has developed immense competence,
especially during the tenure of Ms. Anna Tibaijuka. It
is important therefore that the UN-HABITAT
programme be adequately supported, both technically
and financially, to enable it to face the challenges
before the world in the areas of human settlements,
slum prevention and slum upgrading.
Closely linked to the work of UN-HABITAT are
the health and environmental aspects — water and
sanitation and environmental management and
sustainability — of the housing and human settlements
area. It is, however, important to note that, by working
closely with other United Nations agencies and
programmes, UN-HABITAT has been able to integrate
those important aspects into its work. That is
commendable, as it has greatly contributed to the
improvement of human livelihoods through an
integrated approach to human settlements and related
environmental aspects.
I wish to applaud the Executive Director for her
great work in those areas, including in particular her
efforts in implementing the Habitat Agenda and the
related Millennium Development Goal programmes
and projects in Kenya. She has been instrumental in
supporting my Government in slum-upgrading
programmes. More striking is the fact that she is the
first UN-HABITAT Executive Director to have
established an office in one of the largest slums in the
world, the slum of Kibera in Kenya. I believe,
Mr. President, that you yourself visited the Kibera
slums during your recent visit to Nairobi and saw the
challenges, as well as the efforts that are being made
jointly by the Government, UN-HABITAT and other
development partners in partnership with grass-roots
organizations and non-governmental organizations.
Hence, I call upon Member States to reaffirm
their support for the Executive Director in her
endeavours to implement the Habitat Agenda and the
related Millennium Development Goals in all our
countries, especially in the developing world.
My delegation, I personally and Kenya, which is
host to UN-HABITAT, reaffirm our support and will
facilitate the work of UN-HABITAT and of the United
Nations Office at Nairobi to the fullest extent possible.
Let me end by noting the excellent work done by
the Executive Director in spearheading very important
initiatives, which include organizing the second session

06-40901

of the World Urban Forum, held in 2004 in Barcelona,
Spain, and the Forum’s third session, which concluded
just last week in Vancouver, Canada.
I wish the Executive Director well; we shall give
her the fullest support.
Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): The
delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania wishes
to join the first two speakers in extending our warmest
congratulations to Ms. Anna Tibaijuka on her reelection as Executive Director of the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT).
Ms. Tibaijuka has done a commendable job in raising
the profile of urbanization challenges in all parts of the
world.
My delegation wishes specifically to emphasize
the importance of capitalizing the United Nations
Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation and its
Slum Upgrading Facility. That call was made in
paragraph 56 (m) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1). Our Vice-President, His Excellency
Mr. Ali Mohammed Shein, who delivered a keynote
address at the third session of the World Urban Forum,
which just ended in Vancouver, has correctly observed
that, unless good urban policies are followed by
commensurate investment resources at the local level,
it will be very difficult to translate ideas into action.
We urge Ms. Tibaijuka to enhance her efforts in the
challenging task of capitalizing the Habitat and Human
Settlements Foundation. We appeal to donor countries
to continue their efforts to assist the Executive Director
in that task by providing sufficient and predictable
resources in a timely manner, in order to enable her to
fulfil her obligations as mandated by Member States.
Tanzania will do all that is within its power to
assist the Executive Director to discharge her
responsibilities successfully.
Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): Let me begin by associating
Nigeria with the statement made by the representative
of South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, and in particular by congratulating Ms. Anna
Tibaijuka on her good work and her strong leadership
of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-HABITAT), in recognition of which the
Secretary-General recommended her re-election, which
the General Assembly has just endorsed. That is a
reflection of our collective faith in Ms. Tibaijuka and
our satisfaction with her excellent work. Since her
assumption of office, Ms. Tibaijuka has worked

3

A/60/PV.91

tirelessly to place the critical issues of shelter and
urban environmental sustainability on the front burner
of the global agenda, particularly in Africa, where the
challenge of rapid urbanization is most acute.
Nigeria is very pleased at the support that
UN-HABITAT has given to the African Union, and
more especially the establishment of the African
Ministerial Conference on Housing and Urban
Development as the vehicle to facilitate the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda and the relevant
Millennium Development Goals. UN-HABITAT has
also been instrumental in launching the Cities
Programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and is working with the African
Development Bank to ensure the realization of
sustainable shelter objectives in Africa. Indeed, Nigeria
has been working very closely with UN-HABITAT on
the sustainable cities initiative and sustainable urban
governance, and it is very happy to house the UNHABITAT support office in Abuja to further those
goals. We look forward to expanding our cooperation
and would like to emphasize the need for adequate
funding of the core budget of UN-HABITAT to enable
the Programme to fulfil its mandate.
The President: I think I can safely say that we in
the United Nations can congratulate ourselves on the
re-election of Executive Director Anna Tibaijuka.
During my visit to Nairobi in April, I saw for myself
the impact of her leadership on the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme and on the important
issues of human settlements, urbanization and
development.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 112.
Agenda item 161
Extension of the term of the permanent judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994

4

Letter dated 3 May 2006 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
General Assembly (A/60/878)
Letter dated 13 June 2006 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/60/906)
The President: In document A/60/878, the
Secretary-General transmitted a letter dated 21 March
2006 from Judge Erik Møse, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In his
letter, the President of the Tribunal recalls that the term
of office of the permanent judges of the Tribunal will
come to an end on 24 May 2007 and that there are a
number of multi-accused trials that are currently under
way before the Tribunal that are likely to continue
beyond that date.
All single-accused trials currently in progress are
due to be completed between May 2006 and May 2007.
The President of the Tribunal is of the view that it
would not be a viable option to delay the
commencement of new trials until after the newly
elected judges assume their duties on 25 May 2007.
This means that most if not all of the permanent judges
will be engaged in trials when their four-year term
expires on 24 May 2007. Should certain judges not be
re-elected, particular cases might have to resume de
novo with new judges.
Consequently, in order to ensure continuity and
the ability of the Tribunal to implement its completion
strategy, as set out in Security Council resolution 1503
(2003) of 28 August 2003, and complete all trials by
2008, the President of the Tribunal requested that the
current term of office of the permanent judges of the
Tribunal be extended until 31 December 2008. As the
statute of the Tribunal does not provide for extending
the term of office of the permanent judges, approval of
the Security Council, as the parent organ of the
Tribunal, and of the General Assembly, as the organ
that elects its judges, would be needed in order to
extend the term of office of the permanent judges until
31 December 2008. The Secretary-General therefore
requests that the General Assembly and the Security
Council grant such approval.
In document A/60/906, the President of the
Security Council transmits to the President of the
General Assembly the text of Security Council

06-40901

A/60/PV.91

resolution 1684 (2006) of 13 June 2006, whereby the
Council, inter alia,
“Decides in response to the request by the
Secretary-General and notwithstanding the
provisions of Article 12 (bis), of the Statute of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda, to extend the
term of office of the following permanent judges
of the International Tribunal at the Tribunal until
31 December 2008:
– Mr. Charles Michael Dennis Byron (Saint Kitts
and Nevis)
– Mr. Asoka de Silva (Sri Lanka)
– Mr. Sergei
Federation)

Aleckseievich

Egorov

(Russian

– Mr. Mehmet Güney (Turkey)
– Ms. Khalida Rachid Khan (Pakistan)
– Mr. Erik Møse (Norway)
– Ms. Arlete Ramaroson (Madagascar)
– Mr. Jai Ram Reddy (Fiji)
– Mr. William Hussein Sekule (United Republic of
Tanzania)
– Ms. Andrésa Vaz (Senegal)
– Ms. Inés Mónica Weinberg de Roca (Argentina)
“Requests States to continue to make every
effort to ensure that their nationals who serve as
permanent judges of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda remain available to serve in their
positions until 31 December 2008.”
If there is no objection, I propose that the
Assembly decide to endorse this recommendation of
the Secretary-General, which was endorsed by the
Security Council in its resolution 1684 (2006) of
13 June 2006.
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 161?
It was so decided.

06-40901

Agenda item 114
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
The President: I should like to invite the General
Assembly to consider the positive recommendation by
the Security Council on the application for admission
to membership in the United Nations of the Republic
of Montenegro.
The Security Council has recommended the
admission of the Republic of Montenegro to
membership in the United Nations, as stated in
document A/60/902. In this connection, a draft
resolution has been issued as document A/60/L.58.
I give the floor, first, to the representative of
Austria, to introduce draft resolution A/60/L.58.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): On behalf of the
European Union, the countries aligning themselves
with this statement and an impressive number of other
sponsors, it is a great honour and privilege to
recommend to the Assembly the adoption of the draft
resolution before it to admit the Republic of
Montenegro to membership in the United Nations. That
is in accordance with Article 4 of the Charter, and it
follows the adoption of Security Council resolution
1691 (2006) of 22 June 2006, which recommends to
the General Assembly that the Republic of Montenegro
be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
In his letter of 5 June (A/60/890, annex),
President Vujanović has requested the admission of the
Republic of Montenegro to membership in the United
Nations and has confirmed his country’s complete
adherence to the Charter of the United Nations. We
warmly welcome the presence of the President of the
Republic of Montenegro, His Excellency Mr. Filip
Vujanović, here with us today.
The Declaration on the Independence of the
Republic of Montenegro was passed on 3 June 2006 by
the parliament of Montenegro after the national
referendum on 21 May based on the Constitutional
Charter of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro.
It envisages Montenegro as a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multireligious society in an
independent State with full legal personality under
international law. In that Declaration, Montenegro had
already signalled its intention to become an active
member of the international community and to join the
United Nations.

5

A/60/PV.91

We commend the peaceful and democratic way in
which Montenegro gained its independence. We see
this as a sign of the political maturity of all actors. The
European Union has been a steadfast partner of the
people of the Western Balkans in the past years. It fully
respects the decision of the people of Montenegro. On
12 June, the foreign ministers of the European Union
decided to further develop their relations with the
Republic of Montenegro as a sovereign, independent
State. On 16 June, our heads of State or Government
once again reconfirmed the European perspective of
the Western Balkans on the basis of the Stabilization
and Association Process.
The European Union is therefore very pleased to
present this draft resolution to the Assembly. To our
new Member, the 192nd, the Republic of Montenegro,
we say welcome to the United Nations.
The President: Since the draft resolution was
submitted, we have received the names of a large
number of additional sponsors, which I will now read
out to the Assembly. The additional sponsors are:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Belarus,
Belize, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Costa
Rica, Cuba, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iceland,
Indonesia, Israel, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Norway,
Peru, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, San Marino, Singapore, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste, the United States of America, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
May I take it that the General Assembly accepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and adopts
draft resolution A/60/L.58 by acclamation?
Draft resolution A/60/L.58
(resolution 60/264).

was

adopted

The President: I therefore declare the Republic
of Montenegro admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
delegation of the Republic of Montenegro to its place
in the General Assembly Hall.
The delegation of the Republic of Montenegro was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly
Hall.
The President: It is a great honour and pleasure
for me on this historic occasion to welcome, on behalf

6

of the General Assembly, the Republic of Montenegro
as a new Member of the United Nations. I congratulate
the people and the Government of the Republic of
Montenegro, and I congratulate the United Nations on
the admission of its 192nd Member State.
Less than six weeks ago, the people of
Montenegro held a referendum with a very high voter
turnout, where a majority of the voters chose
independence. Two weeks later, on 3 June, the
parliament of Montenegro passed a declaration on the
independence of the Republic of Montenegro. In an
open, democratic and peaceful manner, Montenegro
has secured a smooth transition to the status of an
independent and sovereign State. In demonstrating its
adherence to democratic values and principles and the
rule of law, Montenegro has set an important example.
I am confident that Montenegro will strive for goodneighbourly relations and strong regional cooperation
in the Western Balkans, thus promoting stability in an
area struck by conflict in the recent past.
I believe that Montenegro will also actively
contribute to the multilateral efforts of the General
Assembly and the United Nations in addressing the
multitude of global challenges that lie ahead and that
we all face together. I wish the Republic of
Montenegro and its people peace, prosperity and every
success in the future, and again wish them a warm
welcome to the United Nations.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Zimbabwe, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): Allow me, on
behalf of the Africa Group, to welcome the new State
of the Republic of Montenegro to this family of
nations. We sincerely congratulate the Republic of
Montenegro on becoming the 192nd Member of the
United Nations and wish President Vujanović and the
people of Montenegro well as the country joins us in
the collective endeavour to address the many and
complex issues before the United Nations.
The 21 May 2006 referendum that saw the birth
of the new and independent State of Montenegro was
an exercise of the right to self-determination. That is a
principle that we in Africa have always respected and
will continue to cherish. Being the newest member of
the family is an experience that most of us in the
African Group can relate to. It has its challenges as
well as its excitement. With respect to the challenges,

06-40901

A/60/PV.91

the Group of African States will be ready to extend its
cooperation to the fullest extent possible to the new
Member, the State of the Republic of Montenegro. We
look forward to working together with the country’s
representatives.
The Republic of Montenegro joins the United
Nations at a crucial moment, when the Organization is
seeking to renew itself and to make itself more
efficient and more responsive to the needs of its
Members and their citizens, particularly those in the
developing world. It is our hope and expectation that
the increase in the membership of the United Nations
will translate into a groundswell of voices and opinions
that will help us realize the many goals and targets that
we have set for ourselves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Asian States.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Today we have gathered in
the General Assembly Hall to salute the admission of
the Republic of Montenegro as the newest Member of
the United Nations. On this happy occasion, as Chair
of the Asian Group, I have the honour to extend our
warmest congratulations to the Republic of
Montenegro on joining the United Nations family as its
192nd Member.
We note with great satisfaction the solemn
commitment of the Republic of Montenegro to abide
by and fulfil the obligations contained in the Charter of
the United Nations. We would like to commend both
the Republic of Serbia and the Republic of Montenegro
for the peaceful manner in which they concluded the
dissolution of Serbia and Montenegro, in line with the
results of the referendum held in the Republic of
Montenegro on 21 May 2006, organized in accordance
with the constitutional charter of the State Union of
Serbia and Montenegro. The two brotherly nations
have now decided to live in separate homes. We wish
both countries continued progress and prosperity.
The Asian Group looks forward to working
closely with the representatives of the Republic of
Montenegro in promoting peace, stability and welfare
in the Balkans, as well as in the international sphere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.

06-40901

Mr. Neritani (Albania): It is my honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Eastern
European Group on the adoption of draft resolution
A/60/L.58 and to congratulate the Republic of
Montenegro on its admission today to membership of
the United Nations. On this occasion, let me warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Filip Vujanović, President
of the Republic of Montenegro, on this historic day for
his people and for his country. We rejoice with them
and share the sense of joy and fulfilment which
presides on this historic day.
As the newest State admitted to this indispensable
institution, the Republic of Montenegro will add its
voice to the voices of other members of this body to
further harmonize our actions towards our common
ends and to further strengthen the universality of the
United Nations, as well as its legitimacy and
effectiveness.
With the admission of this new peace-loving
State, willing and able to carry out its obligations under
the United Nations Charter, the goal of universality
moves closer to its ultimate attainment. We praise the
acceptance of Montenegro as a new Member of the
United Nations and are reassured in our belief in the
family of cooperation and partnership among our
countries as we work towards fulfilling our obligations
as States Members of the Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba, who will speak on behalf of the
Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States to welcome the
admission of the Republic of Montenegro as the 192nd
State Member of the United Nations. We welcome the
presence at this very special meeting of the delegation
of the Republic of Montenegro, headed by the
President, His Excellency Mr. Filip Vujanović.
On this historic occasion, when we are
welcoming a new Member among us, it is appropriate
that we reaffirm our firm commitment to the common
values uniting us at the United Nations and to reiterate
that we will continue to work tirelessly to realize the
hopes placed in the Organization. Much remains for us
to do to achieve the noble purposes and goals of the
United Nations. We are certain that, through its efforts,
the Republic of Montenegro will contribute to progress
in that endeavour.

7

A/60/PV.91

The members of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States are prepared to work in close
cooperation with the Republic of Montenegro in all
areas of United Nations activity. The Republic of
Montenegro will always be able to count on our
goodwill, support and cooperation. On behalf of all the
members of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, I wish to reiterate our warm welcome
to the Republic of Montenegro and to congratulate the
people and the Government of that country on this
special occasion, wishing them much success, peace
and prosperity.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Ireland, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States.
Mr. Cooney (Ireland): It is my particular honour,
on behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States, to welcome the Republic of Montenegro as the
192nd Member of the United Nations. The Republic of
Montenegro arrives among us as a newly independent
State, but we acknowledge its long national history,
reflected in its name, which reaches back through the
centuries.
The people of the Black Mountain, Crna Gora,
Montenegro, have taken the democratic decision to
assume their independence and to take their place in
the family of sovereign nations. They have done so
according to procedures agreed with the Republic of
Serbia. We salute the Governments and the peoples of
both Montenegro and Serbia for the dignified and
peaceful manner in which they managed the delicate
process of separation in full conformity with the
United Nations Charter.
We welcome the Republic of Montenegro as a
State committed to the maintenance of a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multireligious society. We look
forward to the Republic of Montenegro playing an
active and constructive role in the work of the United
Nations.
We, for our part, pledge ourselves to work with
the Republic of Montenegro to fulfil the purposes and
promote the principles of the United Nations Charter in
the interests of the people of Montenegro and of all
mankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, the host
country.

8

Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of
America): On 12 June 2006, the United States formally
recognized the Republic of Montenegro as a sovereign
and independent State, consistent with the request of its
Government and the will of the people of Montenegro.
The United States now welcomes Montenegro’s
admission as a Member of the United Nations and
takes note of its commitment to fulfil its international
obligations.
We join our colleagues in extending our
congratulations to the Republic of Montenegro on this
momentous occasion in its history.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Serbia.
Mr. Kruljević (Serbia): Allow me at the outset to
welcome in our midst His Excellency Mr. Filip
Vujanović, President of the Republic of Montenegro.
We are gratified at his presence in the General
Assembly Hall today.
The Republic of Serbia, continuing the
international personality of the State Union of Serbia
and Montenegro, is pleased to see the Republic of
Montenegro — now a neighbouring and friendly
country with which it has maintained close ties —
become the 192nd Member State of the United
Nations. We are convinced that the Republic of
Montenegro will contribute fully to the respect for and
pursuit of the principles and purposes of the world
Organization.
I would like to emphasize that the Republic of
Serbia, having spent nearly a century in a common
State with the Republic of Montenegro, will seek to
develop the closest and most friendly bilateral relations
with that country. Good-neighbourliness and regional
cooperation constitute the cornerstone of my country’s
foreign policy in its commitment to the lasting
stabilization of the region of South-East Europe. We
are convinced that that concept is also truly
contributing to the fulfilment of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is our firm belief that,
through bilateral and regional cooperation and EuroAtlantic integration processes, to which both the
Republic of Serbia and the Republic of Montenegro
aspire, that common goal can be achieved most
efficiently.
The Republic of Serbia stands ready to extend its
full support to the Republic of Montenegro within the

06-40901

A/60/PV.91

United Nations and to closely cooperate and coordinate
its activities with that country. We believe that in doing
so, both countries will contribute to the strengthening
of the role of the world Organization and its capacity to
respond to the numerous challenges of the present-day
world.
Address by Mr. Filip Vujanović, President of the
Republic of Montenegro
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Filip Vujanović,
President of the Republic of Montenegro.
Mr. Filip Vujanović, President of the Republic of
Montenegro, was escorted into the General
Assembly Hall.
The President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I have the great pleasure to welcome to the
United Nations His Excellency Mr. Filip Vujanović,
President of the Republic of Montenegro, and to invite
him to address the General Assembly.
President Vujanović: It gives me particular
pleasure and honour to convey the gratitude of the
Republic of Montenegro to the States members of the
General Assembly, which voted in favour of
Montenegro’s accession to membership of the United
Nations only five weeks after the decision of
Montenegrin citizens to restore independence.
(spoke in Montenegrin; English text provided by the
delegation)
I would also like to thank Mr. Per Stig Moeller,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark, and the
Security Council for its recommendation that
Montenegro become a State Member of the world
Organization. Of course, our special appreciation also
goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
significant contribution to our swift accession to
United Nations membership.
After 88 years, Montenegro regained its
independence on 21 May, thus becoming the youngest
country in the world. It regained the independence it
had gained at the Berlin Congress in 1878. This time, it
was done without a peace conference, in a democratic
referendum. The referendum process was organized in
compliance with democratic best practices and
international standards, as generally recognized by all
international and local observers. As a result, given its

06-40901

genuine commitment to democracy, Montenegro
immediately received international recognition.
The referendum was held in close cooperation
with the European Union and represented another
significant step towards our strategic priority related to
European and Euro-Atlantic integration, demonstrating
that we have the democratic capacity required for
further progress. Our membership in the United
Nations represents a step forward in the overall
development of Montenegro and additional proof that
we are on the right track. We are aware of the many
challenges that lie ahead, but, after a long period of
time, we will now be responsible for our own destiny,
in line with the development capacities of our State.
For all of us in Montenegro, the United Nations
has always provided an irreplaceable means of
connection among various States, peoples and cultures,
particularly during the times of crisis that the Balkans
experienced in connection with the recent tragedies and
conflicts of war. Throughout that period, the role of the
United Nations was of paramount importance in
encouraging dialogue and compromise. Although
Montenegro was not directly engulfed by the war, it
was not spared its consequences. Therefore, the role of
the United Nations during that period was valued and
respected to an even greater degree. For that reason, as
a new State Member of the United Nations,
Montenegro is ready actively to support the
Organization’s efforts aimed at the peaceful resolution
of conflicts and to make its contribution to the
humanitarian efforts of the United Nations as well as to
its peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.
I would like to recall a significant, but perhaps
insufficiently known, detail from our Montenegrin past
which serves as testimony to Montenegro’s devotion,
throughout its history, to this lofty goal. In January
1897, the Prince of Montenegro, Nikola Petrović
Njegoš — later King Nikola I Petrović Njegoš — when
sending Montenegrin soldiers to the island of Crete to
join a peacekeeping mission of the then Great Powers
to help resolve the ongoing conflict, proudly said:
“The Great European Powers paid me a
great honour by inviting me to send troops
composed of my Montenegrins to Crete to join
the international army, because they believed that
Montenegrins would discharge their duty as
befitting them — honestly and heroically.”

9

A/60/PV.91

I am sure that this principle, which is still valid,
as well as the commitment of Montenegro — despite
its size — to contribute to peace will also be reaffirmed
in the future engagement of our country within the
United Nations.

underdeveloped, the small and the large, Montenegro
will further dedicate itself to the full implementation of
the Millennium Development Goals, thus contributing
to better living standards for its citizens and to stability
in general.

On the basis of its previous experience,
Montenegro is deeply aware of the importance of
establishing relations with other countries based on
friendship and partnership, respecting their sovereignty
and territorial integrity. In that regard, we attach
special importance to good-neighbourly relations and
regional cooperation, with the goal of ensuring
economic and overall prosperity and stability.

Montenegro will continue to develop and shape
its policy in line with the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which serve as the basis
for modern democracies. Furthermore, it will continue
to implement and promote a policy that fully respects
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
citizens regardless of their personal or other
differences.

We would like in particular further to develop
close cooperation with the Republic of Serbia, not only
in the context of good-neighbourly cooperation and a
commitment to European integration, but in all spheres
of common interest, reflecting our social and historic
ties. As a new State Member of the United Nations,
Montenegro undertakes to respect all obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations, including all United
Nations documents signed and acceded to by the State
union of Serbia and Montenegro. Montenegro hereby
reaffirms its dedication to observing the principles of
international law, as well as to respecting the
International Court of Justice, which safeguards those
principles.
In the present context of challenges to global
security, Montenegro wishes fully to contribute to the
fight against terrorism, organized crime and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. To that
end, Montenegro will in particular respect all United
Nations conventions defining measures to efficiently
deal with those challenges.
As an ecologically oriented State, Montenegro
has a special obligation to respect United Nations
efforts aimed at promoting sustainable development at
the global level, and it will actively continue to
develop as a State that enables its citizens to enjoy
overall progress on the basis of sustainability. In that
respect, we find it particularly important that the first
United Nations EcoBuilding in our region, which will
be used by various specialized United Nations
agencies, is to be built in Montenegro in cooperation
with the United Nations.
Taking into account the efforts made by the
United Nations aimed at reducing the existing gap
between the rich and the poor, the developed and the

10

Montenegro is very proud of its multi-ethnic and
multireligious harmony. This is one of the fundamental
values that distinguish it in both the regional and the
broader international context.
Montenegro is aware of the opportunities offered
by the United Nations to small countries, which are
given a chance to preserve and protect their interests
on an equal footing with other States and are able to
promote their identity and specific characteristics
through membership in the United Nations. In that
respect, I am sure that even small countries, as has
been proved in the past, can contribute to the goals for
which the United Nations stands.
From the very beginning, the United Nations has
initiated positive changes and played an irreplaceable
role on the international scene. Respect for, and the
promotion of, its achievements and principles have
been embraced by all modern and democratic States,
including Montenegro. I am confident that, despite the
fact that the United Nations has always faced — and
will continue to face — challenges, the Organization
has bright prospects and a bright future. United by the
common goals and lofty values to which all of us are
committed, we can be sure of long-term stability,
security and overall prosperity.
I am positive that Montenegro can make its
contribution to that noble goal. Today, by becoming the
one hundred ninety-second State Member of the United
Nations, Montenegro has assumed, with honour and
dignity, that challenge and responsibility, confident that
it will meet the attendant expectations and obligations
with equal success.

06-40901

A/60/PV.91

The President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I wish to thank the President of Montenegro
for his important statement.
Mr. Filip Vujanović, President of the Republic of
Montenegro, was escorted from the General
Assembly Hall.

06-40901

The President: I should like to inform Member
States that the flag of the Republic of Montenegro will
be raised at a ceremony that will take place in front of
the delegates’ entrance immediately following the
adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

11
