28

General Assembly-Sixteenth Seellion

3. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to make available
to the competent organs of the United Nations the
means required for the measures of assistance mentioned above.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1672 (XVI). Refugees from Algeria in Morocco
and Tunisia
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Natious
High Commissioner for Refugees,1
Recalling its resolutions 1389 (XIV) of 20 November 1959 and 1500 (XV) of 5 December 1960,
Considering the action taken by the High Commissioner and the encouraging results achieved during
the World Refugee Year,
Noting with appreciation the progress made on behalf of refugees from Algeria in Morocco and Tunisia,
Observing with regret that the problem which is the
cause of this situation has not yet been solved,
Recognizing that the living conditions of those refugees, and in particular those of the children, remain
precarious and require constant improvement,
Considering the temporary nature of the situation
of those refugees,
Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to :
(a) Continue his present action jointly with the
League of Red Cross Societies until those refugees
return to their homes ;
( b) Use the means at his disposal to assist in the
orderly return of those refugees to their homes and
consider the possibility, when necessary, of facilitating
their resettlement in their homeland as soon as circumstances permit ;
( c) Persist in his efforts to secure the resources
which will enable him to complete this task.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December _1_961.

1673 (XVI). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 2 and having heard
his statement before the Third Committee,8
Taking note of the progress achieved in respect of
the international protection of refugees and in seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems through voluntary repatriation, integration in countries of asylum
or resettlement in other countries,
Expressing its appreciation for the efforts made by
the High Commissioner to complete in the near future
the major aid programmes for "old" refugees in Europe,
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Supplement No. 11 (A/4771/Rev.l) and Supplement No. 11A
(A/4771/Rev.1/Add.l).
'Ibid.
a Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Third Committee, 1112th meeting.

Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the High
Commissioner in his various fields of activity for groups
of refugees for whom he lends his good offices,
Noting further with satisfaction the assistance he can
give those refugees in handling the contributions designed to provide for their assistance and in utilizing
the emergency fund established under General Assembly
resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to pursue his activities on behalf of the
refugees within his mandate or those for whom he
extends his good offices, and to continue to report to
the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme and to abide by directions which that Committee might give him in regard to situations concerning refugees;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to continue to
lend their support to the alleviation of refugee problems still awaiting solution:
(a) By improving the legal status of refugees residing in their territory ;
( b) By facilitating the voluntary repatriation, resettlement or local integration of refugees ;
( c) By providing the High Commissioner with the
necessary financial means for the accomplishment of
the tasks incumbent upon him and, in particular, by
enabling him to reach the financial targets established
with the approval of the Executive Committee of the
High Commissioner's Programme.
1081st Plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1674 (XVI). Balanced and co-ordinated
nomic and social development

eco•

The General Assembly,
Affirming its belief that economic development and
social development are interrelated and that the fullest
possible satisfaction of social needs must be the ultimate goal of all measures designed to foster economic
development,
Recalling its resolution 1392 (XIV) of 20 November 1959 on the interrelationship of the economic and
social factors of development,
Recalling also its resolution 1161 (XII) of 26 November 1957 on balanced and integrated economic and
social progress, as well as its resolution 1258 (XIII)
of 14 November 1958 requesting the Economic and
Social Council, in collaboration with the specialized
agencies concerned, to consider social programmes and
policies designed to accelerate economic growth, meet
the problems resulting from economic and technological
change, and raise standards of living by, inter alia,
avoiding an inequitable distribution of national income,
Being conscious, therefore, of the importance of
planning for balanced and co-ordinated development
in the economic and social fields,
Noting the useful work on this subject accomplished
so far by some organs of the United Nations, including
the regional economic commissions,
Considering that further study of this question may
be of particular value to the economcially less developed countries,

Resolutions adopted on .the reports of t,he Third Committee

Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
830 A (XXXII) and 830 H (XXXII) of 2 August
1961 concerning the Report on the World Social Situation,4 and balanced co-ordinated economic and social
development,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to continue the study of the question of balanced and co-ordinated economic and social development,
2. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council, the regional economic commissions, th{! Committee for Industrial Development, the Social Commissioi;i and the specialized agencies concerned should
continue to pay special attention to problems of balanced economic and social development, taking into
account the interaction of economic growth and social
development and all valuable experience of countries
of various economic and social systems;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
recommend, after appropriate studies, measures which
may be helpful primarily to the less developed countries in planning for balanced and co-ordinated economic
and social development ;
4. Recommends further that the Special Fund
should take this question into consideration when providing assistance to requesting countries ;
5. Expresses the wish that the regional institutes
of economic development which are in the process of
being created in the various regions under United
Nations auspices would include in their terms of reference the study of social factors affecting economic development;
6. Believes that an exchange of experience in the
field of co-ordination of economic and social development will be fruitful.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1675 (XVI). Strengthening of the work of the
United Nations in the social field
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1392 (XIV) of 20 November
1959 in which it rec;ognized that economic development
and social development are interrelated and that social
progress is an end in itself as well as a means of
furthering economic development,
Recalling further its resolutions 1393 (XIV) of 20
November 1959 on low-cost housing and 1508 (XV) of
12 December 1960 on low-cost housing and related
community facilities,
Taking note of recommendation No. 115 concerning
workers' housing adopted by the International Labour
Organisation at its forty-fifth Conference on 28 June
1961,
Having considered chapters VI and VIII of the
report of the Economic and Social Council to the
General Assembly,11
1. Notes with satisfaction the action taken by the
Economic and Social Council to strengthen the activities
of the United Nations in the social field, particularly
'United Nations publication, Sales No.: 61.IV.4.

• Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
SuppTe~t No. 3 (A/4820).

29

the decision to enlarge the Social Commission and to
convene it annually, the establishment of the ad hoe
group of experts on the relation of community development programmes to national development programmes
including land reform, the establishment of the ad hoe
group of experts on housing and urban development,
and the Council's request that the Social Commission
reappraise its basic direction with a view to giving
increased attention to matters. of social policy;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 841 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 designed to bring
about close co-ordination between the programmes of
industrialization, rural development, urbanization and
housing;
3. Calls the attention of Governments of Member
States and the appropriate authorities of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies to the necessity
of closely co-ordinated action in dealing with the problems relating to those programmes ;
4. Expresses its satisfaction that the Economic and
Social Council will give consideration, at its thirtythird session, to having a combined plenary debate on
world economic trends and the world social situation
at its thirty-fourth session, thus giving practical recognition to the interdependence of eqmomic and social
factors in development ;
5. Requests that the Economic and Social Council,
on the basis of the information gathered in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1508 (XV),
consider proposals to expand and co-ordinate international programmes and give assistance, at the request
of Governments, to national programmes in the field
of low-cost housing and related community facilities;
6. Expresses its strong support of the hope expressed in Economic and Social Council resolution
840 J (XXXII) of 2 August 1961 that all necessary
provision will be made to enable the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to discharge effectively its
responsibilities in the social field, in particular those
relating to research, operational programmes, United
Nations Children's Fund projects concerned with social
services for children and those arising from the increased activities in the social field of the regional economic commissions.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1676 (XVI). Urbanization
The General Assembly,
Having noted Economic and Social Council resolution 830 B (XXXII) of 2 August 1961 in which the
Council approved the proposal for concerted international action in the field of urbanization,
Recognizing the magnitude of problems stemming
from the growing concentration of population in urban
and metropolitan areas, inter alia, the increasing volume
of investment required to provide sufficient employment
and to establish and maintain social and physical
services and facilities in those areas,
Recognizing further the difficulty of adaptation to
urban life of people from rural areas, the inadequacy
of urban institutions designed to fadlitate such adaptation and transition, and the lack of basic research,
studies and evaluation of successful techniques in those
fields,
