S/PV.8712

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8712th meeting

Friday, 31 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Ms. Hidalgo
Mr. Auväärt
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Baati
Mr. Clay
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 6 December 2019 from the Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic extended pursuant to resolution 2454 (2019) addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/930)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-02528 (E)
*2002528*

S/PV.8712

The situation in the Central African Republic

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 6 December 2019 from the
Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic extended pursuant to resolution
2454 (2019) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/930)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2020/79, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/930, which contains the text of a
letter dated 6 December 2019 from the Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic extended pursuant to
resolution 2454 (2019) addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Dominican Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, Niger, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 13 votes
in favour, none against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2507 (2020).
2/8

31/01/2020

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2507 (2020),
renewing the sanctions regime concerning the Central
African Republic. As penholder, we are of the view
that the text is a good compromise that we managed
to reach following negotiations throughout which
the delegation of France strived throughout to play
the role of constructive facilitator. As such, I would
like to thank the members of the Council for their
flexibility, but I deeply regret that we did not adopt the
text unanimously.
The Security Council is always ready to listen to the
legitimate concerns of the Central African authorities
about the security of their country. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, a major commitment
of the United Nations, ensures the security of the
population throughout the country and supports the
gradual redeployment of the Central African armed
forces. Moreover, in order to help equip and strengthen
the mobility and security of the Central African forces,
from September to date the Security Council has twice
authorized a significant easing of the arms embargo.
Finally, I recall that the Central African authorities can
take advantage of the exemption procedures stipulated
by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic.
We believe that, in a security context that remains
unstable, it is important to maintain a responsible
approach and to ensure support for the Central African
authorities in their efforts to advance security sector
reform; to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate former
members of armed groups; and to manage weapons and
ammunition. This is a key element for achieving lasting
peace and security in the Central African Republic.
France will therefore continue to fully support the
Central African authorities in that endeavour.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): On behalf
of South Africa, Tunisia and the Niger, I welcome
the adoption of resolution 2507 (2020), renewing the
sanctions regime imposed on the Central African
Republic. We take this opportunity to thank all members
of the Security Council for the text, which is the product
of constructive negotiations and the assiduous work of
the penholder. We also commend and support the efforts
20-02528

31/01/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

of the Government of the Central African Republic to
implement all the measures taken to restore peace and
stability in the country. We would like to highlight two
points with respect to the resolution.
First, we stress that the sanctions regime must
represent not an objective in itself, but rather our
commitment to the country’s transition towards peace
and stability and peace.
Secondly, the adoption of the resolution is thus a
response to the legitimate request of the authorities of
the Central African Republic to pursue the definitive
lifting of the arms embargo on the basis of progress
made in the area of storing and preventing the diversion
of weapons.
The resolution that we have just adopted will pave
the way for the re-equipping of the entire defence and
security apparatus so that the authorities of the Central
African Republic can regain control of the entire
country and confront the armed groups that continue to
pose a threat to peace and stability.
Finally, the three African members of the Security
Council stress the need to support the Central African
Republic, in coordination with all regional partners,
in its efforts to stabilize the country and promote its
socioeconomic recovery, and encourage it to further
increase cooperation with its partners.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2507 (2020). Sanctions are indeed an
imperfect tool, but among the basket of corrective
options currently available, such measures are likely
to yield some intended results, with minimal collateral
effects. To be clear, our desire is not to punish the
Central African Republic, but to support the State as it
restores its own authority and fulfils its responsibility
of protecting civilians. We consider the resolution to be
robust enough to help combat the proliferation of illicit
small arms and light weapons while providing some
flexibility to the legitimate authorities of the country,
which have faced operational and logistical difficulties.
Our delegation has taken note of the Central African
Republic’s repeated calls for a complete lifting of the
arms component of the sanctions measures. While
we do agree that there is some merit to that request,
primarily as it relates to enabling the security forces to
reclaim territory from armed groups, we do not believe
that the time is ripe for a complete lifting of arms

S/PV. 8712

measures, as there still remain some shortcomings with
weapons and ammunition management in the country.
To that end, we emphasize that there is a great need
for capacity-building and call on all of our friends in
the international community to provide technical and
development assistance in that regard.
At this juncture, we wish to recognize that the
Government of the Central African Republic, despite
its many challenges, has committed to and made
progress towards achieving the key benchmarks that
guide our sanctions review process. We also offer our
highest assurances that once those efforts continue,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will advocate for
further easing of the arms embargo with a view to
gradually and progressively lifting those restrictions.
We therefore encourage the Central African Republic
authorities to continue reforming its security sector and
to maintain its efforts to disarm, demobilize, reintegrate
and repatriate ex-combatants. Those structural reforms
would help to build trust and ensure much-needed
reconciliation among the people of the Central African
Republic. After all, it is they who must lead their
political process.
The resolution embodies the spirit of compromise.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to thank
France, the penholder, and all members of the Security
Council for their constructive efforts to reach a working
consensus. As individual Member States, we may often
have divergent views, but as a Council we must always
remain objective and pragmatic. We should never allow
narrow self-interest, ideological positions or strategic
agendas to overshadow the needs of the Central
African Republic.
Finally, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will
always stand in solidarity with our African brothers
and sisters. When Africa speaks, we will listen.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): We welcome today’s
adoption of resolution 2507 (2020) to renew the
sanctions regime in the Central African Republic and
we thank the penholder for its perseverance in trying to
consolidate and bridge the views shared by the Council
members. We engaged in these negotiations with the
aim of sending a signal of unity to the Central African
Republic and its people. That is particularly important
because this year, with the upcoming elections, will be
crucial to the stability and future of the country. It is
regrettable that this unity could not be fully reached in
the end.

20-025283/8

S/PV.8712

The situation in the Central African Republic

We commend the Government of the Central
African Republic for the hard work, commitment
and results achieved over the past year. The Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and the ongoing implementation
efforts, as well as the overall political process, are
encouraging and positive signs. We also welcome the
country’s continuing work with regard to security sector
reform, the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation process and the management of
weapons and ammunition. We would like to assure
the Government of the Central African Republic of
Germany’s support, which we extend through the
European Union and its Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic, but also as one of the
biggest bilateral donors of humanitarian assistance in
support of the people of the Central African Republic.
Yet, we also see that there is still a lot of work to be
done. We remain deeply concerned about the situation
in the Central African Republic given the instability,
violence and continuing attacks on civilians — as we
sadly witnessed again just a few days ago in Bria. We
remain convinced that the sanctions regime, including
the arms embargo, is an important element to accompany
the Government of the Central African Republic on
its way towards stability, peace and development.
Guided by that understanding of the importance of the
sanctions regime, as well as the need to send a clear
and positive signal to the Government of the Central
African Republic, we have shown flexibility in the
negotiations, despite our concerns.
Today’s decision must also be seen against
the background of the widespread availability and
proliferation of small arms in Africa. Those arms are
a major driver of conflict. Germany is committed to
combating that scourge, including through our support
for the African Union Silencing the Guns initiative.
In that context, I wish to stress the importance of the
responsibility that we have placed on the shoulders of
the Government of the Central African Republic today,
namely, to administer additional categories of arms
and to live up to the highest standards in assuming that
responsibility. We urge the Central African Republic to
live up to the responsibility to tightly control any arms
delivered to it, to use them only in strict compliance
with all legal conditions, including international human
rights and humanitarian law, and to prevent any risk
of proliferation.
4/8

31/01/2020

We would like to underline that we see the efforts
of the Central African Republic, hand in hand with its
international partners, as part of an ongoing process.
We therefore strongly encourage the authorities of
the Central African Republic to continue their efforts
in making further progress on the benchmarks,
particularly with regard to security sector reform, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and the management of weapons and ammunition.
Ms. Hidalgo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the adoption of resolution
2507 (2020). We understand that the adoption of this
resolution reaffirms the Security Council’s commitment
to the authorities of the Central African Republic to
contribute to their struggle to achieve sustainable
peace. The Dominican Republic voted in favour of the
resolution, recognizing the efforts of the authorities of
the Central African Republic to implement the terms of
reference and with a view to contributing to consensus
in the Council.
We hope that over the next six months, the
authorities will continue to implement the steps
established in presidential statement S/PRST/2019/3, of
9 April 2019, which will enable the Council to finally
lift the sanctions regime and the arms embargo. We
urge all parties to redouble their efforts to implement
the February peace agreement and to continue working
on the remaining challenges with a view to bringing
about peace and lasting stability for their people.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2507 (2020). We would like to thank the
penholder, France.
It is regrettable that we are not unanimous regarding
this resolution, whose sole purpose is to curtail the
hostile actions of armed groups that seek to undermine
peace and security in the Central African Republic.
We should not be divided on the issue of restricting the
illegal flow of weapons to a country that is suffering
from warfare and violence, but should instead unite
in finding ways to assist the Central African Republic
in stopping massacres such as the one in Bria just this
week. We extend our condolences to the delegation of
the Central African Republic. We should join together
in helping the Central African Republic to counter
the spread of measles, which was declared a national
epidemic three days ago, and assist the country in its
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform processes.
20-02528

31/01/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

Turning to positive developments, we welcome the
commitment of the Government of the Central African
Republic and the progress made on the five benchmarks
agreed by the Council. We believe that it is our common
goal to restrict the flow of weapons into hands that
would use them to further destabilize the vulnerable
situation in the Central African Republic.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium today provided its support for the renewal of
the sanctions regime. We would like to thank France
for its constructive work and leadership in that regard.
Belgium is convinced that the arms embargo
measures on the Central African Republic remain
essential in order to create the conditions for lasting
peace in the country. We recall that the authorities also
benefit from an exemptions mechanism. We encourage
the authorities to continue their security sector reform
efforts so as to ensure that they have well-trained and
adequately equipped armed forces and police who
are aware of their responsibilities to the people and
supported by a long-term strategy. That is a long-term
task, and we are ready to assist the Central African
Republic as a partner at the national level as well as
through the European Union.
I would like to conclude by recalling Belgium’s
support for the Government of President Touadera,
Special Representative Ndiaye and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2507 (2020) and thanks the
penholder for its efforts in trying to find consensus and
bridge differences.
We heard the call from the Central African Republic
and recognize its efforts to fulfil its obligations under
the benchmarks. Today’s adoption is a form of support
to the Government of the Central African Republic in
the need to combat armed groups and maintain stability
closer to the upcoming national election.
Today’s adoption also emphasized our views on
sanctions. First, sanctions are not an end in themselves
but a means to achieve our collective goals. Secondly,
sanctions are not forever and should be used in line
with the real situation on the ground.
Indonesia reiterates its support for the efforts made
by the Government of the Central African Republic and
further calls on the wider membership of the United

S/PV. 8712

Nations to continue its support to the country. Indonesia
will continue to push for unity in the Council and the
bridging of differences among members in order to
move forward in our collective goal to save lives.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
current political and security situation in the Central
African Republic is improving overall. The Government
of the Central African Republic is committed to
implementing the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and is
actively making progress in the implementation of the
benchmarks for the arms embargo assessment. China
commends those efforts.
China has always believed that sanctions are not an
end in themselves but rather a means to the end, which is
to help the Central African Republic to restore national
stability and a normal social order at an early date.
The Security Council should base itself on the actual
situation on the ground in the Central African Republic,
particularly the aspirations of its Government, and
lift the arms embargo sanction measures against the
Central African Republic as soon as possible. That will
help the Government of the Central African Republic
to strengthen its capacity to maintain national safety
and security and facilitate the political settlement of the
Central African Republic issue.
China wishes to thank France, the penholder, for its
efforts. However, resolution 2507 (2020) failed to fully
respect the wishes of the Government of the Central
African Republic regarding the lifting of the arms
embargo, nor did it reflect the constructive ideas of
some members of the Security Council. China therefore
had no choice but to abstain.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2507 (2020). I
would like to begin by thanking France for its efforts
to secure the Council’s consensus on the resolution and
for its inclusive approach to the negotiations.
We regret that, despite the considerable effort of
the penholder, consensus could not be reached and
the Council was obliged to agree on a renewal period
of only six months. We believe that six months is too
short to allow for the effective implementation of the
resolution and sends the wrong signal to the armed
groups targeted by the resolution.
I would like to be set out the position of the
United Kingdom on the arms embargo. The arms

20-025285/8

S/PV.8712

The situation in the Central African Republic

embargo is designed to prevent weapons from reaching
armed groups, not from reaching the Government of
the Central African Republic. The notification and
exemption procedures, as set out in the resolution, are
the mechanisms through which the defence and security
forces of the Central African Republic can access all
the arms and equipment that they need to perform their
role. To claim otherwise risks giving a false impression
that adjusting or lifting the arms embargo will
necessarily make the Central African Republic defence
forces better able to protect the citizens of the country.
The United Kingdom welcomes the commitment of
the Government of the Central African Republic and the
progress made since April towards the five benchmarks
agreed by the Council in the areas of security sector
reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and weapons and ammunition management. Progress
on weapons management, in particular, is vital to
ensure that weapons intended for the Central African
Republic defence and security forces do not fall into the
hands of armed groups. We encourage the Government
of the Central African Republic to continue its efforts.
It has our full support.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Russia was unable to support today’s
resolution 2507 (2020). We sincerely appreciate the
penholder’s efforts; however, not all of our arguments
were taken into account in the drafting the text of the
resolution. We advocated for a greater easing of the
arms embargo. Unfortunately, neither Bangui’s official
appeal nor our position were duly considered.

31/01/2020

therefore determined to further review the Security
Council’s restrictive sanctions in July with a view to
their easing and, ultimately, their full lifting.
Sanctions are one of the many important tools in
the Council’s toolkit to stimulate the peace process and
political dialogue, and they should be used with the
full measure of responsibility and caution in order to
avoid causing harm. Moreover, any Security Council
restriction must evolve and adapt in line with the
changing dynamics on the ground.
We wish to assure the Council that Russia will
continue to provide assistance to the Central African
Republic, both in its process of national reconciliation
and in the context of strengthening its security forces,
with a view to normalizing the situation in the country
and reaching a sustainable settlement to the protracted
armed conflict.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The United States is pleased to join the large majority
of Council members in voting in favour of resolution
2507 (2020), renewing the sanctions regime in the
Central African Republic. We hope that the extension
of the arms embargo, assets freeze and travel ban
will keep necessary pressure on the armed groups
that continue to undermine peace and security in the
Central African Republic.

The arms embargo on the Central African Republic
may have played a positive role in the early stages,
but now it is effectively an obstacle to the rearming
of the national army and security forces — the very
institutions that bear the primary responsibility for
upholding the peace and security of their own citizens.
Meanwhile, the saboteurs of the peace process among
the armed groups remain unhindered in replenishing
their stockpiles of weapons through smuggling.

That decision is grounded on our overarching
goal to strengthen the Central African Republic as
a country, as a whole, and support its institutions.
However, the resolution aside, given the dynamic that
played out in this negotiation, we must raise the issue of
the recent remarks made on this matter by the Russian
Ambassador in Bangui that are deeply concerning.
In public comments, the Ambassador denigrated any
member of the Council who would disagree with Russia’s
position, saying that those Governments — including
my own — “do not want peace and security in the
country” and “are against the interests of the Central
African people”.

Simplifying procedures for the Central African
Republic to obtain certain categories of armed vehicles
for its own needs, as provided for by the present
resolution, is another small step in supporting the
Central African Republic. However, we must not forget
that the legitimate Central African authorities have
urged the Council to fully lift the arms embargo, and
in our view they have every reason to do so. We are

In fact, nothing could be further from the
truth. The members of the Council differ regarding
technical elements most appropriate for an effective
sanctions regime, the issues that we seek to highlight
in Security Council resolutions and even sometimes
how to characterize recent developments in the Central
African Republic. But all of us are engaged on this
matter because we want to see peace and security in the

6/8

20-02528

31/01/2020

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Republic and elevate the interests of
the Central African people.
The United States demonstrates our commitment
as the largest single-country humanitarian donor in the
Central African Republic. Our life-saving assistance of
more than $140 million in just the past year is directly
helping millions of Central Africans who were forced
to flee their homes. Moreover, we are helping to rebuild
the Central African Republic’s security institutions so
that they can protect the people and the territory of the
Central African Republic. If our Russian colleagues are
suggesting that life-saving humanitarian aid is against
the interests of those who depend on it, it would not
be the first time that they have done so in the Security
Council this month. But that would not make the
claim true.
As other speakers have noted, we believe that the
Council would be favourably disposed to exemption
requests from the Central African Republic Government
to import new arms, but we have not received any such
requests since the last relaxation of the arms embargo
in September. We look forward to future reporting on
progress towards the benchmarks for the next iteration
of the resolution.
Russia’s divisive propaganda leads down a
dangerous path. The Central African Republic is a
fragile State, and it is in the interests of all of us in the
international community to support its return to full
sovereignty and avoid any acts that could destabilize
the country. That point is crucial in the run-up to the
December 2020 elections. We should all be seeking
to de-escalate tensions and build confidence among
political actors, rather than spreading false narratives.
We should support political dialogue and transitional
justice and work transparently to address violations of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic in a constructive,
consultative manner with the United Nations and the
African Union.
Rather than questioning the motives of Council
members whose views do not align with their own,
we hope that Russia will work cooperatively with
the United States and other friends of the Central
African Republic to support the strengthening of State
institutions in a transparent and coordinated way, and
to ensure that the 2020 elections are free and fair.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.

S/PV. 8712

At the outset, Viet Nam would like to thank France,
the penholder, and other members of the Security
Council for their hard work on resolution 2507 (2020).
We welcome the adoption of the resolution, which
renews the sanctions regime and further eases the arms
embargo on the Central African Republic. It shows that
the Council has been closely following the situation
in the Central African Republic and seeking ways to
support its Government and people in order to achieve
sustainable peace in the country.
It is important that Security Council resolutions be
fully implemented. We are of the view that the ultimate
purpose of the sanctions is to pave the way forward for
a peaceful and sustainable solution to the crisis. The
application of sanctions has to be in conformity with
international law and in respect of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Central African Republic.
Viet Nam welcomes the recent positive developments
in the Central African Republic and wishes to stress
the importance of maintaining conditions favourable to
dialogue, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
preparation for the upcoming electoral process.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): I must apologize in advance because I am
losing my voice at this very important time and, as
such, will be forced to be brief.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2507 (2020), renewing the sanctions regime concerning
the Central African Republic, even if the unanimity that
we had hoped for was not achieved. I sincerely thank
all members of the Security Council. We are especially
pleased by the spirit of consensus and compromise that
prevailed during the negotiations, given the fact that
the fate of an entire people depends on the decisions
that the Council takes in this Chamber. I sincerely
commend France, the penholder, for its flexibility
throughout these days of consultations, which yielded a
concise text acceptable to all. My delegation welcomes
the further easing of the arms embargo with respect to
certain types of vehicles.
The activities of armed groups in the north of the
country, specifically in Vakaga prefecture, remain
a source of deep concern for the population, even if

20-025287/8

S/PV.8712

The situation in the Central African Republic

the latest events in Bria led to casualties in the ranks
of those groups themselves. Equipping the defence
and security forces with vehicles will ensure their
mobility in areas affected by insecurity and their rapid
intervention to protect civilians in distress. Indeed, it
is those criminal activities throughout the country that
have led the Government to call for the complete lifting
of the arms embargo.
I would be remiss in concluding without
congratulating Viet Nam for its excellent work over the
course of its presidency in the month of January, even
though it is the last day of that presidency. I wish the
new elected members of the Council every success in
discharging their mandate over the next years.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

8/8

31/01/2020

As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of January, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Viet Nam to the
members of the Council and to the Council secretariat
for all the support they have given us. Indeed, it has
been a busy month, during which we rose to consensus
on several important issues within our purview. We
could not have done it alone or without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of all members,
their delegations, representatives of the secretariat,
conferences services officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I now speak on behalf of
the entire Council in wishing the delegation of Belgium
good luck in the month of February.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

20-02528
