United Nations

S/PV.9319

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9319th meeting
Wednesday, 10 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-13183 (E)
*2313183*

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting. I request the Protocol Officer to escort
Her Excellency Ms. Željka Cvijanović, Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to her seat at
the Council table.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Christian
Schmidt, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to put on record our
disagreement with the presence of Mr. Christian
Schmidt at this meeting in his capacity as so-called
High Representative. The Security Council did not
approve him for that position. We want to stress that the
question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is on the Council’s
agenda under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. For a quarter of a century now, it has been our
practice to approve High Representatives. Without a
corresponding mandate from the Council, the position
of High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
therefore remains vacant. In view of that, we would like
to emphasize that Mr. Schmidt has no right to speak on
behalf of the international community or to submit any
documents to the Security Council.
Nevertheless, it is also the practice of the Security
Council to hear speakers in their personal capacity.
That is how we will perceive Mr. Schmidt’s presence in
the Chamber today.
The President (spoke in French): I take note of the
remarks of the representative of the Russian Federation.
It is decided to invite High Representative Schmidt to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
2/22

10/05/2023

Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Schmidt.
Mr. Schmidt: It is an honour to address the Security
Council here today. Almost three decades have passed
since the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement. I
see encouraging developments in post-conflict Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but I also see profound threats to the
fundamentals of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am therefore
pleased to have an opportunity to report to the Security
Council on the situation.
Historically, geographically and culturally, the
country is on an irreversible path towards European
integration. The functionality of the authorities at all
levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina is of utmost importance
both for fully implementing the Dayton Agreement and
for advancing on the path towards the European Union
(EU). The EU candidacy status granted to Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 15 December last year is a crucial step
on that path. It created positive momentum and was
welcomed by the population. Positive momentum was
also created by the rapid formation of the executive and
legislative authorities at almost all levels in the country
following the general elections of 2 October. The
appointment of the executive authorities of the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska was
swift. Both Governments are in place and operational.
However, the entity of the Federation was
caught in a stalemate between political blocs for
seven months, threatening the Government with
destabilization and institutional dysfunctionality,
which I had largely addressed through my decisions
of last October and April. On 27 April, when all the
constitutional deadlines had expired, I enabled the
House of Representatives of the Federation to vote on
a Government suggested by a majority of the members
of Parliament and formally proposed by Federation
President Lidija Bradara. The next day, 28 April, the
Federation House of Representatives voted in favour of
that Government proposal. The end result is a stable
and fully functional Federation. Furthermore, I am glad
to inform the Council that the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court concluded in March 2023 that
my October decisions were in full accordance with the
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.9319

Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution and the relevant
international human rights conventions. Despite that,
the adoption of anti-discriminatory legislation remains
one of the most important tasks before the Government
so that the Sejdić and Finci group of cases and others
can be implemented in the near future.

in one entity and democracy in the other. Furthermore,
the question of State property still needs to be resolved
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it should be done by
consensus. Bosnia and Herzegovina is the only postYugoslav State that has not yet succeeded in settling the
questions from its Yugoslav heritage.

One of the key challenges to the full implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement comes from the other
entity, Republika Srpska, and the developments there
are not business as usual. The secessionist positioning
and rhetoric of the entity’s leadership have dramatically
increased in the reporting period. Republika Srpska’s
President, Milorad Dodik, openly advocates for the
independence of Republika Srpska and has even spoken
publicly about joining Serbia. That calls into question
the fundamentals of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
pursues a secessionist policy.

It seems that there is an intention to gain domestic
support by misinterpreting legal and political facts
and by claiming that resolving the issue of State and
defence property would challenge the very existence
of Republika Srpska. The entity authorities continue to
disregard the final and binding decisions of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court by attempting
to regulate the matter, in violation of those decisions.
That was the case with the law on immovable property
adopted by the Republika Srpska National Assembly, a
law that I suspended on 27 February. The Constitutional
Court has since annulled that legislation. If the State,
entities, cantons and municipalities can find a solution
to the issue of State property, everybody will benefit,
and nobody will lose.

I am particularly worried about a joint statement
signed by the ruling parties of Republika Srpska on
24 April. The statement appears to be an action plan
for secession. It mentions that the two entities own
State property exclusively and conduct legislation that
is not at State level, and it rejects the authority of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
signatories oblige Republika Srpska representatives in
the country’s institutions to suspend decision-making at
the State level until the Republika Srpska Government
and Parliament approve their decisions. The statement
calls for the Serb judges to withdraw from the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. It also calls
for establishing a police unit to conduct so-called
border monitoring between the entities. None of those
measures can be reconciled with the Dayton Agreement.
They clearly endanger the State institutions and the
country’s unity.
On 6 March, in a letter to Radovan Višković, the
Prime Minister of Republika Srpska, President Dodik
promoted an erroneous and misleading interpretation
of the Dayton Agreement and the constitutional
framework. He disregards the explicit provisions of
the Constitution that uphold the principle of continuity
between the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
today’s Bosnia and Herzegovina — a principle that has
been reaffirmed on many occasions by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Within Republika
Srpska, new legislation and initiatives promoted by the
ruling coalition are shrinking the space for civil society
and independent media. Bosnia and Herzegovina must
not become a country divided between authoritarianism

On 22 March, in a joint statement by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board, the
ambassadors expressed deep concern about the recent
developments in Republika Srpska. I think that in
that regard international partners must continue to
respond with a united position. The State Constitution
guarantees the existence of both entities and Brčko
but prohibits an entity from seceding or unifying with
another State. Any step in that direction would have
perilous implications, putting the 28 years of peace
and progress at direct risk. We cannot step aside and
allow divisive political tactics to endanger the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the cohesion of its society.
I welcome the reassurances by the neighbouring
States of Serbia and Croatia that they fully respect
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I am also grateful for the continued
presence of the European Union Military Operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea). As a Dayton
institution, it is the military counterpart to the Office
of the High Representative and a confidence-building
measure and necessary tool for safeguarding peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. EUFOR-Althea’s
role remains critical.
Little progress has been made in implementing the
5+2 agenda, apart from budget adoptions at various
levels, which contribute to fiscal sustainability, as well
as some positive developments in the Brčko district.

23-131833/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina still faces considerable
challenges regarding State and defence property, the
rule of law and various aspects of fiscal sustainability.
There is an attempt to follow the European Union’s
proposals to implement European standards, but it is
progressing very, very slowly. We expect — and this
is a political observation — that with the Government
now enforcing it at full capacity it can hopefully speed
up a bit. The Office of the High Representative remains
committed to working with the authorities to achieve
those goals. As for the economy, growth continues
despite challenges such as increased inflationary
pressure. In previous years, uncertain and inadequate
financing affected Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
institutions’ ability to carry out their legal obligations.
In that regard, the adoption of an increased budget is a
very positive development.
Trust-building is an indispensable element of
the efforts to ensure sustainable peace and progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A recent analysis by the
website Balkan Insight shows that the war in Ukraine
and the pandemic have aggravated the situation of
traumatized people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the
study, a war veteran stated that the war in Ukraine
triggers flashbacks, saying “I have stopped watching
news from Ukraine — I cannot.” Traumas remain
widespread and often unaddressed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina owing to a lack of institutional resources.
I call on the members of the international community
to support the national efforts to heal the widespread
traumas in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s society. I also call
for funding — public, private or other — to assist the
people who have suffered and are suffering the most.
In that context I want to point to the contributions that
are already being provided by United Nations agencies
to specifically support such people, and we should
continue on that path.
The denial of the Srebrenica genocide and the
glorification of war criminals continue to be a problem.
Remembrance, memorialization and truth-telling
for future generations are preconditions for peaceful
coexistence among the various groups in the country.
Without that, this country cannot transition from a postwar society to a modern, unified, democratic nation.
With that understanding, I amended the law on the
Srebrenica-Potocari Memorial Centre on 20 February,
so that the Centre can broaden and intensify its
engagement. I am glad that the city of Mostar recently
changed the names of streets that had been named after
4/22

10/05/2023

leading members of the Ustasha, a regime in the Second
World War. I want to add that on the regional level,
I have been seeing a lot of commitments by mayors,
municipalities and non-governmental organizations
to dealing with the issue, but a great deal remains to
be done.
When it comes to the prosecution of war crimes,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is the most advanced country
in the region. But even now, after the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has done its
work, the prosecution of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity needs the full support of the
international community, because there are thousands
of cases to be processed. War criminals convicted by
an international court must be entered into the national
criminal records. I welcome the efforts to create a legal
basis for this, and I am very ready to support them. I am
working closely with the Registrar of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunal in The
Hague. Those who were convicted and served their
sentence in prison should remain silent in public,
save to speak about redress in a manner respectful of
the victims.
School curriculums that differ along ethnic lines
cannot overcome the shadows of the past. The diversity
of the constituent people must be respected, but there
must also be space for citizens who do not belong to
such ethnic groups.
Disunity in foreign and defence policy is another
shortcoming in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It would
be beneficial for the country if the three members of
the presidency agreed more often on common foreign
policy positions, in the interests of the country and all
its citizens.
In
the
face
of
continued
instability,
people — especially young people — are leaving the
country in record numbers. Political participation
among youth is low. When asked about the reasons for
migration, many people refer to widespread corruption,
nepotism, segregated education, divided society and
the limited job market.
The overall participation of women in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in executive and legislative positions
remains low. Yet there were some appointments of
women to high-level political positions after the
October 2022 elections. I am speaking here of Her
Excellency Ms. Željka Cvijanović, Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Her Excellency
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Ms. Borjana Krišto, Chair of the Council of Ministers,
and Ms. Lidija Bradara, President of the Federation.
Women comprise around 20 per cent of the State- and
entity-level parliaments. The balance in the executive
authorities is even worse, especially at the local level.
Discrimination in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
a complex problem encompassing many issues and
groups. Ethnic minorities and persons who do not belong
to any constituent people, referred to as “Others” — in
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina — are banned from certain public
offices, which are reserved for constituent peoples.
I therefore call upon political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to launch comprehensive constitutional
and legal reforms in order to tackle this problem and to
implement the relevant decisions of the European Court
of Human Rights. By introducing new legislation and
constitutional amendments against discrimination we
can address the shortfalls of Annex 4 of the Dayton
Agreement, which is the State Constitution.
Minorities often face ethnic and religious
discrimination. That is especially the case with the
returnees. Social exclusion and discrimination against
the Roma remain widespread, particularly in housing,
employment, education and access to health services.
More efforts are needed to combat discrimination and
promote tolerance in the interest of fostering stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
All those who suffered as a consequence of the
war want to be reassured that peace will be protected.
Political and religious leaders have a particular
sensitivity for that need. Here I want to highlight the
contribution of the Honourable Reis-ul-Ulema, head of
the Islamic Community. His statements often express
the fears of those relying on him. In those cases, we
have to listen. We see that there is a lot of uncertainty
and that the people feel unsafe. The Honourable Reisul-Ulema, head of the Islamic Community, has been
personally attacked and humiliated in wartime and
is now very engaged in interreligious dialogue and
reconciliation. I appreciate that, and underscore the need
for interreligious dialogue, which we should support.
As the international community, we have to renew
the promise we made to Bosnia and Herzegovina in
1995 — never again. Those who put peace at stake
deserve a clear answer. If we say never again, we must
act in line with our promise.

S/PV.9319

In conclusion, I will underscore one message only:
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity are not negotiable. Borders within the country
do not and will not exist. Respect for the country’s
constitutional, legal and institutional framework is the
cornerstone of long-lasting peace, stability and progress.
Without that, Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot move
forward towards the European Union, to the detriment
of all of its citizens. That needed move towards the EU
and the adoption European standards could involve the
Dayton Agreement, step by step, if and when necessary.
I value dialogue and openness with the political
actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina and regional
interlocutors. I am hopeful for the country’s future
within the European family. A lot of young people are
leaving, but some are staying. Those who are staying do
not agree with the current situation. They are invited to
work for a better future and greater involvement. That
could bring great momentum to the country.
My report shows some problematic developments,
but is also very hopeful.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Schmidt for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank High
Representative Christian Schmidt for his briefing and
clarifications. I welcome to this meeting the President
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the delegations
of Serbia and Croatia.
The formation of the new Government is a welcome
development that ensures respect for the will of the
majority, as expressed in the democratic elections.
We also hail the constitutional amendment by the
Office of the High Representative on the support of
the presidency for a new Government. Preserving the
stability achieved over the years requires measures to
avoid new impasses in future.
On the other hand, we are concerned about recourse
to the so-called Bonn powers, as, in our view, it feeds
narratives about the alleged imposition of solutions from
the outside. In order to prevent the erosion of public
trust in the political system in place, we encourage
local forces to act with restraint and to keep in mind the
importance of putting the safety and well-being of the
population above short-term political interests. In that
sense, we welcome the ultimately peaceful transition to
the new Federation Government, on 28 April.

23-131835/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Brazil views with even greater concern the
separatist rhetoric adopted by some local leaders,
particularly in the light of reports of the recurrence of
ethnically based hate speech. In this and other files, our
position has been clear and consistent — Brazil respects
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
condemns attempts to relativize that fundamental
principle of the Charter of the United Nations. We
urge local leaders to express their firm rejection of
secessionist attempts, which brought so much suffering
to Bosnia and Herzegovina in the not-so-distant past.
At the national level, we take note of the High
Representative’s concern over disagreements between
members of the presidency. We trust the ability of
Bosnian leaders to prevent the existence of opposing
points of view — to be expected in a democratic
political environment — from undermining efforts to
strengthen the rule of law and regional integration.
Brazil supports the undertaking of trust-building
measures between communities in order to prevent
further episodes of ethnically based violence and create
conditions conducive to the safe return of refugees.
We condemn violations of minority rights in both
entities, as well as any glorification of violence or
denial of crimes committed during the war. We are
aware of the frustrations regarding the implementation
of the Dayton Accords. We believe, however, that the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina still offers the best prospects for
preserving peace and stability.
Brazil reiterates its support for the full
implementation of the 5+2 agenda, allowing Bosnia
and Herzegovina to finally complete its transition from
international oversight.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank the High Representative
for his briefing. Malta values the role and mandate of the
High Representative and acknowledges the importance
of his Office in maintaining the continued stability and
peace in the country. We take the High Representative’s
concerns about divisive inter-ethnic and secessionist
rhetoric seriously as threats to peace and stability in
the country and potentially to the wider region. The
Office’s presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is key
to facilitating dialogue and maintaining calm in the
region. We reiterate our position on the importance
of sustained stability in the Western Balkans and the
overall prosperity of the region.
6/22

10/05/2023

We have taken note of the fact that authorities are
now in place at the State and entity level. We hope that
this step forward will foster increased cooperation
between all parties for the sake of stability and social
and economic prosperity. Malta calls for ensuring the
representation of women in all Government institutions
and highlights the importance of an inclusive public
administration. We welcome the European Union (EU)
candidate status granted to Bosnia and Herzegovina
at the end of last year and support its commitment to
achieving its goal of EU membership. We encourage
Bosnia and Herzegovina to strive to adopt the necessary
reforms, particularly in addressing the 14 key priorities
and strengthening the country’s constitutional, electoral
and judicial frameworks, which will ensure meaningful
progress towards EU membership. We call for the
reforms to be inclusive and based on the rule of law.
Malta condemns all nationalistic and divisive
rhetoric and actions that could lead to unnecessary
tensions or conflict, undermining stability and the
quality of life in the country. That is especially true
for dangerous discourse about secession that not
only undermines the progress achieved but creates
obstacles on the path towards EU accession. Malta
is also concerned about the legislative initiatives and
announcements in the Republika Srpska entity against
LGBTQI persons and civil society and media freedom.
We call for the implementation of credible and genuine
measures to address shortcomings in the protection
of the fundamental rights of persons belonging
to minorities, including LGBTQI persons, and in
preventing discrimination against them. We call for a
strong, unified country that enacts coherent legislation
through coordinated institutions. That is the only way
to achieve adequate reforms and overcome future
challenges. We stress the need for a strong commitment
from all parties towards reconciliation and the
strengthening of cohesion. We consider that to include
a school curriculum that represents diversity but does
not discriminate based on ethnicity, in order to ensure
that children grow up in a reconciliatory environment.
Malta also recognizes the importance of the role of
the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in maintaining security and stability and
believes that its presence is crucial to preserving the
present stable situation.
In conclusion, we urge responsible and sensible
leadership in Bosnia and Herzegovina that strives for
cooperation based on respect for all members of society
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

with a clear view towards EU integration and rejects
decisions that perpetuate division. We support all
efforts to engage in constructive, inclusive dialogue that
guarantees the peaceful coexistence of all communities.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank Mr. Christian
Schmidt, the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his informative briefing. I also
welcome the participation of the Chair of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in this meeting.
The report of the High Representative highlights
developments such as the rapid formation of State
institutions at all levels following the general elections
held last October. The effective functioning of the
executive, legislative and judicial arms of Government
is the bedrock of democratic, peaceful and stable
societies. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, that is critical to
remedying the political deadlock, which in recent times
has prevented the State from delivering on the social
contract with its citizenry. We encourage further progress
towards the formation of a new Federation Government.
We note the progressive commitments to ensuring
fiscal sustainability through the adoption of the 2023
budget, as well as the Global Framework of Fiscal Balance and Policies in Bosnia and Herzegovina 2023–
2025, which is designed to increase funding to State
institutions by significant margins and support their
effectiveness. We are also encouraged by progressive
developments in areas such as transparency, accountability, anti-corruption, infrastructure development,
public administration and fiscal and economic reforms,
all of which are taking place in Brčko district. As we
have said before, those dividends of political will and
cooperation should serve as a beacon for the full implementation of the 5+2 agenda across the whole of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
However, a number of complex challenges remain
in the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
particular, we are concerned about the divisive rhetoric
and actions marking the period under review. Escalatory
language and hate speech diminish the prospects for
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence among the
many ethnic societies of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and must be avoided as much as possible. We urge all
parties to remain faithful to their commitments under
the General Framework Agreement and underscore that

S/PV.9319

all legitimate nationalist aspirations should be realized
through dialogue in good faith and in a manner that
does not destabilize the country’s fragile peace.
We also note the continuing divergences in the
Presidency on matters relating to the constitutional
order, as well as internal and foreign policy issues. We
reiterate our call on the leaders to work collaboratively
to advance areas of commonality and find pragmatic
approaches to outstanding concerns. In our view, little
progress can be made on the many contested issues
unless and until all leaders commit to a constructive
dialogue in a spirit of mutual respect, cooperation and
consensus-building in the interests of their constituents.
It would not be far from the truth to observe that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently more divided
and less stable than it has ever been since the end of
the horrifying war. Rising tensions threaten to tear
apart this multi-ethnic nation and reignite a political
crisis, which its people and, indeed, the rest of the
world can ill afford at a time of heightened global
political tensions. We therefore urge for the continuing
support of the Security Council and the international
community in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and its objectives of peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Pending the completion of the 5+2 agenda, we
encourage all sides to respect and work collaboratively
with the Office of the High Representative. We also urge
the High Representative to exercise his responsibilities
with due regard to the enabling laws, and we emphasize
the importance of respect for all national institutions.
Having been granted EU candidate status in December
of last year, Bosnia and Herzegovina and its leaders
have a good opportunity to advance State reforms that
can foster the country’s EU-integration perspective.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Ghana’s commitment to
the preservation of the sovereignty and integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in line with the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
and in the spirit of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Christian Schmidt for his briefing. I welcome
the participation in this meeting of Her Excellency
Ms. Željka Cvijanović, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as that of the representatives
of Serbia and Croatia and the Head of the Delegation of
the European Union.

23-131837/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Since our previous meeting, in November (see
S/PV.9179), the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been marked by several significant developments
that should be highlighted. The holding of elections on
2 October, followed by the formation of the Council of
Ministers and an executive, as well as the adoption of
the budget within the legal time frame, is a remarkable
development that attests to the efforts made by Bosnia
and Herzegovina to exercise its full sovereign authority.
We welcomed the significant participation in the 2022
general elections of women, who made up 42 per cent
of the 7,258 registered candidates. We also note the
greater involvement of young people in the political life
of the country, something that should be encouraged
to ensure harmonious State-building, provide future
prospects for the young and slow down the trend among
them of leaving the country, which has led to an outflow
of more than half a million young people over the past
10 years and is a significant development challenge for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We stress the importance of strengthening the
implementation of the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement,
which is undoubtedly one of the best guarantees that
Bosnia-Herzegovina can build a political future that
corresponds to its history and sociological reality, and
which takes into account the aspirations of the two
entities and the three constituent peoples. My country
encourages Bosnia’s political leaders to work together
to achieve that goal, including by instituting the
necessary reforms, especially strengthening the rule of
law. It is essential for the Federation to finally form
a Government, because given the fact that elections
were held in 2018 and 2022, it is hardly conceivable
that the winners of the 2014 elections should remain in
interim positions. We hope that the agreement reached
by the parties representing each of the three constituent
peoples to form a coalition will enable them to
overcome that challenge and that they will work to find
a compromise on the contentious issues. We welcome
the clear commitment of the members of the new
Presidency to accelerating the implementation of the 14
key priorities for integration into the European Union.
Building a more inclusive and egalitarian society
requires the adoption of measures that promote
coexistence, while respecting individual rights and
freedoms and human rights, including freedom of
religion. We urge all the parties to show restraint and
to refrain from any hate speech or divisive rhetoric
that could undermine the building of a lasting peace.
8/22

10/05/2023

We encourage the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue their efforts to unblock the
stalled economic development projects and agree on
a position on the role of the international community.
That political progress will contribute to improving
the economic situation. We encourage Bosnia and
Herzegovina to address the legacies of the war by
taking the necessary action with regard to its victims,
returnees, survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
and missing persons.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its support for
the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is an essential part of the peace and
security architecture aimed at helping the country to
overcome its security challenges. We support national
initiatives that promote interaction between the entities
and the Federation and that will enable Bosnia and
Herzegovina to remain in control of its destiny.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
appreciate the detailed briefing on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina as part of this debate and acknowledge
the presence here today of the representatives of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the European Union, Croatia and
Serbia.
Ecuador stresses the importance of the Office of the
High Representative in monitoring the implementation
of the civilian aspects of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as its work in ensuring security and stability in
the country. We urge all the parties to cooperate with
the Office of the High Representative and to intensify
their efforts to fulfil and implement the commitments,
conditions and objectives set out in 2008 in the 5+2
agenda. The closure of the Office would be beneficial
only after those conditions have been met and the
objectives achieved.
We commend the peaceful holding of general
elections in October of last year and the speedy
formation of the new authorities, as well as the decision
to unblock the formation of the Government of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge for
expanding the efforts to advance the full, equal and safe
participation of women in political life in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We call on all the parties to put an end
to the methods used to limit women’s access and to all
types of gender-based violence, including harassment.
Ecuador is concerned about the intensifying
secessionist rhetoric from various actors in the country,
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

a development that could threaten the Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
which in turn could put regional stability at risk. We
urge all the parties to exercise calm and restraint
and to refrain from any unilateral actions that could
undermine the constitutional order established under
the Dayton Agreement. My delegation also rejects the
dissemination of hate speech and corrosive rhetoric on
ethnic and religious issues, which deepens divisions
and undermines the reconciliation process in the
country. We call on the authorities to lead by example
and to refrain from divisive speeches or actions that
could undermine trust in their communities. Only
through respectful dialogue and the strengthening of
the rule of law — without impunity — can a peaceful,
secure, multi-ethnic and multi-religious coexistence be
guaranteed. In that regard, we firmly condemn the denial
or glorification of war crimes, which continues to inflict
pain on victims and society. Ensuring accountability for
such crimes, including conflict-related sexual violence,
is critical to the country’s reconciliation process. We are
also concerned about the recent political developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina that have threatened to
undermine the progress made over the past 27 years.
We hope the parties will put aside their political
interests and demonstrate their unconditional respect
for the country’s national institutions and the Dayton
Peace Agreement as a mechanism for the consolidation
of peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In conclusion, the Security Council should maintain
its commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and the Dayton Agreement. In that regard, Ecuador
will continue to express its support for the work carried
out in that country by the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the area of
peace and security.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank High Representative Schmidt for his
briefing, and I also welcome the participation in
today’s meeting of Mrs. Željka Cvijanović, Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Serbia and the European Union.
Nearly three decades on from the 1995 Dayton
Agreement, significant progress has been made in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.9319

Last year’s elections saw all political parties
fully engaged. Though the elections presented some
challenges, we commend all parties for resolving
electoral differences peacefully. This is yet another
important milestone in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
development as a nation.
The United Arab Emirates believes that maintaining
and promoting political stability is essential if Bosnia
and Herzegovina is to build upon and engender a lasting
peace. The recent formation of the Government of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important
step forward for the people of the Federation and for all
citizens of the country.
For today’s discussion, I would like to emphasize
three points.
First, encouraging tolerance and peaceful
coexistence is necessary for achieving sustainable
peace, especially in diverse societies like Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The United Arab Emirates is convinced that a
cornerstone of a peaceful future for all is deep respect for
human fraternity, tolerance and coexistence. Promoting
a culture of mutual respect and understanding for people
of all backgrounds can serve as a foundation for a safe,
secure and prosperous society. Local and grass-roots
efforts to promote intercommunal dialogue play a crucial
role in supporting longer-term peacebuilding, and we are
encouraged by such efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which are often spearheaded by the younger generation.
Secondly, we continue to stress the importance of
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in all aspects of political life and decision-making in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Women play an essential role
in supporting reconciliation efforts in post-conflict
societies. Their full inclusion is essential for the country
to achieve sustainable peace. As such, we encourage
efforts to strengthen the participation of women at all
levels of decision-making.
Thirdly, as the country builds towards a more
prosperous future, due consideration should be given
to economic development. The United Arab Emirates
is a firm believer that economic development is key to
sustaining lasting peace and can play an important part
in facilitating post-conflict reconciliation.
To be truly effective, economic development must
be inclusive, ensuring that women and youth — and
people from all communities — are able to benefit from

23-131839/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

10/05/2023

it. Equitable economic development strengthens social
cohesion and integration and builds resilience against
hate speech and attempts at provoking ethnic tensions.

favour of more commitment and strong support for
transformative reforms. It is the only way forward for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I would like to take this opportunity to strongly
reaffirm my country’s support for the territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in line with international
law and the Dayton Agreement. We strongly support
the work done by both the national and international
institutions supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the Office of the High Representative, the
European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the institutions established out of the
Dayton Agreement.

All stakeholders should come together to work
and fulfil the 14 key priorities identified by the EU
Commission — a road map for the opening of EU
accession negotiations. In that respect, more substantial
work is needed for the full implementation of the
5+2 agenda.

We urge all actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
engage in good-faith efforts to resolve the ongoing
political disputes and avoid ethnically and religiously
charged language — or any language that can
inflame tensions.
At this critical time in the region and the world, it
is more important than ever to focus on promoting a
stable political climate and bringing about the promise
of peace and prosperity.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank the High
Representative, Mr. Christian Schmidt, for his insightful
briefing. We appreciate and fully support his efforts
and active engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
welcome the presence of the Chair of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mrs. Željka Cvijanović.
We also take note of the letter from the member of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Denis
Bećirović, addressed to the Security Council, regarding
the participation of the country in this meeting.
As we heard from the High Representative, the
reporting period has been dominated by intensive
political developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
welcome the establishment of executive institutions, at
all levels, following the general elections in October.
This is an important step towards a normal functionality
of the Administration, at all levels.
The decision taken by the European Council in
December to grant European Union-candidate status
to Bosnia and Herzegovina is a historic milestone
from the European perspective of the country, with
a positive impact for the entire region. This is a clear
and bold message by the European Union (EU) in
10/22

Making progress towards EU integration would be,
by far, the best and most meaningful investment for the
future of the country since the Dayton Agreement. That
will require resolute steps to strengthen the rule of law,
democratic governance, and fundamental freedoms
and to ensure equal rights for all. It also represents an
opportunity for the increased participation of women
and a wider involvement of young people in a process
that will define their future.
Last week, on 5 May, Bosnia and Herzegovina
commemorated the killing of 1,601 children during
the siege of Sarajevo, between 1992 and 1996. Many
of them were slaughtered while being selectively and
intentionally targeted by snipers, in just one of the
barbaric acts perpetrated under the men convicted
as genocidal war criminals, Ratko Mladić and
Radovan Karadžić.
While we highly appreciate the amendment brought
by the High Representative to the Law on the Center
for the Srebrenica-Potočari Memorial and Cemetery
for the Victims of the 1995 Genocide, any attempt to
rewrite history must be dismissed. History cannot be
undone. It can help only to understand the collective
past and serve as a lesson for better decisions in future.
We remain deeply concerned about developments in
the Republika Srpska that are a blatant and intentional
violation of the constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Attempts to establish the Republika Srpska’s ownership
of select properties that fall under the jurisdiction of
the Bosnian State are unacceptable. Furthermore, the
celebration of the unconstitutional Day of Republika
Srpska, on 9 January, as well as calls upon the judges
representing the Serbs in the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to resign and attempts to
politically influence the judiciary at large are just the
latest moves and part of a continued policy of provocative
actions, with clear intentions to break up the country.
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

It has become a pattern, almost a ritual. The leader
of the Republika Srpska never misses an opportunity
to use his own country as a punching bag, attacking
unity, undermining the statehood of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its normal functioning. While his duty
and responsibilities are to participate in the common
institutions, his policies and actions demonstrate
the contrary.
Let us not forget that Milorad Dodik has been put
under sanctions precisely because he is in syntony with
those, inside and outside the country, who work night
and day against the unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
against justice, cooperation, understanding and
reconciliation in the country and in the Western
Balkans, against the confirmed and accelerated EuroAtlantic path of the entire region.
We commend the active engagement of the High
Representative to stop these dangerous dynamics in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and urge him to continue
on that path. We also recognize and fully support
the stabilizing role of the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Any push for more assertive, aggressive and
unconstitutional policies in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are a stab in the back to the unity and functionality of
the country and its future. The persistent actions and
policies of Republika Srpska today are the recipe of
how to make a country dysfunctional. Such actions
and policies were not agreed in Dayton; they are not
inscribed in the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
they have not been condoned by anyone in Europe and
they are not what the country and the entire region need
nowadays. Leaders and the politicians of the Republika
Srpska seem to have forgotten the consequences of
fomenting ethnic division. They seem to ignore the
price the country and the region has paid in the past,
although many wounds are still open. They are wrong
and must wake up because disintegration is the past,
whereas cooperation in good faith is the future.
No one will ever be able to build a viable
and sustainable future in Europe by glorifying
war criminals, denying genocide, questioning the
sovereignty and unity of the country and investing in
hate speech and discrimination. On the contrary, the
Europe of the past eight decades was built by investing
in reconciliation and by working together for mutual
benefit, where there are no losers, only winners. That
is why we think that the current Republika Srpska is

S/PV.9319

not, cannot and will not be the model for politics in the
Western Balkans. It should not be allowed to break the
backbone of the country or the spirit of cooperation and
understanding that is now prevailing in the region.
Thirty years ago, a terrible bloody war nearly
tore Bosnia and Herzegovina to pieces. The Dayton
Agreement put an end to that war. Peace has since
prevailed, but it has not completely delivered. The
impatience of the country’s young people is the alarm
bell signalling that politicians are late or slow. It is
therefore time for everyone there to come together for
the common good and work on a single agenda, which
is meeting the people’s aspiration for a common and
better future. Anyone standing in the way of that should
be cast aside.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me start by
welcoming the participation of the High Representative
in this meeting. Mr. Schmidt and his Office continue to
play a crucial role in contributing to a stable and secure
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is therefore important for the
Security Council to have an informed and open dialogue
with Mr. Schmidt on the situation on the ground.
The United Kingdom wants to see Bosnia and
Herzegovina move forward as a democratic, stable
and prosperous European country. We welcomed the
formation on 28 April of a new Government of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A functional
and effective Government is vital to countering hostile
actors, making progress on Euro-Atlantic integration
and implementing reform. While it was regrettable that
the High Representative had to take executive actions,
Mr. Schmidt, along with the international community,
had repeatedly encouraged domestic politicians to
come to an agreement and form a Government. His
executive powers remain a necessary tool when the
situation requires it. We urge all actors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to set aside narrow interests and
promote collaborative and constructive politics in
the coming period. That includes halting attempts to
frustrate governance and working together to agree
on an alternative to the permanent amendment to the
Federation Constitution before May 2024. We welcome
the proactive approach taken by the new Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina and hope to see
such activity continue.
We remain concerned about the dangerous,
divisive and secessionist rhetoric and actions from
the Republika Srpska leadership. As the High

23-1318311/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Representative makes clear, the Republika Srpska
authorities continue to undermine State institutions
in an attempt to damage the integrity of the State.
Recent authoritarian legislative moves threaten peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the wider
region. Against that backdrop, it is more important than
ever that the Security Council maintain its support for
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the High Representative. The United Kingdom
remains firmly committed to the Dayton Agreement
and its associated international structures. We welcome
all efforts towards meeting the conditions set out for
their closure, including the 5+2 criteria. We remain
a committed member of the Peace Implementation
Council in support of the territorial integrity and
fundamental structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
single, sovereign State made up of two entities. We also
recognize the European Union Military Operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s effective work in maintaining
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It continues to play a
vital role in regional security.
Now is the moment for all parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to show courage and leadership,
rejecting the politics of division and hatred in favour
of cooperation and constructive engagement. That
is essential if the country is to deliver stability and
prosperity for all its citizens.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the presence of Her Excellency Mrs. Željka
Cvijanović, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the representatives of Serbia,
Croatia and the European Union (EU).
Since the general elections last October, the
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
generally stable, which we welcome. China’s position
on the question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is consistent
and clear. We respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the choice made by its people for the future of their
country. All parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
encouraged to engage actively in constructive dialogue
for national reconciliation. It is our hope that all the
parties will prioritize the interests of the country and
its people, enhance mutual trust and jointly safeguard
political stability in the country.
Regarding the High Representative mechanism
and the selection process for the post, China’s position
remains unchanged. The role of the Council in the
12/22

10/05/2023

process of appointing a High Representative cannot be
denied and that role constitutes established practice.
For some time, the use of Bonn powers has caused
considerable controversy in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The High Representative mechanism and its Bonn
powers are special arrangements for special periods.
The international community should adopt a fair,
balanced and prudent approach to the question of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and provide constructive assistance in
a manner that adapts to the developments on the ground
and meets the real needs of the people in the country.
We should also point out that unilateral sanctions
that are not authorized by the Security Council have
no foundation in international law. They will not help
to ease the differences among the various parties and
might even intensify tensions. We urge the countries
concerned to stop imposing sanctions, exerting
pressure and interfering in the internal affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
In the past year, economic growth in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has shown positive momentum. However,
the country is still dealing with challenges such as
inflation, serious unemployment and population
outflow. Its economy and people’s livelihoods are under
pressure. The international community should step up
support to help it rise to its development challenges.
On the other hand, the country should create a fair,
just and non-discriminatory business environment
for foreign enterprises, which will help to attract
foreign investment, create employment opportunities
and promote the country’s sustainable economic and
social development.
We support all efforts conducive to safeguarding
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
commend the constructive role played by Serbia,
Croatia and other countries in the region. We hope that
the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue its active role in maintaining
security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Her Excellency Mrs. Željka Cvijanović,
Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We note with deep concern that the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has entered a qualitatively
new and dangerous phase. The Western community
has become directly involved in the systemic internal
political crisis in the country. External forces, acting
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

through the Office of the High Representative and a
number of international presences in Sarajevo, are
openly manipulating the deepening inter-ethnic and
inter-party tensions, blatantly abusing the role assigned
to them in the 1995 General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are particularly
concerned about the destructive activities of the selfstyled High Representative.
The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
previously agreed on a course towards handing over
full responsibility to the Bosnian peoples, which has
been cast aside and forgotten. By blatantly interfering in
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s internal affairs, the pseudoHigh Representative’s behaviour in that sovereign and
independent European State evokes some of the worst
colonial traditions by interfering in the Constitution
of one of its entities, the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Its penal code and electoral laws have
nothing to do with facilitating the implementation of the
Peace Agreement, no matter how hard Mr. Schmidt and
his Western sponsors try to suggest that. The situation
is already so out of hand that Mr. Schmidt is taking
decisions on the composition of the Government of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As for the Constitution, we cannot neglect to
mention the work of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which while it is supposed to guard the
interests of the country, is increasingly becoming a tool
to serve Western capitals, often acting in conjunction
with the Office of the High Representative. Indeed, even
today three of the nine judges serving on the Court are
foreign nationals. Now it is a German, an Albanian and a
Swiss who are caring for the well-being of the country’s
citizens. That is a particularly blatant example of how
not to respect the sovereignty of a country in the twentyfirst century, let alone one in the centre of Europe. By
crudely reshaping the most important areas of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s domestic political life according to
their own point of view, which is completely untethered
from reality, these external forces are only multiplying
the problems and making them chronic ones. They give
off an impression that they are addressing the essential
issues. Frankly, the repercussions of this criminal actions
will affect generations of Bosnians, and in all honesty,
and with a sense of responsibility, we want to warn the
Security Council about that right now.
The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
has become a club of interests that is clearly opposed to
the interests of the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.9319

Once again, it has become clear that our decision to
suspend our participation in the Steering Board was both
timely and fully justified. We demand that the process
of dialogue and consensus be resumed. The Office of the
High Representative itself should be shut down as soon
as possible. It has done nothing but harm to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its peoples. The Western experiment
on Bosnian society has run its course, and it is time to
free the people of the country from humiliation. The
increasingly frequent mass protests against the activities
of the Office of the High Representative testify to the
relevance of that argument.
The goal of the West’s strategy is quite clear
and should mislead no one. Using its illegal toolkit,
the Office of the High Representative is supposed to
radically reshape the political scene at every level of
Government, destroy the system of balance between the
country’s peoples, ensure the presence of Brussels- and
Washington-controlled forces and drive the country
into the arms of NATO in defiance of its peoples’
sovereign will. The result would be a disaster not only
for the region, but also for the whole of Europe. The
Council cannot turn a blind eye to the lawlessness that
is happening in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Dayton’s
multi-ethnic vision for the country is in danger. The
Western countries’ classic neocolonial Western
approach in Bosnia and Herzegovina poses a real threat
to the implementation of the Peace Agreement. Worse,
it is undermining the very foundations of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s statehood and violating the fundamental
rights of its constituent peoples, thereby ratcheting up
the tensions yet again.
We will refrain from commenting on the so-called
report of the so-called High Representative. In our view
it is impermissible to disseminate the fabrications of a
private individual as a Security Council document. We
emphasize once again that there is not and never has been
a Security Council decision approving Mr. Schmidt’s
appointment to the post of High Representative.
We were disappointed by the fifty-fifth report of
European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea), whose mandate, as we
know, does not include providing an assessment of the
internal political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Yet our attention was called to the presence of such an
assessment as well as its biased political section, which
does not reflect the reality on the ground. We believe
that the report’s deliberate exaggerations and approach
laying the blame exclusively on Bosnian Serbs are

23-1318313/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

just one more projection of the interests of some EU
countries onto the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
through EUFOR-Althea. In that connection, we would
recommend that EUFOR-Althea’s leadership focus on
conducting assessments of the security situation, which
has remained at an invariably good level all these years.
We invite Council members to familiarize
themselves with the truly noteworthy report by
Republika Srpska, which is full of useful factual material
on the real situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
call on the Council to assess the situation realistically.
It is vital that we do not blindly believe what the
biased Western stakeholders and the illegitimate High
Representative are pushing, but rather take a deeper
look at the existing issues through the prism of the
Dayton Peace Agreement endorsed by the resolutions
of the Council. As one of the States that witnessed
the signing of the Dayton Agreement, Russia fully
supports the fundamental principles of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the equality of its three constituent peoples and two
entities with broad constitutional powers. We believe
that the key to solving the intra-Bosnian problems
lies exclusively in engaging in inclusive inter-ethnic
dialogue, without external interference, and only on the
basis of the Dayton provisions.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank High Representative Christian
Schmidt for his briefing and welcome the participation
in today’s meeting of Mrs. Željka Cvijanović, Chair of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since our last meeting, in November (see
S/PV.9179), we have welcomed the swift formation
of a new executive at the central level following the
general elections held on 2 October. We also welcomed
the formation of a new Government of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 28 April, after more
than four years of a technical Government. We
expect those new executive decision-makers, as well
as those of Republika Srpska, to honour the political
agreement reached on 12 June 2022 in Brussels by
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
calls for the implementation of key reforms to promote
democracy and the rule of law within six months of the
new executives taking up their posts.
We also welcome the European Council’s decision
on 15 December to grant Bosnia-Herzegovina the status
of candidate country for accession to the European
14/22

10/05/2023

Union. With that decision, adopted unanimously by the
27 member States, the European Union has sent a strong
signal to the Bosnian people, reminding them of their
common destiny with the countries of the Union. That
decision marks a new step for Bosnia and Herzegovina
on its path to European integration. The road map for
moving forward on that path is clear, especially for the
opening of accession negotiations. It includes 14 priority
reforms set out by the European Commission. France
hopes that the newly elected authorities will commit
resolutely to implementing those reforms, which are
essential to the country’s rapprochement with Europe,
and which will bring tangible improvements to the lives
of all Bosnian citizens, particularly in the area of the
rule of law.
We call on all the political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to refrain from any provocative or
secessionist rhetoric and actions, especially anything
that calls into question the country’s sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity. Such actions are unacceptable,
and we call on the political representatives to take
responsibility in that regard; they must work to reduce
tensions and engage in constructive dialogue. France
also underlines its deep concern about Republika
Srpska’s recent declarations and legislative initiatives
aimed at limiting freedoms by targeting the media and
non-governmental organizations. If they are definitively
adopted and implemented, they would represent a step
backwards in terms of the protection of fundamental
rights and European rapprochement in the country. I
would also like to remind Council members that in a
Bosnia and Herzegovina that is moving forward on
the European path, there is absolutely no place for
revisionist discourse or the glorification of war crimes.
France fully supports the work of the Office of the
High Representative, which we know is not intended to
last beyond what is necessary. In 2008, the 5+2 agenda
clearly established the conditions for the end of the High
Representative’s mandate, but we are not there yet. We
also reiterate our full support for the European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
has played a fundamental role in stabilizing Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the wider region since its deployment
in 2004.
In conclusion, I hope that its candidate-country
status will bring an impetus for change in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which, I reiterate, is not an end in itself
but a starting point on the road to negotiations for
accession to the European Union.
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
We greatly appreciate High Representative Schmidt’s
participation here today, as well as his briefing. I
also want to thank Mrs. Željka Cvijanović, Chair of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for her
participation in today’s meeting.
The United States has long advocated for the
democratic and prosperous future that the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have chosen and deserve. We
will continue to support the country as it builds towards
a more flourishing and secure future in the EuroAtlantic community of nations. We congratulate the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the formation
of its first new Government in eight years. That was an
enormous accomplishment, and the Office of the High
Representative and its authorities played a critical role.
Now is the time for all levels of the Government to seize
on the positive momentum generated by the formation
of all of its institutions. Now is the time to make real
and tangible progress on reforms for a more democratic
and prosperous future.
We urge officials to avoid actions that threaten
the Dayton Peace Agreement or undermine the
country’s Euro-Atlantic integration. Local leaders
must rise above ethno-nationalist agendas and focus,
instead, on restoring accountable, transparent and
efficient governance. For too long, ethno-nationalist
parties have undermined democratic institutions and
engaged in corrupt behaviour for narrow personal and
political gain.
Republika Srpska Milorad Dodik’s secessionist
rhetoric and attacks on basic rights and freedoms lead
down a dangerous and isolated authoritarian path. He
has called for the creation of a special unit to “monitor”
the inter-entity boundary line, which could lead to a
soft partition of the country. And he has taken steps that
have undermined State-level institutions, silenced the
media and civil society, targeted lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and intersex individuals and raised
tensions and security concerns.
We are very appreciative of High Representative
Christian Schmidt’s work, which has been vital to
keeping the international community informed of
ongoing efforts to ensure enduring stability and
prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region.
The Office of the High Representative plays a key role
in ensuring implementation of the civilian aspects of the

S/PV.9319

Dayton Peace Agreement and has been instrumental in
ensuring that key institutions, including the judiciary,
continue to function.
The United States remains committed to combating
endemic corruption and the undermining of State-level
authorities. We remain steadfast in our support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and multi-ethnic character and urge the
international community to continue engaging with the
country’s leaders at all levels of Government.
In conclusion, the United States fully supports
the High Representative and his ability to exercise all
necessary authorities, including the Bonn powers, until
the 5+2 agenda is complete. The High Representative
and his Office needs the Council’s support, as well as
that of the international community, in his work.
We also urge the Council to continue to support
the European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina which has been vital in maintaining a safe
and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wish
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate on the implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, covering the period from 16 October
2022 through 15 April 2023. This meeting allows the
Security Council members to be informed on the latest
developments on the ground. We express our gratitude to
the briefer, Mr. Christian Schmidt, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his useful insights. We
welcome the presence of Her Excellency Mrs. Željka
Cvijanović, Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We note that general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina were held amid a tense atmosphere in
October. Despite that situation, we commend the
efforts of the country’s House of Representatives to end
the political deadlock by appointing a new Government
on 28 April, after months of protracted negotiations.
However, we remain worried about the current political
climate, characterized by divisions along ethnic lines,
lack of unity and the fragmentation of the society.
While the criminalization of genocide denial has
had a general preventive effect, it is disconcerting that
the denial of genocide and glorification of war criminals
still occur, particularly in the political arena. We agree
with the High Representative that this compounds the

23-1318315/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

10/05/2023

pain and harm done to the victims and the society. More
importantly, that behaviour undermines reconciliation
efforts between the communities and peoples.

under the initiative of the High Representative. Japan
encourages all the elected politicians to unite and move
forward towards constructive nation-building.

In that connection, we encourage all parties
involved to refrain from using nationalist and divisive
rhetoric and to uphold the purposes and principles
contained in the General Framework Agreement for
Peace and the constitutional framework of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Japan is deeply concerned about the statements
and actions challenging the country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity that would undermine the foundation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We strongly urge all
political leaders to have a constructive attitude for the
future of the country.

Mozambique encourages the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in their efforts to promote
reconciliation, peace, stability and development
throughout the country. It is our firm belief that there can
be no peacebuilding without true reconciliation, there
can be no nation-building without collective healing
from the past. We therefore urge the international
community to continue supporting such efforts.

The accession of the Western Balkans to the
European Union is an important step towards
attaining a united Europe. We hope this will present
an opportunity for the country to further advance the
necessary reforms to achieve greater integration.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank High Representative
Christian Schmidt for the detailed inputs, and welcome
the participation of Mrs. Željka Cvijanović, Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would like
to reassure the Council of Japan’s unwavering support
for the High Representative and his Office. Recognizing
the importance of the role of the High Representative,
Japan has been contributing a fair amount of the budget
of his Office since its inception. I also welcome the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the meeting.
More than 27 years have passed since the brutal
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina came to an end.
Achieving prosperity is critical, not only for the
country’s future but also for the peace and stability of
the Western Balkans.
Japan strongly supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
sovereignty and national unity, regardless of ethnicity,
religion or political affiliation. Since the Dayton Peace
Agreement, Japan has been consistently providing
assistance to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
areas such as health care, education and demining. Our
support for nation-building and national reconciliation
efforts continues to this day.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is now facing an important
juncture. It has transitioned from conflict to peace, but
the question remains how it can achieve a successful
future. In that context, Japan welcomes the formation of
the Governments at State and entity levels, including the
Federation Government that was recently established
16/22

In conclusion, Japan remains committed to
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s prosperity
through steady development. We will continue to work
towards peace and stability in the Western Balkans.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Switzerland.
I thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Christian Schmidt, for his briefing. I
welcome the participation of the collegial Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Switzerland has been involved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entire Western Balkans region for
more than 30 years. Our countries are closely linked.
More than 60,000 people from Bosnia and Herzegovina
live in Switzerland. We contribute to the lasting peace,
security, prosperity and good governance of the country.
To that end, we also support efforts to better integrate
the country into European institutions and welcome its
achievement of candidate status in the European Union.
With the aim of implementing the civilian aspects
of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Switzerland supports
the Office of the High Representative. While its role
is key for the time being and its presence is necessary,
the main goal remains to advance towards the end of
its mandate by accomplishing the reforms essential
to the progress of the 5+2 agenda. We also recall
the important work of the European Union Military
Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is making
a substantial contribution to peacekeeping in a region
facing renewed tensions.
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The most recent report of the High Representative
shows that the difficulties in Bosnia and Herzegovina
have deep roots which require lasting solutions. To that
end, I would like to emphasize three aspects.
First, cooperation among all political actors serves
the interests of the entire population of the country.
Switzerland welcomes the swift formation of the central
Government following the elections last October. We
encourage the political leaders to use that constructive
momentum and to seize the opportunity of the recent
formation of the Government in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance reforms and
strengthen government institutions. Sustainable
progress, however, requires the support of all members
of society. That includes full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at all political levels and
decision-making processes. Long-standing stereotypes
and the lack of efforts to promote their participation
have contributed to their underrepresentation in public
office. The reconciliation processes would benefit
from greater participation of women. We welcome the
references to that issue in the High Representative’s
report and encourage a gender analysis throughout
his work.
Secondly, the unity of the country must be
strengthened by respect for diversity and fundamental
freedoms. While recognizing the positive human rights
developments in key areas, we are concerned about
the persistence of hate speech, the glorification of war
criminals, historical revisionism and attempts to deny
genocide. They jeopardize the peaceful and multi-ethnic
coexistence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Switzerland
is concerned about the separatist and nationalistic
rhetoric of some representatives in recent months,
especially in Republika Srpska. We call for refraining
from that type of rhetoric. We also remain concerned
about the violation of fundamental rights of citizens.
Fighting against the violation of those rights and against
discrimination will make it possible to move towards
reconciliation and deal with the past. That includes a
greater commitment to justice and reparation, including
for unresolved cases of enforced disappearances and
conflict-related sexual violence. Finally, the rights
of minorities must be protected and the freedoms
of the media and association must be guaranteed.
Thirdly, young people must be given a central
place in the decisions that determine the future of their
country. They represent an indispensable potential
for the whole society. Young women and men are

S/PV.9319

particularly affected by the long-term consequences
of conflict. Their exodus illustrates the impact of the
political, economic and social challenges in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To counter that trend, their voices must
be heard. In addition, they should be able to benefit
from initiatives to encourage dealing with the past and
better social cohesion, especially through education.
Young people must be empowered to become agents of
change for peace and prosperity.
Switzerland will continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its European path. I reaffirm our
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the country, as well as for its united, peaceful and
multi-ethnic future.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Chair of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mrs. Cvijanović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council.
I am encouraged to hear so many statements
indicating that the Governments represented in this
meeting all share the same objective — a Bosnia and
Herzegovina that is sovereign, independent, stable,
functional and prosperous.
With this shared goal in mind, I would like to
emphasize three points that any informed observer
must agree are key to accomplishing it.
First, and most important, the only realistic path
towards this shared objective is adherence to the
Dayton Accords, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution, which incorporated a formula for powersharing among the three major constituent peoples in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which share a long history of
conflict. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution was
carefully designed based on the recognition of that simple
reality and established a system with decentralized
authority and important power-sharing mechanisms
in order to give each of the groups confidence that it
will not come under the rule of the other groups. That
carefully crafted system has successfully preserved
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina for more than 27 years.
Since the Republika Srpska, the entity that elected
me to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, is
mentioned so many times in this Chamber, I would

23-1318317/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

like to note that in Dayton, the Republika Srpska
agreed with the other parties to be part of a highly
decentralized Bosnia and Herzegovina in which all
competences belong to the two entities except for
those few competences that the Constitution expressly
assigns to Bosnia and Herzegovina-level institutions.
In the decades since the Dayton Accords were
signed, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been contorted into
a much more centralized system, owing almost entirely
to foreign interventions, rather than legal, democratic
actions. If we all share the common goal of a sovereign,
independent, stable, functional and prosperous Bosnia
and Herzegovina, then the most important thing that the
Security Council and its members can do is to support
the Dayton Accords by word and deed and condemn
actions that would undo the carefully crafted system
of checks and balances guaranteed in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution.
My second point is that, despite some heated
rhetoric, the security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is, in fact, quite stable, as the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has recently confirmed. Bosnia and Herzegovina is not
at all the powder keg it is alleged to be by some who
seek more foreign intervention and control over Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is true that Bosnia and Herzegovina
often finds itself in a state of political tension, but that
condition is typical among most democracies, including
many of those represented in the Chamber today.
And that brings me to my third point. The
primary threat to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability
does not come from charged political statements, but
from the failure to faithfully implement the Dayton
Accords. Quite simply, if the deal struck in Dayton
is not honoured, then there is no hope for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s success.
There are two particularly pernicious ways in which
there has been a failure to adhere to what was agreed
in Dayton. The first is the illegal transformation of the
role of the High Representative from a facilitator into
an autocrat with unlimited powers vastly exceeding
the strictly limited mandate agreed in annex 10 of
the Dayton Accords. The despotic powers claimed
by the High Representative are even more expansive
than those of a foreign viceroy, as they are asserted
to be completely immune from any limitations or
oversight whatsoever.
18/22

10/05/2023

Successive High Representatives, having almost
no relevant experience in the region and few relevant
credentials for the position, have ruled by decree with
no local hearings, no consultation with elected bodies
or officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina and no due
process whatsoever; and they have done so with no
authority granted by the Security Council or by any
valid legal instrument or international organization.
Those dictatorial actions have resulted in a flood of
rash, ill-considered, humiliating decrees — more
than 460 pieces of legislation and regulations, 110
amendments to the entity Constitutions and 249
extrajudicial punishments of individuals — all with no
legal authority or oversight.
Despite widespread agreement, even among former
High Representatives, that the High Representative’s
claim to rule by decree is utterly illegal, Mr. Christian
Schmidt has rashly announced additional disruptive
decrees that have infuriated large segments of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s population. His latest edicts purport
to amend the criminal codes of both of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s entities, yet again make a mockery
of the rule of law and represent just the latest brazen
usurpation of the democratic rights of the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to rule themselves, rights that
the Council has pledged to protect.
Furthermore, shortly before my travels to participate
in this meeting, Mr. Schmidt, whose appointment the
Council failed to approve, threatened that if I had the
nerve to question his legitimacy before the Council, I
would receive an answer I would not like. That attitude
that Mr. Schmidt has shown towards the elected
officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina is, unfortunately,
typical of the attitude of too many foreign officials who
come and go in my country. Their arrogant, dismissive
and disdainful attitude towards legally elected and
broadly supported domestic officials and institutions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is, to say the least,
unhelpful and becomes particularly absurd when those
officials sharply criticize the entities for proposing
laws mirroring those that have long been in place in
those diplomats’ own home countries. Remarkably,
those officials, who work to usurp the constitutional
authority of democratically elected officials in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on a daily basis, complain when local
officials do not bend their knee and honour their illegal
assertions of authority, and so we are accused of a
failure to communicate.
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The High Representative’s dictatorial rule
is not just patently illegal, but it is also very
counterproductive, as has been attested in recent years
by former High Representatives. The Office of the
High Representative’s looming presence and constant
attempts to micromanage Bosnia and Herzegovina
suffocate the democratic process and hinder the
unfettered internal dialogue and reconciliation essential
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future success. Indeed,
the Office of the High Representative’s ill-advised
interference more often creates rather than solves
problems, as demonstrated by the way it has generated
and inflamed the controversy regarding the ownership
of public property.
Initially it was widely accepted that the
Constitution left public property to the entities, an
understanding used as the basis for various Bosnia
and Herzegovina laws still in force and upheld by
the Constitutional Court. Even statements made or
supported by influential foreign officials in 2008 also
demonstrated acknowledgement of entity ownership of
public property. The issue was never in dispute until
former High Representative Paddy Ashdown, with his
typical imperial attitude, intervened to create the entire
controversy. Years later, in 2012, when the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina agreed to a resolution of the
public property issue, the deal was quashed by then
High Representative Valentin Inzko simply because it
was not driven by the Office of the High Representative
and crafted to his liking. Uncertainty regarding
public property, caused solely by Office of the High
Representative meddling, now hinders cooperation
and progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the issue
has been seized upon by those seeking to further
centralize Bosnia and Herzegovina in contravention of
the Constitution.
If Bosnia and Herzegovina is ever to be sovereign,
independent, stable, functional and prosperous, then it
needs to be governed not by unelected foreigners issuing
despotic decrees according to their own preferences
and prejudices, but by its own Constitution and its own
citizens, in accordance with democratic principles and
the rule of law. The truth of that statement must, I think,
be obvious to all members of the Council, but it is perhaps
particularly clear to the many countries represented
in this Chamber that have proud histories of freeing
themselves from despotic imperial rule by certain
foreign Powers. And it must also be acknowledged by
the members of the Council that the rule of law needs

S/PV.9319

to be honoured not just by local leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but also by those foreign officials who
have long been ignoring or even actively subverting
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution agreed
in Dayton, who have been routinely and cavalierly
violating the prohibition against foreign diplomats
meddling in local politics of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations and who have been influencing
judicial cases that should be decided only in accordance
with the Constitution and proper judicial integrity.
This points to a second important threat to the
constitutional order in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unfortunately, some of the greatest distortions of the
constitutional structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have been caused by the very institution established to
uphold it — the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court. The Office of the High Representative frequently
complains that the Court’s rulings are not being
respected by the entities. Тhe same Office of the High
Representative has hypocritically decreed that its own
edicts are totally untouchable by the rulings of any court
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Remarkably, the Office of
the High Representative never addresses the reasons
why the Court’s decisions are met with scepticism,
which is due to the corruption of the judicial process by
the interference and influence of the Office of the High
Representative itself, along with that of certain foreign
Powers, as well as the effective control of the Court
by its three foreign judges. Those foreign judges, who
were meant to be a part of the Court for only the first
five years of its operation, do not live in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, have no educational background in the
laws of our country, do not speak the local languages
and issue contorted rulings that many agree read like
political acts meant to please certain foreign Powers
rather than soundly reasoned legal determinations.
When a court ignores judicial propriety and the
constitutional limits of its own authority and issues
decisions that are ultra vires, that court naturally
squanders the respect of the citizens and the other
branches of Government. And when such decisions are
the product of a voting bloc of foreign judges subject
to outside influences, it is clear why such decisions
lack credibility.
It is in the context of that total usurpation of the
democratic process in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
outside Powers and the corruption of our judiciary
that so-called secessionist rhetoric and other political
expressions of extreme frustration in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be understood.

23-1318319/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

As for the Republika Srpska, its official policy
remains what it has always been: the Republika Srpska
is committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and to the constitutional
order established in the Dayton Accords, and it is
committed to peace above all. But it is not ready to
accept illegal, despotic rule by high representatives
and unconstitutional decisions of the Constitutional
Court, nor to have its constitutional, democratic rights
trampled and be treated as a colonial possession of
certain foreign Powers.
Somehow the Republika Srpska has ended up in a
sort of Orwellian position where complaints about the
distortion and degradation of the Dayton Constitution
are said to be anti-Dayton. The hypocrisy of such
allegations, coming from some who actively subvert the
Constitution agreed in Dayton, is astonishing.
If members of the Security Council will read the
latest report of the Office of the High Representative
(S/2023/318) in that context, then they may understand
that, to many of us in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
report reads like that of a colonial viceroy to the
home office, complaining that the locals, who are
too ignorant and uncivilized to rule themselves in a
constitutional democracy, do not respect and appreciate
the benevolent despotism of the viceroy’s overlordship.
And if Council members will read the latest report from
the Republika Srpska, they will see that the Republika
Srpska cannot be accused of being some renegade State
simply because it calls upon foreign officials to respect
international law and the constitutional democratic
rights of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens.
I again thank the members of the Council for their
concern about the future of my country. I ask the Council
to support Bosnia and Herzegovina by advocating
the full implementation of the Dayton Accords as
written and condemn foreign meddling in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which undermines the Accords, violates
the rule of law, corrupts our judicial system and hinders
political cooperation within Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As the most important concrete steps in that
direction, the Council should make clear once and for
all that the High Representative does not possess the
despotic authority to rule Bosnia and Herzegovina by
decree and confirm that our institutions at all levels
of administration are entitled to make decisions in
accordance with our Constitution.
20/22

10/05/2023

I am convinced that Bosnia and Herzegovina
can have a successful future if the Dayton Accords
are faithfully implemented with the support of the
Security Council. And I will add that I am trying to
introduce a touch of reality in this debate today in the
Council. Bosnia and Herzegovina is not a fairy tale
and is never going to be a fairy tale, but it can become
a decent country if our Constitution is respected and
honoured by all parties inside and outside Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I will speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its 27 member States. The candidate
countries North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania,
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova all align
themselves with this statement.
Since the Security Council last met on this agenda
item (see S/PV.9179), Bosnia and Herzegovina has
achieved the status of EU candidate country, indeed
a very significant step for the country and for the
European Union and not irrelevant for the Council.
That status is based on the understanding that the
steps specified in the European Commission’s
recommendations are taken, in order to strengthen the
rule of law, the fight against corruption and organized
crime, migration management and fundamental rights.
In the current geopolitical context, the EU underlines
the urgency for the country to move forward on its EU
path, in particular via fulfilling all 14 key priorities for
the opening of EU accession negotiations identified in
the Commission’s opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
application for EU membership. The EU also calls on all
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to swiftly
implement the commitments set out in the agreement
reached on 12 June 2022 and urgently finalize the
constitutional and electoral reform in line with the
key priorities.
The European Union urges all political actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to refrain from and renounce
provocative divisive rhetoric and actions, including
questioning the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the country, and to end the glorification of
convicted war criminals, as well as genocide denial,
and instead actively promote reconciliation.
The European Union is concerned over the legislative
initiatives and announcements in the Republika Srpska
entity, including secessionist rhetoric, that are not in
23-13183

10/05/2023

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

line with the EU path of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Freedom of expression, media freedom and pluralism,
as well as freedom of operation of civil organizations,
are key pillars of a democratic society. Credible,
genuine measures, including proper implementation,
to address shortcomings in the area of the protection
of fundamental rights comprising non-discriminatory
treatment of persons belonging to minorities, including
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons,
are urgently needed.
(spoke in French)
The European Union welcomes the inauguration of
the new Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the new Government of the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, following the elections held in
October 2022. The European Union calls for the rapid
establishment of a functioning government, including
at the cantonal level, with a view to focusing on the
reforms needed for EU membership.
The European Union reaffirms its full support for
the efforts of the European Union Military Operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continues to assist the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina in maintaining a
secure environment for all citizens.
The European Union reaffirms the importance
of continued cooperation among international actors
and expresses its support for the mission of the High
Representative and his Office in the implementation of
the 5+2 agenda.
(spoke in English)
We reiterate our unequivocal commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU perspective as a single,
united and sovereign country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Stevanovic (Serbia): Today we are addressing
the issue that has been on the Security Council’s agenda
for a long time. This is a testimony to the difficult legacy
of the Yugoslav crisis and the complex challenges in the
post-war period.
Nevertheless, we must remind ourselves of major
achievements that have been often taken for granted.
In the words of the report of the European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is stable, and there is no threat to its
stability. That was the case for the last 27 years, and
despite all the political bickering, that is the case now.

S/PV.9319

I also want to echo something mentioned here.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not a platform for any proxy
conflict. Nobody in the country wants to be somebody’s
pawn on the broader geopolitical chessboard. That is
equally important for the country’s stability and should
not be overlooked, despite all the pessimistic predictions.
The stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a direct
result of the much-criticized Dayton Peace Agreement.
Serbia believes that honouring the Dayton Peace
Agreement is necessary for international trust-building
and the functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The constitutional balance of power between the two
entities and among the three main ethnic groups should
guarantee equal rights in their joint pursuit of shared
goals and common interests. Each unilateral move
results in a new challenge and adds to futile attempts
to achieve the upper hand in the decision-making
process. Therefore, the only path forward for each and
every subject in that country, as well as the country as
a whole, is through dialogue and agreement.
In that context, allow me to state once again that
Serbia is consistently and permanently committed to
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is in line with
the provisions of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
Serbia’s signature on it. Moreover, it reflects our strict
adherence to the principle of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, which must be honoured always
and without distinction.
Accordingly, Serbia considers issues, such as the
marking of the Republika Srpska Day, the functioning
of joint institutions, the property law and election laws,
internal matters of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are hopeful that the institutions formed after
the elections will provide sustainable progress for the
country, its entities and constituent people.
The countries of our region need an acceleration
of the European Union enlargement process and
steady progress in reforms more than ever before. We
welcome every step taken by Bosnia and Herzegovina
in that direction, as it brings us closer to our common
European future.
Strengthening comprehensive regional cooperation
is an important part of our European integration. It is also
essential in dealing with the same strategic challenges.

23-1318321/22

S/PV.9319

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The emigration flow and demographic trends are
extremely negative. The region is losing its people. The
brain drain threatens to leave Bosnia and the whole
Western Balkans deficient in what has always been our
primary resource — skilled and educated people. It is
for that reason that we call on all the regional countries
to embark on the Open Balkan Initiative. That is a
regionally driven initiative. It allows the full synergy of
our capacities through the free flow of people, capital,
goods and services. It should better prepare us for the
common goal of membership in the European Union,
originally based on the same principles.
Finally, having mentioned all our concerns, I
want to point to something that speaks highly of our
common hopes. Last week, my country suffered the
terrible tragedy of losing 17 predominantly very young
lives caused by two mass shootings. On that occasion,
Bosnia and Herzegovina declared a day of mourning.
Mr. Konaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Mr. Stojanović, Vice-President
of the Federation entity, visited the elementary school
in Belgrade, the scene of one of the shootings, to pay
tribute to the victims. Those acts of solidarity go
beyond any words, as does the gratitude of the Republic
of Serbia. That should serve as a reminder that we have
too much in common to question our joint future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić (Croatia): I thank the High
Representative, Christian Schmidt, for his briefing.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the European Union (EU) on
behalf of its member States. I would also like to add
some remarks in my national capacity.
First of all, we would like to wholeheartedly
congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on becoming an
EU candidate country. That is a significant achievement,
and we believe it presents a strong incentive for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to focus on reforms and the welfare of
its citizens.
We also welcome the successful formation of
Government at the state and Federation level. Taken as
a sign of improved functionality, we wish success to the
new Government in pursuing reforms and advancing on
the path to the EU. Equally, we hope that cooperation

22/22

10/05/2023

and democratic dialogue will be accepted as formative
principles in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is also
prerequisite if the country is to use the opportunities
of the current momentum and achieve tangible results
on its way to the European Union and Euro-Atlantic
international structures.
Croatia supports the work of the High Representative
Schmidt, especially regarding the promotion of
functionality and political stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All political actors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be fully aware of their responsibility
to respect the authority of the High Representative and
his Office.
Political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
show utmost determination and political will, with the
full sense of responsibility for the country’s future
and continue, with the aim to complete, the work on
constitutional and electoral reforms. We are convinced
that only the full respect for the principles of equality
among constituent peoples and the non-discrimination
of all citizens, as enshrined in the Dayton–Paris Peace
Agreement, can bring about lasting political stability to
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a neighbouring country and one of its most
significant trade partners, Croatia will continue to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina in the process of
European integration, development, the building of
strong and resilient democratic institutions and other
important reforms. In this sense, Croatia is looking
forward to the joint session of the Government of the
Republic of Croatia and the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to be held in June.
We wish Bosnia and Herzegovina, its peoples
and citizens every success and a positive outcome,
and Croatia remains ready to support and help in that
regard. It is to that end that Bosnia and Herzegovina can
now also use the strengthened perspective of European
stability, peace and prosperity.
It is up to the political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to resolutely pursue this course. We call
on the political actors who have not yet done so, to
abandon the policy of obstruction and division and to
truly contribute to creating a better future for all in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-13183
