S/PV.8446

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8446th meeting

Thursday, 17 January 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger/Mr. Trullols. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Michon
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-01270 (E)
*1901270*

S/PV.8446

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Forces and Rapid Support Forces from the reports of
the Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear an
informative briefing by Ambassador Joanna Wronecka,
Permanent Representative of Poland, in her capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Wronecka.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from
4 October 2018 to 17 January 2019.
During the reporting period, the Committee met in
informal consultations on 24 October to hear a briefing
by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict.
With regard to her visit to the Sudan, Ms. Patten said
that she was the first Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to be invited by the Government of
the Sudan. She noted during her visit that there had been
significant improvement in the security situation in
many parts of Darfur, but that women and girls still faced
considerable security challenges. Ms. Patten expressed
optimism regarding the framework of cooperation that
was to be concluded shortly, whose purpose would be
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
The framework would also emphasize accountability as
a central aspect of deterrence and prevention. Ms. Patten
said that the cessation of sexual violence, ensuring
accountability for such crimes and the implementation
of specific prevention and protection measures, as
envisioned under the framework of cooperation, were
also requirements for the delisting of Sudanese Armed
2/15

17/01/2019

On 15 November, the Committee issued a
press release (SC/13582) on Ms. Patten’s briefing.
On 27 November, the Panel of Experts on the
Sudan submitted its final report (see S/2019/34) in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2400
(2018). The Committee discussed the report and the
recommendations contained therein during the informal
consultations held on 14 December. The final report
was transmitted to the Council on 10 January, and I
will therefore not go into detail on its content in my
presentation. Given the period covered, the report of
the Panel of Experts did not take into account the latest
developments in the Darfur peace process, namely, the
signing on 6 December of a pre-negotiation agreement
between the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi
faction and the Justice and Equality Movement and the
Government of the Sudan, supported by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
In terms of recommendations to the Security
Council, the Panel recommended that the Council
urge the Libyan warring factions to stop cooperating
with the Darfuri armed groups. The Panel was also
of the opinion that the Regional Operational Centre
in Khartoum and similar regional initiatives should
be supported by Member States as part of a holistic
and comprehensive approach to peacebuilding, border
management and addressing cross-cutting challenges
such as migrant smuggling.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Her Excellency Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, for
her briefing on the activities of the Committee for
the period of 4 October 2018 to 17 January 2019. We
commend her for her outstanding work at the healm of
the Committee and assure her of the support of Côte
d’Ivoire in the exercise of her functions.
The informal consultations of 24 October gave
the members of the Committee an opportunity to
hear a briefing from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
19-01270

17/01/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the improved security situation
in Darfur, but it deplores the increase in sexual violence
against women and girls. My country maintains
that those responsible for those actions must be held
accountable for them before the competent authorities.
It is also necessary to strengthen protection for those
victims and better prevent those crimes.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the Special
Representative’s visit to the country at the initiative
of the Government of the Sudan, which represents an
important step in the establishment of a cooperation
framework between the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations with a view, among other things,
to preventing sexual violence in conflict and holding
accountable the perpetrators of those heinous acts.
The presence in Libya of Darfuri rebel groups
and their financing by warring Libyan parties, as well
as the ability of Sudanese armed groups to generate
funds in the region and beyond, as indicated in the
Panel of Experts report (see S/2019/34), are a source
of great concern for the Council. It seems necessary
to strengthen collaboration among the various
expert panels and sanctions committees in order
to establish information-sharing frameworks that
would undoubtedly enhance the work of the panels
and committees.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire once again congratulates
the Chair of the 1591 Sanctions Committee and calls
for increased collaboration between the Sudanese
Government and the United Nations with a view to
restoring lasting peace and stability to the Sudan.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for her briefing on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, over
a 90-day reporting period. It was an excellent report
and we listened closely. My statement today will focus
on three issues, namely, the security situation, the
transition to peacebuilding and, of course, sanctions.
First, Indonesia welcomes the relatively stable
security situation in Darfur, with the exception of
intermittent clashes in Jebel Marra, as confirmed by
the Secretary-General’s latest report. We also welcome
the Sudanese Government’s efforts to promote the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, with the support of the international
community. My delegation is encouraged by the signing
of a pre-negotiation agreement between the Sudanese

S/PV. 8446

Government and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni
Minawi faction and the Justice and Equality Movement
last month in Berlin.
Yet we also note with concern the presence of
Darfuri armed groups, particularly with regard to their
efforts to acquire financial and military capabilities.
It is high time to effectively cut those groups off
from their sources of financing. The international
community needs to apply strong pressure on parties
that continue to impede progress towards lasting peace
and opt for war.
Secondly, the improvement in the security situation
reinforces the transition concept endorsed in resolution
2429 (2018) and enables us to focus on peacebuilding
and development activities in Darfur. Capacitybuilding must continue to be extended to the Sudan,
in line with the principles of national policies and
priorities. Resource mobilization is key to supporting
the transition to peacebuilding and development, while
also addressing the root causes of the conflict and
securing the continued implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace. My delegation sees a potential
role for the Peacebuilding Fund. We also welcome the
proposal to hold a pledging conference for Darfur to
ensure sufficient funds for the United Nations country
team. Over the past few weeks, I have repeatedly
stressed in my interventions that economic development
is a key factor for ensuring stability, growth and lasting
peace in countries. In that regard, the international
community should continue to render assistance to
ensure that sustaining peace is achieved in Darfur.
Thirdly, on the issue of sanctions, Indonesia has
maintained a consistent view regarding their efficacy.
Sanctions should be used as a last resort, with a clear,
transparent and measurable timetable. Sanctions
measures and applications must also be periodically
evaluated, including against the backdrop of the latest
situation on the ground. As I mentioned just now,
economic development should also be considered in the
context of sanctions efficacy. Indonesia stands ready to
contribute to that discussion.
I would like to conclude by commending the
critical work of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Indonesia has
demonstrated its commitment to contributing to peace
and stability in Darfur, including through its longstanding contribution to UNAMID, which presently
amounts to 477 peacekeepers. My delegation believes

19-012703/15

S/PV.8446

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the improvement in security situation in Darfur paves
the way for UNAMID’s eventual exit in 2020, in line
with resolution 2429 (2018).
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to pay well-deserved
tribute to Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for her
comprehensive briefing and excellent work as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan. I would also like to
commend her for her practice of making the Committee’s
reports public so that they can be discussed at Security
Council plenary meetings.
It is against that backdrop that we take the floor to
point out, in general terms, the concern of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea about the resumption of fighting
between Government forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid faction in the Jebel Marra area,
which have resulted in several victims and new
displacements, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian
crisis and the abuse of human rights. We also note our
Government’s concern about sexual violence related
to the conflict in Darfur, as well as the challenges to
internally displaced persons returning to their homes.
As we know, the Government of the Sudan has
spared no effort to resolve the crisis and normalize the
situation in the conflict regions. As the most recent
report of the Secretary-General points out, the security
situation in Darfur has remained relatively stable, with
the exception of intermittent clashes in the Jebel Marra
area and the persistence of intercommunal conflicts
over land and resources.
In order to further consolidate the progress achieved
through the efforts of the Sudanese Government, it is
essential to counter the activities of the Darfuri armed
groups that are strengthening their position in Libya. It
is their sources of financing that allow them to continue
fuelling the conflict.
In that regard, it is imperative that all the sanctions
on the identified and designated individuals and entities
be strictly enforced, including travel prohibitions and
asset freezes. It is equally urgent that the Security
Council call on the various warring factions in Libya
to refrain from cooperating with the armed groups
in Darfur. As long as the sanctions adopted by the
Council are not strictly observed, it will be difficult to
achieve normalcy in the situation or to guarantee the
security of the population, bring an end to the difficult
humanitarian situation or protect women from sexual
4/15

17/01/2019

abuse. It is therefore necessary to review the sanctions
imposed under resolution 2400 (2018) in parallel with
the withdrawal process for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We conclude our intervention by congratulating
and UNAMID on the work it is carrying out, and we
encourage it to continue in that vein, specifically the
protection of civilians, during UNAMID’s withdrawal
process. We also encourage the Government of the
Sudan to do everything in its power to implement the
sanctions. It should offer capacity-building courses in
relation to sexual violence and establish policing and
judicial centres and institutions in remote areas of
the country in order to facilitate access to justice and
police protection.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Joanna Wronecka for her briefing today on the
important work undertaken by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, and for her commitment
to the work of the Committee. As always, she has our
continued support.
The 24 October briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, to the Sudan
Sanctions Committee underscored the ongoing problem
of sexual violence by State and non-State actors in
the Sudan and the continuing need for international
attention on the issue. The Special Representative’s
reporting that perpetrators of sexual violence include
members of the Sudanese armed forces and police as
well as armed non-Government militias is alarming.
It is imperative that the Government of the Sudan
investigate and hold accountable those responsible for
such crimes.
The Sudan sanctions regime allows for the
designation of individuals who commit violations of
international humanitarian law or international human
rights law, or other atrocities. As Special Representative
Patten recommended, the Panel of Experts on the Sudan
should be provided more resources to investigate crimes
of sexual violence and tasked to do so in the areas of
Jebel Marra, including Nertiti, where several incidents
were recently reported. While significant work remains
to address this ongoing problem, we appreciate the
Sudanese Government’s engagement with the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we
19-01270

17/01/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

urge the Government to continue cooperating with her
in future.
Enhancing human rights protections and practices
is one of the six key areas of mutual concern prioritized
in the phase II framework for bilateral engagement
between the United States and the Sudan, which was
agreed to last year. We welcome the commitment of the
Sudan to making progress on that issue, among others.
In that regard, we note our deep concerns about the
Sudanese Government’s response to the recent protests
in the Sudan, which resulted in a significant number
of deaths and serious injuries as well as the arbitrary
detention without charge or trial of a number of political
activists and protesters. We urge the Government to
fully respect the rights to freedom of association and
peaceful assembly and release all journalists, political
opposition leaders, activists and any other protesters
arbitrarily detained. We also urge the Government
to ensure that a fully independent and transparent
investigation into the deaths of protesters take place
as soon as possible, followed by accountability for any
excessive use of force.
With regard to the report of the Panel of Experts
(see S/2019/34), we note with concern the continued
clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid faction (SLA/AW) and Sudanese Government
forces. We are most concerned with the Sudanese
armed forces response to the SLA/AW hit-and-run
attacks with large-scale military operations aimed at
driving the group out of the area. That fighting has
resulted in a significant number of causalities on both
sides, as well as new displacement, humanitarian crisis
and human rights abuses. And across Darfur, women
and girls continue to be subjected to conflict-related
sexual violence. The resulting human rights violations
and abuses, indiscriminate shootings, looting and
destruction of property are unacceptable, and we call
upon all parties to cease hostilities.
While the decreasing financial and logistical
support from South Sudan to Darfuri rebels is
encouraging, we are concerned by reports of growing
support from Libyan groups to Darfuri armed groups.
Furthermore, reported acts in defiance of the arms
embargo by all armed groups and the Government of
the Sudan serve to underscore the need for greater
attention to the implementation of the sanction regime’s
arms embargo.

S/PV. 8446

The United States is concerned by Panel reporting
that the Government of the Sudan is interfering with the
independence of the Panel by mandating Government
participation in Panel meetings with non-Government
interlocutors. We fully support the independence
of the Panel and call upon the Government of the
Sudan to cooperate in this respect. The United States
encourages all Member States to cooperate with the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan and fully implement
our obligations pursuant to the arms embargo, asset
freeze and travel ban measures. We also call upon
Libyan warring factions to cease their cooperation with
Darfuri armed groups.
We will continue to encourage the Government
of the Sudan, the Justice and Equality Movement and
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction
to build upon the recent agreement on a negotiations
framework and to make progress towards a cessation of
hostilities and a political agreement. We also call on the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction to engage
with the joint chief mediator and to engage within a
peace process.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, for her briefing.
At present, the situation in the Darfur region of
the Sudan remains stable on the whole. The Sudanese
Government is actively pushing ahead towards the
reconstruction of Darfur and is strengthening its
capacity-building in the areas of governance and
security in the region. It has also set up engagement
with the parties that have not signed the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. Those efforts of the Government
will further consolidate and advance the peace process
in Darfur.
China believes that the Sudanese Government
should assume the primary responsibility for
maintaining the security of Darfur. As the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) gradually withdraws from Darfur in line
with the road map, the international community should
actively help the Sudanese Government to enhance its
own security and governance capacity-building and
ensure that Sudanese security forces take over security
responsibilities from UNAMID as soon as possible.
The Council should review the sanctions on the
Sudan in a timely manner and make adjustments in

19-012705/15

S/PV.8446

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the light of the latest developments, with a view to
the eventual lifting of the sanctions. That will send a
positive signal to the countries concerned and better
help the Sudanese Government to maintain peace and
stability in the region.
China has noted that some opposition parties and
armed groups in Darfur are still resisting the peace
process. China urges those opposition parties and
armed groups to actively take part in the peace process
and find a solution through peaceful dialogue and other
political means. China supports the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan and South
Sudan in continuing its good offices to promote the
smooth resolution of the relevant issues.
Development is an important guarantee of peace.
China hopes international partners will, in accordance
with the needs of the Sudan, continue to actively provide
humanitarian assistance and economic support. The
United Nations should make full use of the platforms
available, such as the Peacebuilding Commission, to
provide necessary support for the reconstruction and
development of the Sudan.
China has been a long-standing supporter of the
peace process in Darfur, the Sudan, and it is one of the
major troop-contributing countries to UNAMID. Over
the years we have been contributing positively to the
maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur. China is
ready to work with the international community and
will continue to play our constructive role in the quest
for peace, stability and development in Darfur.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Poland
to the United Nations, Ambassador Joanna Wronecka,
for the briefing she delivered in her capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan.
After taking part in the meetings of the Committee
and reviewing the reports of the Panel of Experts,
including the final report (see S/2019/34), it became
apparent that the topics of internally displaced persons,
security and the future of Darfur prevailed in the
discussions and reports of the Committee.
We express our satisfaction about the continuous
decrease in the number of internally displaced persons
in Darfur for several years. We look forward to Member
States offering all the necessary support to the Sudan
in creating the conditions conducive for the return and
6/15

17/01/2019

resettling of internally displaced persons, as well as
providing them with basic services and the continued
delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need.
Concerning the security situation, we are near
full agreement on the stability that most of Darfur
is witnessing, with the exception of some combat
operations near Jebel Marra. The time has come for
the Security Council to review the sanctions regime in
accordance with resolution 2400 (2018), with the aim of
lifting it gradually and in a manner that would enhance
the Government’s ability to enforce its authority
throughout all of its territories. That would be in line
with developments on the ground and with the degree
of cooperation that the parties exhibit with respect to
the peaceful efforts being made.
We reiterate our appreciation for the efforts of the
Sudanese authorities to collect arms and renew the
ceasefire. Bringing about security in Darfur has pushed
most of the armed factions out of the Sudan, but they
will continue to threaten peace and security wherever
they go next.
In conclusion, with regard to the future of Darfur,
a political solution remains a priority for us all. Despite
the fact that no major political breakthrough has taken
place during the reporting period, the Government of the
Sudan continues to be the only side that has participated
in all of the negotiations on Darfur. Moreover, the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur remains the foundational
guiding document for the future of Darfur, in accordance
with resolution 2429 (2018). All of this is also related to
the Security Council’s review of sanctions pursuant to
resolution 2400 (2018). We had hoped that this review
would have taken place within a year of the adoption of
that resolution.
We would like to reiterate our support for the Sudan
in moving forward to build and sustain peace in Darfur.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we wish to thank you for having
convened this meeting and also to thank Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan, for her detailed 90-day report on the work of
the Committee and for her important work at the helm
of the Committee. We would highlight in particular
the briefing given by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sexual
Violence in Conflict, who informed us of the deplorable
situation faced by the Sudanese people, particularly
19-01270

17/01/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

women and children, who are the primary victims of
this scourge, perpetrated by State and non-State actors.
In this regard, we note with concern the fact that
despite the improvement in the security situation in
many areas of Darfur, the number of victims of sexual
violence remains alarming. In addition, some cases
are not reported for various reasons, including fear
of reprisals, stigmatization or a failure to implement
the law. We underline the urgent need to bring those
responsible for these atrocity crimes to justice. We
support Ms. Patten’s recommendations and wish
to stress in particular the importance of including
sexual violence as an independent listing criterion
for sanctions.
In this regard, as stated by the Secretary-General
in his most recent report, we believe that selective
sanctions are an important tool to address this
problem and that the Security Council can contribute
to preventing such crimes. Moreover, we note with
concern the fact that rebel groups in Darfur continue to
receive financing from various sources and countries in
the region. This poses an ongoing threat to the relative
stability in Darfur and, ultimately, runs counter to
efforts to achieve sustainable peace in the country.
We would highlight the importance of all parties
complying with the established arms embargo. We
deplore the repeated violations thereof and call on
the Government of the Sudan and Member States to
implement this international obligation; comply with
measures relating to the assets freeze; and cooperate
with the Panel of Experts.
We also note with concern the continued clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the rebel
groups in the Jebel Marra area. The resulting violence
leads to further displacements and grave human rights
violations and abuses against civilians.
Finally, we congratulate and thank once again
Ambassador Wronecka for her work at the helm of the
Committee and pledge her our cooperation to continue
contributing to efforts aimed at bringing about a
definitive cessation of hostilities and reaching a political
agreement that would allow for the consolidation of
sustainable peace in Darfur.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Ambassador Joanna Wronecka
for her briefing on the activities carried out in 2018 by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591

S/PV. 8446

(2005), concerning the Sudan, and to commend her work
as Chair of that sanctions Committee for the past year.
The initiatives and meetings she mentioned, in particular
that with Ms. Patten in October, have contributed to the
Council’s joint process of reflection aimed at ensuring
the proper implementation of the sanctions regime.
France supports her fully and commends her personal
commitment to peace in Darfur.
France is following very closely the events currently
taking place in the Sudan, not only in Khartoum but
also in the provinces. In the context of the current social
protests, we call on the Sudanese authorities to ensure
the freedom of assembly, the freedom of association
and the freedom of expression, in accordance with
their international commitments. All parties must show
restraint and abstain from any further violence in order
to ease the situation.
We recognize that overall the security situation
in Darfur has improved. However, we deplore the
resumption this year of clashes in Jebel Marra, which
lead to the displacement of persons, civilian casualties
and human rights violations by all parties to the
conflict. The Sudanese authorities and armed groups
must absolutely move forward with the peace process.
This requires not only putting an end to hostilities
but also addressing the root causes of the conflict,
in particular the issues of land ownership, access to
natural resources and the restoration of the rule of law.
In that connection, I welcome the signing on
6 December in Berlin of a pre-negotiation agreement
between the Government and certain armed groups.
That is a step in the right direction.
We remain deeply concerned, however, by the issue
of sexual violence, and, in that connection, I commend
the valuable contribution of Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sexual
Violence in Conflict. The detailed information that
she provided to the Committee has allowed us to better
understand the scope of sexual violence in Darfur.
I regret in that connection that we did not reach
consensus on reflecting in her report the full content of
her statement to the sanctions Committee, but we have
taken note of all of that information and fully support
her recommendations, in particular the recommendation
that sexual violence be set up as a standalone listing
criterion. Those responsible for such violence must be
held accountable. We must encourage victims to file

19-012707/15

S/PV.8446

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reports, and we must also ensure that investigations and
prosecution follow. This is a priority for us.
We are also gravely concerned by the issue of
humanitarian access. A robust, lasting ceasefire regime
must be put in place in order to allow safe humanitarian
access and unimpeded access to those territories and
peoples that require it.
Finally, the withdrawal of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
a subject on which the Council recently expressed
itself, should take place gradually, in keeping with the
security situation on the ground, and take into account
in particular the situation of displaced persons, respect
for human rights and the issue of sexual violence. If
those conditions are met, as we hope they will be, it
will be important that following the exit of UNAMID,
human rights observers have access to the entirety of the
country’s territory, in particular the most remote areas.
To conclude, I should like to say that the sanctions
regime for the Sudan remains a key instrument, with
respect to both the arms embargo and individual
sanctions, for providing support during this
transitional phase, during which we must remain
particularly vigilant.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would also like to thank
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, for her excellent
work. We thank her for her briefing and would have
been interested to receive an even longer and more
detailed report. We also regret that it was not possible
to reach consensus on this important document.
We are also especially interested in the briefing
that Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten gave. Germany is very concerned about sexual
violence in the Sudan. We also agree with the Permanent
Representative of Peru, who has suggested considering
sexual violence as a listing criterion for sanctions in this
context. Sanctions need to be rigorously implemented.
For the time being, we see a necessity to uphold the
sanctions regime and maintain the very important work
of the Panel of Experts, which we commend.
On a more general note on Darfur, let me say
that Germany is very engaged in peacebuilding in
Darfur — that is very important to us. We support
mediation efforts and the political dialogue, which
is absolutely necessary, as it is the only way to come
8/15

17/01/2019

up with a lasting solution for the Sudan and Darfur.
We obviously welcome the signing of the Darfur
pre-negotiation agreement in Berlin. We stand ready to
further support the peace process.
However, while we acknowledge that there are
some improvements in the security situation in Darfur,
we also have to take into account the remaining
challenges. That includes security challenges, as many
colleagues have mentioned. We are also very concerned
that the unilateral ceasefire has not yet been prolonged
by the Government of the Sudan. We would also like to
express our concern that the current internal situation
in the Sudan may also lead to the loss of the recent
momentum achieved in the peace process.
On the situation and developments in the Sudan in
general, I would like to point out that we follow them
with concern; obviously, there have been nationwide
protests in the country since December. People were
killed during those protests and others were wounded.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights expressed
concern about credible reports on the use of excessive
force. The Government of the Sudan should respond to
the legitimate grievances of the Sudanese people, and
diverging views should be tolerated and not restrained
with excessive force. All those responses should be
based on the principle of proportionality.
Against that overall background and those
developments in the Sudan in general, and Darfur in
particular, we feel that the unity of the Security Council
remains of the utmost importance and that the rigorous
implementation of the sanctions regime remains
very crucial.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In addition to the
statement I made as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, let me make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
Allow me to begin by thanking the outgoing
members of the Security Council — Bolivia, Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden — for their
fruitful and solutions-oriented cooperation during their
tenure on the Council and their invaluable contributions
to the work of the Committee. I would also like to
thank the Government of the Sudan and the Permanent
Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations for their
cooperation over the past year of my chairmanship.
19-01270

17/01/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Returning to the Sanctions Committee, I would
like to highlight a few issues of particular importance
to Poland. We are concerned about the reports of
sexual and gender-based violence, which continue to
be perpetrated in Darfur with impunity. We call on
the Government of the Sudan to take all the necessary
measures to put an end to those acts and bring the
perpetrators to justice, and to continue cooperating on
the matter with Special Representative Patten. We have
all witnessed the positive results of the Government’s
engagement on the question of children and armed
conflict. We are convinced that the Sudan can build on
that experience in other fields.
We also remain concerned about the consequences
for the civilian population of the clashes between
Government forces and the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid faction in Jebel Marra, as well as
about the reports of human rights abuses committed
in relation to the fighting. The situation of Darfuri
internally displaced persons remains worrisome as
well. They lack access to economic and social services
as well as the provision of humanitarian aid. They are
also exposed to threats, harassment and intimidation.
With regard to other elements of the sanctions
regime, we note with regret the reports on the violations
of the arms embargo, both by the Government itself and
all armed groups, and we call upon the Government of
the Sudan to seek the Committee’s advance approval
before transferring military material to Darfur.
I would like to seize this opportunity to thank the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan for their professional
approach, the quality of information that they provide
the Committee and our day-to-day cooperation. I
encourage the Government of the Sudan to continue
its cooperation with the Panel and provide the Experts
with the necessary space to fulfil their mandate
independently and impartially.
Poland believes that sanctions are not punishment,
but a policy tool aimed at changing behaviour and
making it constructive, and that they should be subjected
to regular reviews, in order to best reflect the dynamics
on the ground. In that context, I would like to recall the
recommendation from my visit to the Sudan, of which
I informed the Council during my quarterly briefing
in June last year (see S/PV.8287). The recommendation
reads as follows.
“That the Council pursue its intention, as expressed
in paragraph 3 of resolution 2400 (2018), to review

S/PV. 8446

the measures on Darfur in the light of the evolving
situation on the ground. As part of the review I
referred to, the Council could consider setting
solutions-oriented parameters of the eventual
termination of the measures in the long term,
which might serve as a vehicle for positive change
in the Sudan.”
I would like to uphold that recommendation and
assure the Council that, as Chair of the Sanctions
Committee on the Sudan, I stand ready to assist the
Council in every effort aimed at adjusting the sanctions
regime to best reflect the current situation in Darfur.
Let me conclude by assuring the Council that as
Chair I will continue to guide the Committee’s work so
that it supports the Council in its efforts to facilitate an
end to the protracted conflict in Darfur and, by doing
so, contribute to peace and stability in the region.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this briefing. I also thank my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Poland for her detailed account
of the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan. I commend her dynamic way of
leading the work of the Committee.
In broad strokes, we can say that the situation in
Darfur is following a positive trend but still requires
our attention. We are concerned about the violence
observed during recent demonstrations throughout the
country. We deplore that such violence led to death and
call on the authorities to exercise restraint. We are also
concerned about the possible impact of the political
situation in the Sudan on the Darfur peace process. We
call on all parties to join the peace process.
The briefing we just heard reminds us that, even
as we reflect on a strategy for the withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the suffering of the population is unfortunately
not over. Conflict-related sexual violence continues
to affect women and girls in particular. We are deeply
concerned about their lack of access to legal remedies.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to strengthen
its national capacity for legal, medical and psychosocial
support for victims of sexual violence. In that regard,
we support the work of Special Representative Patten
and look forward to continuing to work with her and,
especially, listening to her within the framework of
the meetings of the Sanctions Committees. Belgium

19-012709/15

S/PV.8446

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

17/01/2019

supports making sexual violence a separate designation
criterion, which means that the experts working
for Sanctions Committees must be trained in the
area. We also see the value of similar collaboration
with the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict.

also welcomes the gains made in advancing the Darfur
peace process and in the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, and calls on all parties
to continue their commitment to the negotiations
process, under the auspices of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel.

There are other elements in the report of the Panel
of Experts that alarm us. One is the continuing presence
of armed groups outside the Sudan. These combatants
offer their services to the highest bidder and are highly
mobile, which poses a threat to the entire region,
including the Sudan itself. Another is the fact that
weapons originating in Darfur are in circulation in the
region. Even if it is possible that the weapons-collection
campaign organized by the Darfur authorities has led
some combatants to resell their surplus, the efforts to
curb this traffic must continue. The arms embargo on
Darfur is one of the more useful measures in that regard.

Through resolution 1591 (2005), the Council aimed
to put pressure on the parties that were impeding the
peace process, which we recognized as constituting
a threat to stability in Darfur and the region. It also
targeted those who had committed violations under
international humanitarian law or human rights law,
or other types of atrocities, or those who had violated
measures agreed on in resolution 1556 (2004). Equally,
as the Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan said,
we should also respond to the progress that is being
registered on the ground in normalizing the situation
in Darfur, which has driven the drawdown of the
contingent numbers in the UNAMID mission from
17,000 to 4,000. With those positive developments in
this area of the Sudan, it is important that the Council
be able to recognize and acknowledge that progress
has been made, thanks to the measures imposed in
resolution 1591 (2005). The Council should be able to
relax some of the previously imposed sanctions, and
in that regard we welcome the recommendation of the
Chair of the Committee.

Lastly, we would like to acknowledge the valuable
work of the Panel of Experts, which fills out the view
that the members of the Council have of the situation
on the ground with detailed and verifiable information
and in-depth investigations. Its task is extremely
important, and in order to ensure that the Council
receives the best information possible, it is crucial to
preserve its independence. We call on all parties, in the
Sudan and elsewhere, to cooperate in good faith with
the experts and enable them to conduct their mission
without interference.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. We
would also like to thank and pay tribute to Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka for her briefing and leadership on
this portfolio. And we welcome our colleagues from the
Sudan to the Council today.
South Africa welcomes the improvements in the
security situation in Darfur. The situation has improved
dramatically over the past few years and the role of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) should be commended. We
salute Ambassador Jeremiah Mamabolo, Head of
UNAMID, and his colleagues — all the Blue Berets
and civilian components — for a job well done in
Darfur. Notwithstanding its expected drawdown, as set
out in resolution 2429 (2018), UNAMID must continue
to ensure the protection of vulnerable civilians,
especially the internally displaced and those in camps,
and to prevent gender-based violence. South Africa
10/15

That does not mean that there are no more elements
that require our attention. We remain concerned about
the continued violations of the arms embargo, including
the transfer of weapons to Darfur, which destabilizes
the situation on the ground. In that regard, we urge
UNAMID, in accordance with resolution 2429 (2018),
to continue to provide technical and logistical assistance
to the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission. We also remain concerned
about the growing presence of Darfuri armed groups
in Libya, as further violations of the embargo could
potentially fuel the conflict in the region, undermining
any progress towards stability and lasting solutions
for peace and sustainable development. And women
and children are the most affected by sexual violence,
which has also increasingly become a weapon of war,
affecting the long-term prospects for peaceful and
prosperous communities. In that regard, we would like
to commend the Government of the Sudan for its efforts
to combat sexual violence in conflict.
19-01270

17/01/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, South Africa hopes that as UNAMID
continues to scale down its operations and vacate stable
regions in Darfur, the Sudanese Government will
establish administrative services and ensure normalcy
in the hitherto troubled region of the Sudan. The Council
should do everything possible to ensure that the 30 June
cut-off and withdrawal of UNAMID is realized, since
it would be a major boost to Africa’s call for silencing
the guns by 2020.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have taken note the briefing of Ms. Joanna
Wronecka, Permanent Representative of Poland, on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.
We note the overall positive trend in the military
and political situation and the settlement of the conflict
in Darfur. The security situation is stable. Armed
violence is on the decline. Large-scale clashes and
intercommunal conflicts have ceased. Refugees and
internally displaced persons are returning home.
We see no alternative to the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur as the basis for a political settlement in
the region, and we welcome the measures being taken by
Khartoum to implement it. The signing on 6 December
in Berlin of a preliminary agreement on the resumption
of the peace process speaks to the commitment of the
parties to achieving a lasting peace in the region through
negotiations. In that context, we were disappointed by
the unconstructive negotiating position of Abdul Wahid
Al Nur. We have to acknowledge that attempts to woo
intransigent actors are damaging to the peace process.
We believe that the external sponsors of the Sudanese
opposition should be more proactive in urging their
protégés to take more realistic positions.
As has repeatedly said here in this Chamber,
sanctions are not an end in themselves but rather one of
the tools in the Council’s arsenal for advancing peace
processes and encouraging political dialogue. The
positive developments we have seen in Darfur suggest
that the sanctions introduced 14 years ago have already
served their purpose.
There is an evident need a clear road map for lifting
the Security Council sanctions on the Sudan. In the
context of the planned drawdown of the peacekeeping
contingent of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, we would like to point out that
the previous Chair of the 1591 Committee made the
very logical and timely recommendation that easing

S/PV. 8446

the sanctions regime should go hand in hand with
withdrawing the Blue Helmets. Our experience in
Eritrea has shown that when there is corresponding
political will on the part of the Western members of
the Council, it is quite possible to make substantive
progress in lifting sanctions. Unfortunately, we have
not seen any of that here so far. What is more, we
are already hearing so-called human rights activists
sending signals in support of a de facto toughening of
the Council’s sanctions regime on the Sudan by making
sexual and gender-based violence a separate listing
criterion, expanding the capacity and powers of the
Panel of Experts of the 1591 Committee in this area, and
linking the eventual lifting of sanctions on the Sudan
to a resolution of the problem of sexual violence in
Darfur. In our view, such a transformation threatens to
turn on its head the whole point of the Sudan sanctions
regime, which was introduced with a view to protecting
international peace and security. The initiators of such
so-called innovations are not acting based on the trends
in the real situation on the ground but on their own
narrow national agendas, which are often far removed
from the interests of establishing peace in Darfur.
A number of our colleagues today raised the topic
of the protests in the Sudan. I would like to underscore
that this subject is not related to the subject of our
meeting. The objective of these kinds of tactics is clear.
It is to create an impression that the Security Council
has a mandate to discuss a purely national Sudanese
issue in the context of the sanctions regime. I want to
emphasize that this is no way corresponds to reality
and nobody should be misled on the matter. In general,
it is hard to shake the feeling that raising the issue of
anti-Government protests in Khartoum, which in itself
constitutes interference in the country’s internal affairs,
comes under the rubric of geopolitical engineering and
the West’s well-known policies aimed at replacing
regimes that it does not like. We all know what that led
to in Libya, South Sudan and various other countries.
We do not wish to hold the Security Council and the
1591 Committee hostage to our Western colleagues’
geopolitical agenda.
In conclusion, I want to once again underscore
that any Security Council sanctions regime must be
reviewed so that it can adapt to the realities on the
ground. It was with that in mind that we agreed on
resolution 2400 (2018), which clearly established the
importance of holding such reviews regularly. We hope

19-0127011/15

S/PV.8446

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that concrete parameters for lifting sanctions will soon
be developed. They are obviously long overdue.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Like others, I would
like to start by thanking Ambassador Wronecka, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, for her briefing and
for her continued efforts as Chair, based of course on
her considerable personal experience. It is disappointing
that owing to a lack of consensus within the Committee
she was unable to give a more comprehensive briefing
on her activities.
The subsidiary bodies of the Security Council,
including its Sanctions Committees, are a vital part
of our collective work to maintain international peace
and security. We rely on and require the wider United
Nations membership to implement the sanctions regimes
that the Council agrees on, and we have a responsibility
to demonstrate transparency in the Committees’
conduct of their work. The United Kingdom continues
to support fully the 1591 sanctions regime and the Panel
of Experts, annd I would like to thank the Panel for
its ongoing efforts to provide the Committee with a
comprehensive analysis of the implementation of the
sanctions regime and the wider political and security
dynamics in the Sudan and the region.
I take issue with the Russian delegation’s depiction
of the position of the United Kingdom and of Western
countries on sanctions in general and on the Sudan in
particular, which has no relation to the facts. Sanctions
regimes and the criteria that underpin them are agreed
on by the Council, as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. That is proper and right. The United
Kingdom will continue to act objectively on this and all
sanctions regimes, and we encourage all our colleagues
to do likewise.
In relation to the activities of the Panel of
Experts, the United Kingdom welcomes the increased
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan. However,
we note the concerns that have been raised with regard
to the regular presence of Government officials at some
of the Panel’s meetings. We therefore encourage the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the Panel
with full respect for its independent and investigative
mandate. As noted by the Chair, the Panel recently
transmitted its final report to the Committee, in which
it singled out the clashes between the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid and the Government of the Sudan
forces in the Jebel Marra region of Darfur as the main
12/15

17/01/2019

development during the reporting period. We have
heard during briefings on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) that
these clashes have resulted in a significant number
of civilian casualties, new displacements and human
rights violations and abuses perpetrated by all sides.
The reports of indiscriminate shootings, the looting and
burning of villages and conflict-related sexual violence
are particularly alarming.
There have been welcome improvements in the
security situation in some parts of Darfur, and we saw
some progress in the peace process with the signing of
a pre-negotiation agreement by the Sudan Liberation
Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement with the Government of the Sudan in Berlin
in December. However, the clashes in Jebel Marra
are a stark reminder that the situation in Darfur is
not yet normalized and remains fragile. It is therefore
incumbent on the Council to ensure a responsible
drawdown of UNAMID and to hold the Government to
account for progress on achieving the exit benchmarks
and indicators, as we agreed in presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/19, adopted in December. In addition, the
arms embargo continues to be violated by all armed
groups and the Government of the Sudan. The Panel’s
report details the destabilizing flow of weapons into
and out of Darfur. We call on all parties to adhere to
the arms embargo and remind the Government of the
Sudan of the requirement to request approval from
the 1591 Committee for transfers of military material
to Darfur.
The Chair also noted in her remarks that the
Committee was briefed by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten. During her briefing, the Special
Representative reminded the Committee that conflictrelated sexual violence remains widespread in Darfur
and that survivors and first-hand witnesses regularly
identify members of the security forces as perpetrators.
She also highlighted the fact that sexual violence
continues to be chronically underreported owing to
fear of reprisals, acute stigma, a lack of protection for
victims and inaction on the part of law enforcement.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Government’s
engagement on a framework of cooperation to
prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
An agreement on the framework and its complete
implementation are necessary if the Sudanese armed
forces and rapid support forces are to be delisted from
19-01270

17/01/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8446

the Secretary-General’s reports on sexual violence
in conflict.

resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, and for
her initiative to brief us in an open meeting.

However, I would like to draw attention to the
important recommendations made to the Committee by
Ms. Patten. They were, first, that sexual violence be
elevated as a stand-alone designation criterion; secondly,
that the Panel of Experts be granted adequate resources
and expertise to investigate sexual violence and that the
Committee explicitly request the Panel to investigate
and document alleged incidents of sexual violence in
Darfur; thirdly, that any future benchmarking process
for the possible lifting of targeted sanctions include the
provisions related to sexual violence in resolution 2429
(2018) and the prevention and accountability measures
required under resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106
(2013). The United Kingdom expresses its support for
those recommendations and for the continued efforts
of Special Representative Patten and her Office to
address the worrying prevalence of sexual violence in
the Sudan.

With regard to the issue under discussion, my
delegation welcomes the various initiatives in the
peace process in Darfur, such as the signing of the
pre-negotiation agreement between the Government of
the Sudan, the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi
faction and the Justice and Equality Movement in Berlin
on 6 December 2018, as well as the Government’s arms
collection campaign, which has achieved a certain
level of security in urban areas. We would also like
to highlight the positive developments in regional
dynamics, mainly with neighbouring countries.

While this was not discussed by the Committee, I
would also like to take this opportunity to say a few
words about the current situation in the Sudan with
regard to the ongoing protests. The United Kingdom
is concerned about the current situation. The use of
lethal force and arbitrary detentions by the security
forces in response to peaceful protests is unacceptable
and should stop. We are appalled by reports that the
security forces have used tear gas and violence inside
hospitals against those being treated and doctors
who are providing medical assistance. We repeat our
calls for restraint in policing the protests, the release
of detainees and accountability for those killed. The
Government of the Sudan’s response to the protests will
shape the United Kingdom’s approach to engagement in
the coming months and years.
In conclusion, let me again thank the Chair of the
Committee for her ongoing commitment. I would also
like to reiterate the importance of the sanctions regime
in the Sudan and to express our hope that all members
of the Committee will be constructive as we approach
the renewal of the sanctions regime established by
resolution 1591 (2005) next month.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.
We thank Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to

Unfortunately, despite those signs of commitment
by the parties to the conflict, the peace process in the
Sudan faces a number of challenges. We are troubled by
the clashes in the Jebel Marra area, which have resulted
in further displacements, a humanitarian crisis and
human rights abuses. The vulnerability of women and
girls, who continue to be the target of conflict-related
sexual violence, is of great concern.
Meanwhile, it is disturbing that the Government of
the Sudan and the armed groups are still not complying
with the terms of the arms embargo, in clear violation
of paragraph 7 of resolution 1591 (2005), and that the
travel ban and assets freeze are not being implemented.
Finally, we urge the Government and the other
stakeholders in the conflict to step up their efforts to
implement those measures but, above all, to create
conditions for the eradication of the vulnerable
situation of girls and women and for the cessation of
sexual violence and to ensure effective accountability
for the perpetrators of those crimes.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate your country, Mr. President,
on beginning its non-permanent membership of the
Security Council for the period 2019-2020 and on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to welcome the States
that have recently become non-permanent members
of the Security Council, namely, Germany, Belgium,
Indonesia and our sister country South Africa. My
delegation affirms its commitment to cooperating

19-0127013/15

S/PV.8446

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with them and with the Security Council in all matters
pertaining to the Sudan in the work of the Council.
We would like as well to express our appreciation
to Ambassador Joanna Wronecka. We thank her for her
briefing as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and for
the report that she presented today. I would also express
my appreciation to the members of the Council for their
statements earlier in the meeting.
With regard to the peace process in Darfur, I
would like to underline the following points. First, the
Government of the Sudan is fully committed to the
peace process and to creating the appropriate conditions
for it. My Government expresses its readiness to resume
negotiations with the Justice and Equality Movement
and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction
in accordance with the pre-negotiation agreement
signed in Germany on 6 December 2018. We would
like to reiterate our appreciation and gratitude to our
partners in Germany, and we look forward to further
cooperation with the Security Council and to increased
pressure being put on the rebel movements in order to
encourage them to join the peace process, in line with
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
Secondly, with regard to the situation in Jebel
Marra, I would like to affirm that what took place in
that area was the direct result of the refusal of the socalled Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction
to accept all invitations to hold negotiations in order
to normalize the situation that has existed since 2006
and to achieve a peaceful solution. Moreover, certain
members of the Council also refused to adopt any
measures against the obstinacy of that movement and
its leadership, its disregard for the lives of our people
in Darfur and the obstacles that it has placed in the
way of all national, regional and international efforts to
establish peace in Darfur.
Thirdly, I would like to note the close link between
peace and development in Darfur and that the conflict
in Darfur is essentially over scarce resources for
development. Resolving the root causes of the situation
therefore depends on the level of commitment shown
by our partners and by the international community to
support development in Darfur and to respond to the
call issued by the High-Level Event on the Transition
from Peacekeeping to Peacebuilding and Development
in Darfur, held on the margins of the high-level segment
of the General Assembly in September 2018.
14/15

17/01/2019

Concerning the issue of sanctions, I would like
to note the following. We affirm that the Government
of the Sudan is committed to cooperating with other
United Nations entities and agencies working in the
Sudan on the condition that they comply with their
mandate and that they respect the sovereignty of the
Sudan. Moreover, we strongly reject the unverified false
information mentioned in the final report of the Panel of
Experts on the Sudan established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) (see S/2019/34). Such information was
gathered from sources that are not credible or impartial,
such as Radio Dabanga.
I would like to note that since the sanctions regime
was imposed on Darfur under resolution 1591 (2005),
there have been many developments and that the current
situation in Darfur, as testified to by the Security
Council and the reports of the Secretary General, has
changed. The circumstances now are very different
to those that existed when the sanctions regime was
imposed 13 years ago. All United Nations reports that
have been submitted for the period under review by the
Secretary-General and the Panel of Experts confirm
the continued improvement in the security situation
in Darfur. That improvement was the main factor that
prompted the Council to adopt resolutions 2363 (2017)
and 2429 (2018), which stipulated a reduction in the
troop strength of the African Union-United Nations
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in preparation for a
final drawdown and full exit by June 2020.
The Government of the Sudan has continued to
make efforts to normalize the situation in Darfur in its
various aspects so that the states of Darfur can return
to normalcy. The Government has exerted efforts
in the area of security that have led to great strides
in achieving both security and stability throughout
Darfur. The campaign to disarm citizens and collect
their weapons has bolstered stability and security and
ended outbreaks of violence, which took place in the
past, while combating criminal acts and banditry. The
Government has succeeded in exercising its authority
and enforcing the rule of law, and is continuing its
efforts on a daily basis, which has strengthened security
and stability and prompted large numbers of internally
displaced persons to return to their homes.
Last February, the Council adopted resolution
2400 (2018), which renewed the mandate of the Panel
of Experts until February of this year. I should like to
point out that, in paragraph 3 of that resolution, the
Council expressed its intention to review the sanctions
19-01270

17/01/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

regime in Darfur in the light of the evolving situation on
the ground. Given the fact that all the reports submitted
by the Secretary-General and the Panel of Experts
during the period under review confirm the continued
improvement of the situation in Darfur, we hope that,
in considering the adoption of a subsequent draft
resolution in February to renew the Panel’s mandate,
the Council will review the sanctions regime imposed
on Darfur pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). That
would enable the Sudanese armed forces to perform
their duties as guaranteed by the Charter of the United
Nations and the State’s Constitution, especially in
the light of the planned reduction in UNAMID troop
strength in preparation for its exit next year. Moreover,
our armed forces and other security entities would be
able to fight transnational crime, human trafficking
and illegal migration as well as fighting terrorism and
carrying out other tasks, thereby making it incumbent
upon the international community to support our
military institutions. The Security Council must take
into consideration that Darfur neighbours three States
that are undergoing conflict — a situation that requires
the armed forces and other relevant institutions to be
able to control the situation on the borders shared with
those States.

S/PV. 8446

In response to Council members’ remarks
concerning the demonstrations, violence and
sabotage seen in certain parts of the Sudan since
19 December 2018, I would like to state the following.
The Government of the Sudan is fully committed to
providing its citizens with opportunity to peacefully
express their views concerning the political and
economic situation in the country. At the same time,
the Government of the Sudan is committed to carrying
out its constitutional obligations and international law
in accordance with its right to protect lives and public
property against sabotage, arson and all other forms of
violence, which some demonstrators have carried out. I
would also like to confirm that those demonstrations are
not related even remotely to the topic of this meeting,
which is dedicated to a specific agenda item, namely,
a discussion on the Panel of Experts final report (see
S/2019/34) of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning sanctions imposed
on the Sudan. I would ask that Council members remain
focused on the topic at hand.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

19-0127015/15
