Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3. Invites also the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency to submit within the
same period their written comments and observations
on the said draft articles;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, befare the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly, the comments and observations submitted in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
5. Expresses its desire that an international convention be elaborated and concluded expeditiously on
the basis of the draft articles adopted by the International Law Commission and in the light of the comments and observations submitted in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Representation of States in their relations with international organizations";

111
l. Requests the Secretary-General to invite comments from Member States befare 1 April 1972 on the
question of the protection of diplomats and to transmit
them to the International Law Commission at its
twenty-fourth session;
2. Requests the International Law Commission to
study as soon as possible, in the light of the comments
of Member States, the question of the protection and
inviolability of diplomatic agents and other persons
entitled to special protection under international law,
with a view to preparing a set of draft articles dealing
with offences committed against diplomats and other
persons entitled to special protection under international law for submission to the General Assembly at
the earliest date which the Commission considers appropriate.
1999th plenary meeting,
3 December 1971.
2781 (XXVI). Report of the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggression

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its session held in New York from 1 February
to 5 March 1971,9
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of
defining aggression and on the draft definition, as
reflected in the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task at its session held in
1971,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXII)
of 18 December 1967, 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968, 2549 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 and 2644
(XXV) of 25 November 1970 the General Assembly
recognized the widespread conviction of the need to
expedite the definition of aggression,
Considering the urgency of bringing the work of the
Special Committee to a successful conclusion and the
9 Of]icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/8419).

137

desirability of achieving the definition of aggression as
soon as possible,
Noting also the common desire of the members of
the Special Committee to continue their work on the
basis of the results achieved and to arrive at a draft
definition,
I. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
(XXII), as carly as possiblc in 1972;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression".
1999th plenary meeting,
3 December 1971.
2818 (XXVI). Review of the role of the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Court of Justice is
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
Recalling further that, in accordance with Article 2,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
all Members shall settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security, and justice, are not endangered,
Emphasizing that, in conformity with that principle,
as solemnly proclaimed in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, judicial settlement is one of the means to which States can have
recourse in seeking a just settlement of their disputes,
Considering the desirability of finding ways and
means of enhancing the effectiveness of the Court,
Noting that the Court has undertaken a revision of
its Rules,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General1 º
containing the replies received from certain Member
States and from Switzerland to the questionnaire prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution
2723 (XXV) of 15 December 1970 and the text of
the letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
President of the Court,
l. Invites Member States and States parties to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice which
have not yet been able to do so to transmit to the
Secretary-General, by 1 July 1972, their comments on
the questionnaire prepared in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2723 (XXV);
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit those
comments to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit
to the Court the above-mentioned report, 10 together
with the summary records of the discussions held in
the Sixth Committee on this subject at the twenty-sixth
session;
10 A/8382 and Add.1-4.
