A /S-30/PV.6

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Thirtieth special session

6th plenary meeting

Thursday, 21 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zinsou (Benin),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
General debate
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Kamal Thapa, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Nepal.
Mr. Thapa (Nepal): I thank the President for
his leadership of the special session on the world
drug problem.
Drug abuse has become a multidimensional
problem across the globe, posing a great threat to our
civilization. The use of various kinds of drugs is not
only creating problems for young men and women, but
also ruining them and their families. Therefore, we need
to address this grave problem with collective political
will at all levels. I thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive reports and support the operational
recommendations made in the report on narcotic drugs.
Nepal is fully committed to controlling the problem of
drug use in the country and abroad.
Nepal is a party to the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs and its Protocol, as well as the United
Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. Nepal enacted the
Narcotics Control Act in 1976 and updated national

16-11224 (E)

legislation to address the issues of narcotics production,
sales, imports and exports. We have a strong policy
framework and robust institutional mechanisms to
address this problem, including a national drug-control
policy, narcotic drug-control strategy and guidelines for
the operation of oral substitution therapy for drug users.
In addition to that, the Government has focused on
the prevention side of the problem in a comprehensive
manner with measures to reduce both supply and
demand. The Ministry of Home Affairs has established
a national coordination committee for drug abuse
control chaired by the Minister for Home Affairs with
separate district level committees in the country. Nepal
is doing its level best to address the drug problems
and looks forward to enhanced cooperation with the
international community, including as envisioned in the
Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1).
In conclusion, our focus and priority must be
the men, women and children affected by drug use
and dependence, as well as the potential victims and
all of the consequences for health and society that
illicit drugs can have. I am confident that a coherent
and concerted plan of action and the much-needed
commitment to international cooperation emanating
from this special session will go a long way towards
ensuring an integrated and balanced strategy to counter
the world drug problem.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alexander Khloponin, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Russian Federation.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1611224*

A/S-30/PV.6

Mr. Khloponin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to read out the address by His
Excellency Mr. Vladimir Putin, President of the
Russian Federation, to this special session on the world
drug problem
“This special session of the General Assembly
is a very important and necessary step to promote
international counter-narcotics cooperation. It
would be no exaggeration to say that the challenge of
the illegal production and distribution of drugs has
reached an unprecedented level. The drug business,
which has become one of the most aggressive
forms of transnational crime, poses a real threat
to the State and society, claiming the lives and
ruining the health of millions of people. Moreover,
the proceeds of drug cartels serve as a source for
financing terrorist and extremist groups. Clearly,
it is only by consolidated and concerted efforts,
fully exploiting the potential of the three United
Nations drug control conventions, that this evil can
be effectively resisted. It is encouraging that the
outcome document (resolution S-30/1, annex) of this
session has summed up the constructive experience
gained by different countries of the world.
“We hope that the agreed diplomatic formulas
will be followed by concrete steps towards their
practical implementation at the national and
intergovernmental levels. Russia, for its part,
intends to further intensify its work on countering
illicit traffic in narcotic substances in close
cooperation with other members of the international
community. I wish the Assembly every success and
all the best.”
This statement confirms the special attention paid
by the Russian leadership to countering global drug
challenges. The cross-border expansion of the drug
trade has also affected Russia, posing a direct threat
to our security. Obviously, we must take immediate,
decisive and coordinated steps to deal with a problem
of such scale. In 2010, Russia approved its national
anti-drug policy strategy to 2020, which is a concrete
plan to strengthen Russian society’s fight against drugs.
Despite the measures taken by Russia, drugs
continue to claim and blight the lives of thousands of its
citizens, especially the younger ones. The community
of nations has failed to effectively block drug transit
routes from Afghanistan. We are taking energetic and
targeted steps within the Collective Security Treaty
2/33

21/04/2016

Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and other intergovernmental mechanisms. We hope that
the outcome of this session will help to develop and
strengthen international anti-drug cooperation. First
and foremost, this refers to the Paris Pact initiative,
which has established an effective mechanism for
fighting trafficking in drugs of Afghan origin through
the combined efforts of more than 50 countries and 20
organizations. We are committed to the Paris Pact and
intend to improve it, based on broad intergovernmental
cooperation.
At the same time, we expect all States to demonstrate
enhanced solidarity and cooperation in their search for
appropriate ways to respond to new mutating forms
of the drug threat. First and foremost, we refer to new
psychoactive substances and the use of the Internet
for drug smuggling. We believe that counter-narcotics
efforts should not be affected in any way by double
standards, political expediency or State selfishness.
The drug problem obviously cannot be tackled
with interdictions and punitive measures alone. The
outcome document is clear on that point. An effective
system of prevention, treatment and rehabilitation is
required, as is action to mobilize public opinion through
mass media and youth and volunteer organizations.
The social rehabilitation of drug addicts would allow
them to reintegrate into society and is therefore of
key significance. We need to extend a helping hand to
those who are forced to sow their lands with drug crops
because of poverty and destitution. Effective alternative
development programmes are needed so that the poor
can switch to legal sources of livelihood.
In today’s world, the proceeds of drug trafficking
fuel organized crime, terrorism and corruption. We
align ourselves with the Security Council’s qualification
of illicit drug trafficking as a threat to international
peace and stability. The United Nations must continue
its uncompromising fight against drugs in order to
enhance stability and diminish threats. In the run-up
to the special session, there were some skeptics and
pessimists who argued that the world community had
lost the war against drugs. We cannot accept that. We
have by no means lost the war, but if we are to win it,
we must achieve a new level of solidarity and unity.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Kristjan Thor Juliusson, Minister of
Health of the Republic of Iceland.
16-11224

21/04/2016

Mr. Juliusson (Iceland): The discussions leading
to this special session on the world drug problem
underlined the importance and urgency of a shared
global responsibility in addressing the complex drugrelated issues. In light of this, I think it is crucial that
we think of other ways forward and that we discuss
openly and without prejudice how we can tackle the
challenges posed to our society by drug use. I believe
that the world drug problem is a health issue and will
need to be solved as such.
I do not support legalizing drugs, but I am willing
to participate in a balanced debate on the pros and
cons of legalizing drugs that are now illegal. Indeed,
I have gradually become convinced that the policy
of criminalization that we have put in place does not
deliver the desired outcome — the results we want.
Therefore, given this great challenge, I ask: Are we
going to stand by and watch this opportunity pass? Our
answer should be “no”. We should use this opportunity
to the fullest. Indeed, it is our social responsibility to
try to do better.
Our current policy of incarceration has many faults.
We are locking young people into a vicious cycle for
minor drug-related offences, and we are making it more
difficult to reach addicts who need help and assistance.
We need to examine alternatives to incarceration for
minor drug-related offences. We need to understand
better what contributes to recovery and what are the
obstacles to full recovery from addiction. We need
to refine drug policies and centre them on people,
especially focusing on how to protect children and
young people.
To achieve this aim, in 2014 I appointed a working
group to address the effects of drug abuse, both
for users and their families, in Iceland. The group
consists of members from academia, non-governmental
organizations, local government, civil society, police,
hospitals and rehabilitation centres. The working
group is to take stock of the current legal environment
in Iceland and examine legislation and research on
prevention and treatment from other countries that
have turned the focus of drug abuse and addiction from
criminalization to public health.
We look forward to a coherent strategy that
emphasizes a humane approach — an approach that
protects human rights and reduces the harmful effects
of drug abuse while working towards regaining the trust
of marginalized groups in society and the organizations

A/S-30/PV.6

providing them services and shelter. I look forward to
the final product of the working group, which will be
presented later this year.
We need to be able to prevent a problem before it
happens. With stronger evidence-based drug prevention
strategies, we are able to affect the factors that predict
the problem. We need to be willing and ready to look
at new ways to assist those in need and now is the time.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Myint Htwe, Union Minister for Health
of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar.
Mr. Htwe (Myanmar): First of all, Myanmar is in
full alignment with the statement delivered earlier on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(see A/S-30/PV.2) in this special session on the world
drug problem.
All of us sitting in this Hall are equally concerned
about the threat posed by the use, trafficking and
production of illicit drugs. It greatly burdens our
health, justice and law enforcement systems. And, more
importantly, it is slowly breaking down the social fabric
of our communities. Myanmar is fully and deeply
committed to fight against the narcotic drug problem,
in collaboration with all entities involved in the domain
of preventing, containing and managing this problem.
Each and every country needs to tackle this problem
as its prime national duty; otherwise it could result in
untoward implications that could have a disastrous and
perhaps irreversible impact on their workforce.
The drug problem is also threatening the health and
national security of the countries affected. We must
therefore take a different perspective on this problem
and view it in a holistic and comprehensive manner.
The strategies currently being implemented must be
critically reviewed and assessed from a realistic and
unbiased point of view in terms of their effectiveness
and efficiency, as well as in terms of their short- and
long-term implications for the population. That should
be done because the epidemiological situation at the
time when strategies were formulated and interventions
were identified may differ greatly from the current
scenario. Context and environment are in a constant
state of flux.
A coordinated and well-sychronized response to
prevent and contain the use of narcotic drugs is needed,
in particular among neighbouring countries. In that
context, the real-time exchange of valid and reliable

16-112243/33

A/S-30/PV.6

information is crucial if we are to be successful in
managing the narcotic drug problem. We need to view
the narcotic drug problem as a public health issue.
Therefore, the fight against the drug problem must be
considered in line with the principles and approaches of
public health. It would prove very beneficial to conduct
research on the strategies being implemented. Relevant
actions must also be carried out in a balanced manner
as they are interrelated, intertwined, and mutually
reinforcing and supportive. We also need to create a
sense of ownership of programmes on the part of all
those who are actually involved in the fight against the
narcotic drug problem.
The successful adoption of resolution S-30/1 is
really a milestone in our fight against the narcotic
drug problem and on our path to achieving a drug-free
society. The availability of precursor chemicals for
producing psychotropic substances has posed a serious
problem for many countries. We should earnestly look
for the source of those precursor chemicals and take
decisive action. Drug use, as alluded to earlier, is clearly
a public health issue. Provisional, realistic and socially
acceptable preventive, curative, and rehabilitative
services for drug users and drug treatment and
rehabilitation centres across the country must be given
priority. Effective counselling and education should be
provided to individuals admitted to such centres, based
on the specific customs and culture of the country and
on the findings of various qualitative research studies
on attitudes towards drug use.
We also need to review and study the services
being rendered in those centres in order to ensure that
services are effective and efficient. Drug use surveys
are one of the avenues by which effective and countryspecific strategies and interventions can be formulated.
We should also streamline, fine-tune and modify the
services and strategies according to the changing
epidemiological situation. A review of the existing
drug-related legal framework and legislation may
be conducted as appropriate and as per the changing
international scenario. In collaboration with the
Ministry of Education, the dire consequences of illicit
drug use could be included in the life-skills curriculum
in all schools in order to raise student awareness
about the possibility of drug use, resulting in longterm dividends.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that a review of
existing strategies and actions with a view to adapting
them to suit the changing local epidemiological situation
4/33

21/04/2016

in the area of drug control is worth consideration. The
ongoing review and monitoring of our work should be
done in collaboration with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and associated organizations and
agencies, and with the full involvement of communitybased entities.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the delegation of the Republic of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia) (spoke in Russian): Today
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the members of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO):
the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Belarus,
the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the
Russian Federation and the Republic of Tajikistan.
The States members of the CSTO welcome
the adoption of resolution S-30/1 at this special
session on the world drug problem. We believe that
its recommendations will enable the international
community to more effectively achieve by 2019 the goals
and tasks outlined in the 2009 Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem. We are grateful to all the delegations
that took part in the drafting and negotiations on the
resolution.
We hope that the round tables being held alongside
this meeting on specific aspects of the drug problem
will enrich our discussion with interesting new ideas.
The CSTO member States would like to once again
stress their concern about the continuing problem of the
large-scale illegal production and trafficking of drugs.
It poses a serious threat to international peace and
stability, an obstacle to States’ sustainable economic
and social development and a direct threat to people’s
health and lives, making it one of the major challenges
to humankind in the twenty-first century. The illegal
trade in drugs is also closely linked to such problems
as the financing of terrorist and extremist activity,
illegal arms trafficking and other types of transnational
organized crime, corruption and money laundering.
The member States of the CSTO believe that one
essential condition for effectively combating the world
drug problem is working consistently to strengthen
the central and coordinating role of the United
Nations and the capacity of its specialized institutions
and programmes. In that regard, they affirm their
unwavering commitment to meeting their obligations in
this area, starting with those undertaken under the three
16-11224

21/04/2016

foundational United Nations drug-control conventions
and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, along with the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, as the United Nations system’s main
policymaking body in the area.
We put particular emphasis on the importance of
complying with the current international legal drugcontrol regime and the inadmissibility of legalizing
some types of drugs. The CSTO’s members are united
in their opinion that the conventions of 1961, 1971
and 1988 provide us with sufficient instruments for
effectively countering the spread of illegal narcotics,
psychoactive substances and their precursors. It is vital
that we significantly increase our efforts to eradicate
the cultivation of opium poppies and coca plants for
the illicit production of opiates, particularly heroin
and cocaine. Expanded production of these extremely
widespread and dangerous crops is destabilizing the
situation in a number of regions and creating conditions
conducive to rising crime, violence and corruption.
For a comprehensive, balanced approach to the
world drug problem, the members of the CSTO believe
that essential support to effective law-enforcement
measures should be combined with programmes aimed
at reducing demand for drugs and encouraging social
and economic development.
Alternative development programmes are an
effective way to counter the global spread of drugs. Our
States are taking into account the General Assembly’s
guiding principles on alternative development,
which could become an organic part of national and
international long-term development efforts. We call
on all States to take the necessary steps for preventing
drug use and providing for the treatment, rehabilitation
and social reintegration of drug addicts, based on the
view that protecting people’s life, health and well-being
should be a fundamental principle of global drugcontrol policy.
Like the rest of the international community, the
members of the CSTO are constantly encountering
new drug challenges posed by transnational organized
crime. In that connection, there is an acute need for
operating systems capable of reacting to such threats
and coming up with appropriate responses, particularly
where new psychoactive substances and synthetic drugs
are concerned. We believe it is especially important to
draft timely and effective legislative, regulatory and

A/S-30/PV.6

administrative measures at the national level in order
to respond to emerging new psychotropic substances.
Another important area where efforts should be
coordinated is in combating the legalization of profits
derived from illicit drug trafficking. Considering that
as a rule, large-scale money-laundering operations
and, for that matter, drug smuggling, are carried out by
organized criminal groups, we call for strengthening
cooperation among law enforcement agencies with a
view to dismantling such groups.
The CSTO member States attach great importance
to strengthening the mechanisms of bilateral, regional,
inter-regional and international cooperation in
combating drugs. In particular, our countries’ close
cooperation has enabled us to continue to increase the
effectiveness of our joint law-enforcement activities in
the fight against illicit drug trafficking. For example,
in May 2015 Operation Canal–Patrol seized 15 tons
of illicitly trafficked drugs and more than 22.5 tons
of precursors, while in September of the same year
the Operation Canal–Synthetic-Post seized 20 tons of
drugs. We call on all interested States and international
organizations to step up their cooperation with the
CSTO in combating drugs.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the Delegation of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Alsuwaidi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): We do not have a great deal of time
between now and 2019 to ensure the comprehensive
implementation of the Political Declaration and Plan
of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the
World Drug Problem. We have seen the problem and
its damaging effects on people’s health and well-being
continue to spread, which has led us to convene this
special session in order to review our strategy, improve
on the successes we have achieved and fix the things
that are not working. We are meeting in this Hall to sign
off on a final document (resolution S-30/1, annex) that
represents our shared commitment to confronting the
world drug problem.
The United Arab Emirates has undertaken several
national programmes aimed at dealing with the drug
problem. We have seen a 7 per cent drop in the number
of addicts in 2014 and 10 per cent in 2015. We have
redoubled our operational preventive efforts and have
seen the total amounts seized increase by 9 per cent in
2014 and 15 per cent in 2015. With regard to cooperation

16-112245/33

A/S-30/PV.6

in the fight against drugs, we have contributed to 240
international seizures of 25 tons of drugs and received
the award for the best operational cooperation in 2015.
In the area of the human rights of women and
children, in 2015 we were chosen by consensus
to preside over the Virtual Global Taskforce, an
international alliance designed to protect children from
the dangers of the Internet, in recognition of the ability
and effectiveness of the United Arab Emirates police.
In its most recent ministerial shuffle the Government
appointed a 23-year-old woman as Minister of Youth
Affairs, the youngest in the region and indeed in the
world, as part of its efforts to encourage young people
to participate in decision-making. We have also
established a ministry of happiness and well-being in
accordance with our other policies and the principles of
human rights.
Beyond the principle of the sovereignty of States,
and leaving aside the three conventions that are the
pillars of the international fight against drugs, we
should recall the terrorist aggression in Afghanistan,
the dead and wounded, innocent civilians, women and
children robbed of their lives by terrorists. And yet
a few years ago, some of those here demanded that
such criminals be granted the right to live. The United
Arab Emirates Ministry of Tolerance ensures respect
for others and for their beliefs, faiths, cultures and
religions. We hold dialogues with them and listen to
them. Whether capital punishment should be abolished
or not, we ask others to show us mutual respect for our
religion, faith, ideas and ideology.
In conclusion, I hope that all States, whatever their
individual policies regarding the fight against drugs,
will work to achieve success in combating that scourge.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Dato
Hamdan Abu Bakar, Deputy Minister in the Office of
the Prime Minister of Brunei Darussalam.
Mr. Abu Bakar (Brunei Darussalam): This special
session provides an important opportunity for us to
review the progress made and challenges that remain
in implementing the 2009 Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem. We must take full advantage of our
important forum and work together to tackle the drug
problem, making use of our resources to come up with
new policies and approaches. In doing so, we must also
allow each country to address its own drug problem
6/33

21/04/2016

in a way that fits with its own context and norms and
fully respects the principles of national sovereignty and
territorial integrity as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
It is vital that we act to address the new challenges
and tackle every related issue, especially reducing
supply and demand and ensuring effective law
enforcement. That requires an intensive effort at the
national, subregional, regional and international levels,
with the ultimate goal being to promote the health,
security and well-being of our peoples, their families
and society as a whole, and to safeguard society’s right
to be free of drug abuse.
Brunei Darussalam is fully aware that the
transnational nature of the drug problem means that no
country can avoid it altogether, and Brunei Darussalam
is no exception. In tackling the problem, we have to
work closely with other countries, since it demands
common and shared responsibility at all levels. We are
fully committed to countering the world drug problem
and to implementing the three international drugcontrol conventions. We have adopted a comprehensive
approach that is balanced between strategies for
reducing both supply and demand. To do that, Brunei
Darussalam has put in place a robust and comprehensive
legal, policy and administrative framework.
In deciding the best approach to addressing the drug
problem in each country, we must take into account each
State’s sovereign right, its diverse political, economic,
social and cultural contexts and its social norms. Brunei
Darussalam is relatively drug-free. Only approximately
0.1 per cent of the population is involved with illicit
drugs each year. That has been possible because we
have taken a tough stance on illicit drugs. Our zerotolerance approach to achieving a drug-free country
has worked for us, and we will continue to strive to
keep our country safe from the dangers of illicit drugs
and ensure that they do not reach the public, especially
women and children. We have focused on building a
safe and secure Brunei Darussalam for our people.
We would like to reiterate that we stand with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
embracing a zero-tolerance approach to illicit drugs.
We affirm our belief that the three international drug
conventions should continue to serve as the basis for
global drug policy, and we respect the sovereignty of
each Member State in deciding on and implementing
policies that best cater to its individual needs, based on
16-11224

21/04/2016

A/S-30/PV.6

the unique circumstances and norms of its society. We
want to be part of a drug-free ASEAN.

harm-reduction measures and social reintegration must
be at the core of all our strategies.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our full support
for the Commission on Narcotics Drugs as the main
body and principal policymaking entity of the United
Nations for all drug-related policies and issues, and
we welcome the resolution that we have agreed on and
adopted, entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively
addressing and countering the world drug problem”
(resolution S-30/1, annex).

Romania’s national anti-drug strategy is in full
compliance with the international drug-control
conventions, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and international human rights law. The current
international drug-control framework provides Member
States with the legal instruments and the flexibility that
they need in order to react to current challenges in the
area at the national, regional and international levels.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the delegation of the Republic of Romania.

People who use drugs should be entitled to the
same rights as non-users. We believe that the death
penalty is not the way to limit drug trafficking, and
that we should persist in our efforts to implement better
alternatives to incarceration for drug users and allocate
more resources to measures such as therapeutic justice.
The risks that new psychoactive substances pose to
human health demand that we come up with an effective
response. We must be more flexible in formulating and
implementing evidence-based drug policies built on
respect for human rights. If we are to have more impact
on that issue, we must strengthen our presence around
it and raise awareness at every level of society and in
the media.

Mr. Jinga (Romania): It is a privilege to be here
today to discuss such a crucial turning point for
international drug policy. I would like to congratulate
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs for its preparations
for this special session of the General Assembly.
We welcome the adoption of the outcome document
(resolution S-30/1, annex), which gives momentum to
a renewed approach to our action in this field. It is our
hope that we will continue to discuss key aspects that
can ensure that we develop our drug policies further.
Romania fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
its member States (see A/S-30/PV.1). I would now like
to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
The world drug problem remains a common
and shared responsibility that requires effective and
increased international cooperation. It calls for an
integrated, multidisciplinary and balanced approach
to supply- and demand-reduction policies. As the
Deputy Secretary-General rightly remarked two days
ago (see A/S-30/PV.1), it is important that we listen to
one another and learn from one another’s experiences,
not least about how the issue affects our peoples’ wellbeing. Despite increasing efforts on the part of States,
international organizations, the scientific community
and civil society, the problem continues to pose a serious
threat to public health and safety, and particularly to
children, young people and their families. Human beings
must be at the centre of drug policies. Given the adverse
consequences of drug abuse, it is imperative that we
strengthen measures to reduce the demand for drugs,
especially those that target the younger generation,
by developing comprehensive drug-abuse prevention
programmes. At the same time, treatment and care,

Countering all the various aspects of the world
drug problem requires a firm political commitment to
reducing supply, as the 2009 Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards
an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the
World Drug Problem states. We are now facing a new
trend in the form of the illicit sale and purchase of new
psychoactive substances via the Internet, which has led
to new challenges and risks to human health and safety.
At the same time, we are witnessing the rapid evolution
of a new market — the so-called Darknet — a virtual
place for selling and brokering transactions involving
illicit drugs, new psychoactive substances and other
illicit goods. On top of that, we are still dealing with
the traditional threat posed by heroin and cocaine
trafficking, which continues to require strong
countervailing action on the part of all the relevant
stakeholders. To combat those problems, therefore, we
must combine our law-enforcement efforts and take
advantage of the latest technologies and instruments.
No country can succeed in this struggle on its own.
National law-enforcement agencies and international
bodies such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the International Narcotics Control Board, the

16-112247/33

A/S-30/PV.6

World Health Organization and other United Nations
and regional entities must strengthen their cooperation
in order to respond properly to the growing trends in
the illicit sale and purchase of controlled substances.
It is crucial that we improve our mechanisms for
sharing information and data relating to the activities
of organized criminal groups, because sharing
information continuously and rapidly is key to effective
drug law enforcement.
Romania is fully committed to combating this
global challenge by working closely with partners all
over the world. We strongly believe that international
cooperation with all the relevant stakeholders is now
more essential than ever.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Delcy Rodríguez Gómez, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Ms. Rodríguez Gómez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Our subject today is
unquestionably relevant to every society in the world.
When we consider the history behind the convening of
this special session, beginning with the establishment,
in 1946, of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
barely a year after the creation and founding of our
important Organization, the United Nations, and look
at the conventions that have been adopted on drugs
in 1961, 1972 and 1988, we see a topic that gives us
grounds for reflection and for concern. We know that
the development of a security policy to address the
drug issue, with increasing militarization, has led to a
regrettable failure in combating a scourge that assails
entire societies.
Only considering that drugs pose a threat to the
security of both individual countries and the world as a
whole has led us to ignore a public health problem. That
mistaken approach — and this must be condemned
from here at the General Assembly — has led to foreign
intervention and the undermining the rule of law and
national sovereignty in the name of prosecuting the
so-called war against drugs. In recent years, under the
Bolivarian revolution, we have been able to say that
Venezuela is unquestionably not a producing country,
and we do not have a trafficking problem. We are also
not a consumer country. We are not a country where
people launder the financial profits of drug-trafficking,
nor does our financial system profit from such
activities. The United Nations itself declared Venezuela
to be a country free of illicit drug crops. We have in
8/33

21/04/2016

place a national plan to counter drugs that puts the
human person first, stressing democracy and human
rights. That approach helps us to ensure the protection
of essential human rights and to deal with the publichealth harm caused by the scourge of drugs.
When we look at the failed war-like approach, we
see an attempts to militarize the problem in certain
countries and to invade and occupy those countries.
One need only look at the case of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan was invaded, and yet since that time
opium cultivation has increased eightfold. That is really
food for thought. We have to rethink the entire model,
our entire approach. Drugs have to be regarded as a
public-health problem. In the Union of South American
Nations and the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States we have adopted a vision based on
full respect for democracy and human rights, We must
see drugs as a human and public-health problem.
Venezuela would like to take this opportunity to
reject the politicization of the sensitive issue of drugs.
We have to transcend the failure that the warlike
policy of the war on drugs has led to. We have to reject
the double standards that are applied by imperialist
countries in this area when they claim to be fighting
drugs by invading countries. They thereby undermine
the rule of law and violate the legitimate authority
of countries. The imperialist countries apply double
standards, and money from drug trafficking is being
laundered in those countries. We have to focus on respect
for the individual and human rights. One cannot, under
the pretext of promoting development, undermine the
justice system and the rule of law. We have to move
away from the 51-year-old policy of the war on drugs.
It has failed. We must abandon the warlike policy of
the war on drugs and adopt a truly democratic policy
based on strict respect for human rights, so that we
can actually move ahead and take care of this publichealth problem.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the delegation of the Republic of Honduras.
Mr. Mejía (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): Honduras
endorses the statement made by the representative of
the delegation of the Dominican Republic on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (see A/S-30/PV.1).
We appreciate the holding of this special session of
the General Assembly on the world drug problem with
a view to combining efforts and tackling energetically,
16-11224

21/04/2016

and also in solidarity, the dreadful scourge of drugs
with consequences of incalculable magnitude for
all humankind.
It is incontestable that the drug phenomenon has
a global component. However, each country has its
own historic, geographic, social and political reality
that shapes its individual approach. Honduras, a
mountainous country of impenetrable forests and
unpredictable floods, is one of the countries most
affected by the illicit drug trafficking in the Western
hemisphere, and its rugged terrain lends itself to serving
as a strategic staging ground for criminal enterprise.
This important event provides us with an
opportunity to present the reality of our country to
those present here, given its complex nature. It urges us
to reflect and to continue to strengthen our institutions.
The firm resolve of Honduras is in keeping with
the appeal of the leaders of the region to carry out a
process of change in our strategies concerning the illicit
trafficking in and consumption of harmful substances
in order to enhance and intensify joint efforts at the
national, regional and international levels, based on the
principle of a common but differentiated responsibility.
The State of Honduras seeks to continue to develop
and strengthen its comprehensive public-health
programmes, taking into account the gender perspective
and the inclusion of vulnerable groups in the framework
of ensuring full respect for human rights. On that count,
our country is committed to putting the protection of
the right to life and the integrity of the human being as
its principal objectives of its drug policy.
We therefore need to be aware that this problem
represents a huge cost for countries that serve as
transit points for the traffic in illicit drugs between
drug-producing and drug-consuming countries. That
translates into a considerable number of violent deaths
generated by the ongoing conflicts between organized
criminal groups, coupled with the high cost of the
resources required to combat those groups.
We must remember that Honduras is a signatory to
the United Nations conventions on transnational crime
and on drugs —in this particular case, drug trafficking.
In that regard, civil society plays a significant role
in shaping the international drug policy and the
decision-making processes. Our emphasis in the fight
against drugs therefore has two components:, namely,
targeting domestic criminal structures and focusing

A/S-30/PV.6

on the fight against corruption, which is rooted in the
same phenomenon.
In that regard, over the past two years we have
extradited ringleaders and dismantled criminal
structures; reduced the levels of violence and
insecurity through the creation and strengthening of
Government institutions mandated to combat drug
trafficking; approved legal norms; decreased illicit drug
trafficking by establishing land, air and sea shields;
and identified and destroyed clandestine air strips and
dismantled laboratories.
In the educational field, we have trained thousands
of children, teachers and parents in the prevention of
the presence of licit and illicit drugs in schools. We
have established treatment and rehabilitation centres
for the comprehensive care of addicts, including also a
detoxification unit, among other actions. However, we
recognize that much more needs to be done.
With regard to the Political Declaration and Plan
of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the
World Drug Problem, adopted in 2009, difficulties
have arisen in its implementation. We are confident,
however, that this special session of the General
Assembly will produce innovative proposals and ideas
with regard to the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
We believe that the monitoring and constant
evaluation of the functioning of national organizations
related to the drug problem should be accompanied by
transparency in the use of international cooperation
funds, which form a permanent component in efforts
to strengthen the 2009 Action Plan and serve as the
cornerstone in the development of a comprehensive and
balanced strategy to counter the world drug problem.
With regard to the fight against money-laundering
and the promotion of judicial cooperation, it is
imperative for the State of Honduras to constantly update
its jurisprudence in that area and train personnel for
the analysis and repression of that crime. That includes
greater international cooperation in tax matters and a
coordinated fight against illicit financial flows.
In conclusion, allow me to recall, as stated last
year in the General Assembly by the President of the
Republic, Juan Orlando Hernández Alvarado,
“Honduras produces and consumes practically
no drugs. We are a transit country. Unfortunately,

16-112249/33

A/S-30/PV.6

we provide only the battlefield and the dead.”
(A/69/PV.7, p.20)
I have briefly highlighted some earlier approaches
in what is a common problem for all States meeting
here in order to find the best possible solutions for the
benefit of humankind.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the delegation of the State of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this special session on the world drug problem. The
drug problem is among the most important challenges
facing the world, and the international community has
made strenuous efforts to address it. The strategies
undertaken by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) have achieved considerable
and commendable results. Drug abuse and the illicit
trade in drugs has had catastrophic results on social
and economic stability, sustainable development,
the security of States and the rule of law. They also
represent a real threat to public health, particularly the
health of children and youth, and it behoves us to make
extra efforts and promote international cooperation and
coordination to address this scourge.
Drug-related activities and the impunity of offenders
are reasons for serious concern. They undermine the
rule of law and threaten the stability of societies. We
find it disconcerting that money is being extracted
from illegitimate activities relating to drugs and that
wealth from those sources has been used to support
terrorism and promote illicit trafficking in persons, as
well as arms smuggling. We must take the necessary
measures on the bilateral and national levels to address
that problem. Such efforts should be accompanied
by economic and social policies that concentrate on
the welfare of the citizen, providing health care and
on raising awareness, developing international and
regional cooperation, sharing responsibilities and
promoting efforts with international organizations
and civil-society organizations, in accordance and in
fulfilment of the letter and spirit of the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances
The State of Qatar continues to expend efforts
at the regional and transnational levels to address
this problem, including through the exchange of
information and by building capacities, providing legal
assistance and undertaking joint investigative efforts
10/33

21/04/2016

to address the problem. Qatar provides security and
stability to its society and works to protect it from
the risks of drugs through preventive programmes,
particularly among youth, and through education and
awareness-raising programmes aimed at countering
a scourge that threatens to undermine the country’s
public health system.
The Doha Declaration, adopted by the thirteenth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, hosted by Qatar in 2015, is a step
forward towards the realization of criminal justice and
the promotion of the rule of law at the national and
international levels.
In conclusion, we would like to renew our
commitment to what we have already agreed on, namely,
ongoing cooperation aimed at achieving practical
results in combating the drug problem. We would like
to continue our efforts at the bilateral and international
levels and through our membership in UNODC. We
would be remiss if we failed to express our gratitude
to UNODC and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs as
the main bodies in the United Nations entrusted with
combating drugs. We call for the promotion of the
role of those two bodies and for strengthening their
capacity so that they can provide technical assistance
to Member States.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the delegation of the Republic of Namibia.
Mr. Maruta (Namibia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the board tasked by the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs to engage in a process aimed at reaching
consensus so as to finalize the outcome document of
the special session, entitled “Our joint commitment
to effectively addressing and countering the world
drug problem” (resolution S-30/1, annex). The high
attendance at this special session and the large number
of States gathered here are testimony to the fact that the
drug problem is a global one and must be addressed in
a holistic and comprehensive manner.
This meeting is significant to all of us here and to
the international community at large, as it presents a
collective opportunity for Member States to assess the
progress made in implementing the Political Declaration
and Plan of Action on International Cooperation
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter
the World Drug Problem, as endorsed by the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session in 2009.
16-11224

21/04/2016

During the fifty-ninth session many Member States
highlighted the issue of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, democracy, equality, the right to health and a
people-centred approach to addressing the world drug
problem. Namibia takes note of the fact that the outcome
document that was adopted here at the beginning of
this special session on the world drug problem does
not reflect the issue of human rights as it relates to
the death penalty. Namibia calls upon Member States
to abolish the use of the death penalty for drug-related
offences, if it is provided for in their national penal
codes. It urges Member States that still have the death
penalty in their statutes to consider abolishing it, or to
put it under moratorium.
Namibia further reiterates its support for resolution
70/181, which, inter alia, requests the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs to produce a short, substantive, concise
and action-oriented document comprising a set of
operational recommendations, based upon a review of
the implementation of the 2009 Political Declaration
and Plan of Action, including an assessment of
achievements, as well as of ways to address longstanding and emerging challenges in countering the
world drug problem, within the framework of the
three international drug-control conventions and other
relevant United Nations instruments.
Namibia is fully aware that the world drug problem
remains a common and shared responsibility that should
be addressed in a multilateral setting through effective
and increased international cooperation. It demands
an integrated, multidisciplinary, mutually reinforcing,
balanced and comprehensive approach to supplyand demand-reduction strategies. We reaffirm our
unwavering commitment to ensuring that all aspects of
demand reduction, supply reduction and international
cooperation are addressed in full conformity with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, international conventions and protocols and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The illegal trade in drugs such as cannabis, cocaine
and synthetic stimulants is a threat to Namibian
society. The rapid globalization of the drug trade over
the past decade has shown that no country is immune
to the scourge of drugs. However, Namibia has put
in place strategies to deal with the phenomenon. No
illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances takes place in Namibia. However, the use of
illicit drugs, with cannabis being the most commonly
used drug, has increased in recent years. Namibia

A/S-30/PV.6

has now changed from being a transit route for drug
smugglers to a consumer country, where an increasing
number of people are being arrested for trafficking of
various types of drugs, such as dagga, cocaine, crack
cocaine and heroin, for domestic use.
Namibia reiterates its commitment to ensuring the
availability of controlled substances for medical and
scientific purposes, while preventing their diversion,
abuse and trafficking, and emphasizes that one of the
main aspects of efforts to improve availability is to ensure
their affordability. Furthermore, Namibia notes with
concern the simultaneous unaffordability of pain-relief
drugs, in developing countries in particular, owing to
the high prices set by the pharmaceutical companies.
In collaboration with international and regional
organizations, such as INTERPOL, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the
Southern African Development Community and the
Southern African Regional Police Chiefs Cooperation
Organization, the Namibian police conduct joint
operations specifically designed to combat all forms of
cross-border drug-related crime. Those interventions
are important in our efforts to deal with the issue of
demand and supply reduction and to ensure that the
population is safe and protected from illicit drugs,
which, in most cases, contribute to crime, especially
gender-based violence.
In conclusion, we appeal to UNODC, within the
framework of its global mandate, for the necessary
support for capacity-building and technical assistance
to Member States, at their request.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Cooperation and of the Burkinabé Abroad of
Burkina Faso.
Mr. Barry (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the delegation of Burkina Faso, I would like
take the opportunity afforded to me by this forum to
offer my warmest congratulations to Mr. Lykketoft
on his election to preside over the thirtieth special
session of the General Assembly, on the world drug
problem. I also wish to congratulate the other members
of the Bureau. I assure them of the full support of my
delegation in the conduct of our work.
My delegation endorses the statements delivered
by the representatives of the Sudan and of Morocco,
respectively, on behalf of the Group of African States

16-1122411/33

A/S-30/PV.6

21/04/2016

and of the International Organization of la Francophonie
(see A/S-30/PV.2). We also take note of the report of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its preparatory work
for this session (see A/S-30/4).

extremism. That is our belief, and it is the conviction
of the Group of Five of the Sahel region, which group
includes Mauritania, Mali, the Niger, Chad and, of
course, my country, Burkina Faso.

Burkina Faso welcomes the adoption, on
25 September 2015, of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), especially Goal 3, target
5, which reads “strengthen the prevention and treatment
of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and
harmful use of alcohol”, in which drug abuse was made
a world priority. This special session on the world
drug problem remains an important framework for
examining the progress achieved by all parties involved
in the fight against drugs. In that regard, I note the
relevance of resolutions 69/200 and 69/201, whereby the
Assembly mandated that the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs should lead the process of preparations for this
special session.

The 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action
strongly recommends that States promote international
judicial cooperation. In order to strengthen such
cooperation, Burkina Faso and the countries in our
subregion and, indeed, throughout the world, must pool
their efforts and work together in synergy. We believe
that greater international cooperation will enable us to
better confront the obstacles that remain in the fight
against drugs. Burkina Faso is involved in various
initiatives under the auspices of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and the results obtained
have been very encouraging.

Because the fight against illicit drug trafficking
raises the need for the common and shared responsibility
of all States, it requires a global, coordinated and
integrated response, supported by greater international
and regional cooperation. Within the context of
the effective implementation of the 2009 Political
Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, Burkina
Faso has initiated and executed the following steps.
On the legislative level, we have strengthened
legislation towards the adoption of a law on a customs
code. That law uncompromisingly prohibits trafficking
in narcotics. At the institutional level, Burkina Faso
has created, at the service level within the police, the
gendarmerie and customs, specialized units that have
already carried out operations involving major drug
seizures. In the same vein, we have strengthened
the capacity of our judicial entities to reinforce the
fight against illicit drug trafficking, which cannot be
effective without the organization of a reliable and
trustworthy judiciary.
The revenue generated by that trafficking
constitutes a financial windfall for other trafficking
arrangements used in other criminal activities. That has
been the case with regard to terrorism in the Sahel and
Saharan region, where my country is located. Drugs
fuel terrorism. In plain language, that scourge fuels
the other scourge. The fight against drug trafficking in
the region is also a fight against terrorism and violent
12/33

Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate that
my country stands ready to work in synergy with other
States to build a world of peace, security and justice,
free from the scourge of drugs.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the delegation of the Republic of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, allow me to take this unique
opportunity to express to all Member States the deep
gratitude of the Government and the people of my
country for the solidarity that they have shown in
connection with the tragedy that we have recently
experienced as a result of a powerful earthquake
that has taken human lives and caused widespread
destruction. I wish to publicly thank the United Nations
system and the representatives of the United Nations
Development Programme, especially Ms. Jessica Faieta
and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, the principal representative
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, who immediately deployed an assistance
mechanism for my country, which won our hearts
and gratitude.
While that phenomenon, which caused deaths and
tragedies, was an act of nature, today, at this special
session, we are discussing another cause of death, but
one that we can prevent — the phenomenon of drugs.
In that regard, Latin America is certainly the region
in the world that has most felt the impact of criminal
drug trafficking. The widespread violence in many
cities and towns in our region is the result of the illegal
competition among criminal organizations to control
the drug market. We also suffer the environmental
16-11224

21/04/2016

A/S-30/PV.6

degradation caused by programmes for the eradication
of illicit drug crops.

reaffirm our stance in favour of the abolition of the
death penalty, including for drug-related offences.

The traditional international drug-response
strategy has not delivered the expected results, As
such, at this point we need to rethink that approach. It is
undeniable that no matter how strong our commitment
to reduce supply, no matter how many illicit-drug-crop
eradication programmes are carried out, wherever there
is demand for drugs, there will be someone willing to
satisfy that demand.

We believe that comprehensive prevention and
rehabilitation, without neglecting the regulation and
control of activities linked to controlled substances,
should be the main areas of focus of a new regulatory
body. In the same way, we continue to promote sustained
and sustainable economic development for populations
at risk of being co-opted by drug trafficking through
our national preventive alternative-development policy.

Furthermore, as long as no reference is made
to the control of money-laundering in developed
countries — where there is the most demand for illicit
substances — the nations of the South will continue
to bear the brunt of the prohibitionist policy of the socalled war on drugs. In that context, there is a hidden
intent to impose the hegemony that has transformed the
countries of the North into the arbiters of democracy
and transparency, and which has led the countries of
the South to be listed as so-called money-launderers,
although we know that 90 per cent of the dirty money is
laundered in the banks of the North. That is why Ecuador
considers it vital that the international community make
an effort to explore new approaches and alternatives
to the prohibitionist and punitive model developed
in the last century. The largest consumer countries
should strengthen their efforts and fully assume their
responsibility for the perpetuation of the problem.

As part of the social transformation currently
under way in Latin America, we are maintaining our
serious and determined commitment to eradicate
poverty, reduce inequalities and build more equitable
societies — where debate and the reformulation of drug
policy cannot be absent. That entails recognition of the
reality of the structural conditions of violence, poverty
and destitution as the theatre within which the illicit
trafficking problem thrives, leaving little chance for the
most vulnerable populations and the State to guarantee
the peace and good living of its habitants. As a result
of that process, the Constitution of the Republic of
Ecuador has decriminalized the use and consumption
of drugs, as we view them as a matter of public health.

We reiterate what we have expressed at various
international events and forums: the drug policy
established by the United Nations is in need of profound
change, given the results obtained in the framework of
the international conventions in force. We believe that
by letting ourselves be guided by scientific evidence,
pragmatism and full respect for the national sovereignty
of States, together we can build new and better drug
policies that focus on health and the prevention of
consumption, policies that place the individual — rather
than the substances — at the centre of the formulation
and implementation of policies. In that regard, we also
recognize the importance of harm-reduction policies as
effective measures to reduce the health and social risks
associated with drug use.
Ecuador, aware of our international commitments,
will continue to develop a policy based on unrestricted
respect for human rights and with a cross-cutting,
balanced and gender-based approach. We categorically

In conclusion, my country is convinced of the
urgent need for a radical change in the approach to
the social phenomenon of drugs. When implementing
such policies, priority should be given to human rights,
which is unavoidable at this point. That will be possible
when, beyond the question of will, we begin with a
genuine solution based on drug-policy reform and the
end of the persecution of the nations of the South. As
I said, the recent earthquake was a natural cause of
death. In terms of the drug problem, the prevention of
major disasters in our countries rests in our hands.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Head of the delegation of the Arab Republic Egypt.
Mr. El Ghoul (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
a great pleasure to be here today in order to address
the activities of the special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem. We have been
able to highlight international cooperation based on the
principle of shared responsibility.
The drug problem affects our efforts to achieve
socioeconomic development and destroys the social
fabric of States. I would like to extend my special
thanks to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and

16-1122413/33

A/S-30/PV.6

its technical secretariat for all their efforts in the
successful preparation for this session. That includes
the adoption of the final document, entitled “Our joint
commitment to effectively addressing and countering
the world drug problem”, during the fifty-ninth session
of the Commission held in Vienna this past March and
now embodied in resolution S-30/1.
There is no doubt that the implementation of the
operational recommendations in resolution S-30/1
will be an important step in helping Member States
to achieve their objectives, in accordance with the
2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.
That is why we have been complying with the three
international drug conventions, which represent the
cornerstone for the international system to combat
the drug problem, while maintaining respect for the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular national sovereignty, the territorial integrity
of States and non-intervention in the internal affairs
of countries. In that respect, my country would like to
say that those important documents would suffice, if
we can fully implement them in good faith and without
selectivity, to achieve a world free of drugs and societies
free of drug abuse.
In the same way, we must not miss this opportunity
to confirm the pivotal role played by the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, especially during the past year.
It is the body responsible for ensuring that Member
States implement United Nations drug policies, the
recommendations concerning our joint commitment to
effectively address and counter the world drug problem,
as well as the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of
Action. We think the Commission plays an important
role in the implementation of the recommendations
in that document. We are therefore confident that the
Commission will be able to achieve its task successfully
with the help of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, which has the leadership role in terms of
addressing the world drug problem.
Egypt was among the first countries to understand
the danger of the drug problem. It issued the first
legislation criminalizing the planting of opium in 1800.
It also established a special system to combat drugs
in 1929. We participated in the initial establishment
of a system of control by the international Advisory
Committee on the Traffic in Opium and other
Dangerous Drugs in the 1930s. Egypt has acceded to all
14/33

21/04/2016

the relevant international conventions, beginning with
The Hague International Opium Convention in 1912,
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, and
the 1994 Arab Convention against Illicit Use of and
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.
The changes and developments at the international
level in the fight against drugs have led to increased
concerns on the part of the international community
in addressing the problem, indicating that there
need to be specific changes with regard to strategy
in dealing with the supply and demand of drugs.
At the same time, my country has felt the danger of
the problem at the international and regional levels
and its negative effects on society in different areas.
Egypt has adopted a comprehensive strategy to combat
drugs, aimed at combating illicit drug trafficking,
combating the importation of drugs and eliminating the
centres of criminal activity, including that involving
precursors — especially Tramadol — as well as
increasing international cooperation by participating
in all regional and international conferences and by
entering into various treaty arrangements with Member
States. Within the framework of that strategy, we have
paid particularly balanced attention to reducing supply
and demand by establishing a national council to combat
addiction in 1986, implementing general policies and
finding ways to treat and prevent addiction. We have
also established a special system for raising awareness
that works with governmental and non-governmental
entities in order to reduce demand.
Because we believe that the drug problem is
international in nature and has dangerous effects on
societies and friends and that international cooperation
is important, given that no country can face the drug
problem alone, Egypt’s machinery to combat drugs has
cooperated with numerous countries from 2014 to 2015.
The agenda of this special session includes
discussing the important issue of combating drugs,
indicating the desire of the international community to
confront this international problem and find effective
mechanisms and new ways tor ensure cooperation
among States throughout the world. Our hope is for a
world free of drugs. That cannot be achieved through
individual States’ efforts, but through a collective and
sincere effort on the part of States through mechanisms
provided by the existing conventions. We are confident
that the special session will strengthen our common
16-11224

21/04/2016

efforts to achieve a better future for our people by
effectively combating the world drug problem.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I shall
now make a statement in my national capacity as the
Permanent Representative of Benin.
The President of the Republic of Benin, His
Excellency Mr. Patrice Talon, invited to take part in the
special session of the General Assembly on the world
drug problem, has asked me to represent him. He sends
his fraternal and amicable greetings to his peers and the
various senior figures who have convened in New York
on this occasion.
In carrying out the task that he has entrusted to me,
I would first like to express my warm congratulations
to the President of the General Assembly and the
competent bodies of the United Nations for having so
well organized this special session, which represents
a turning point in international efforts to combat the
scourge of drugs. This special session of the General
Assembly offers us a unique opportunity to review
the progress made in implementing the 2009 Political
Declaration and the Plan of Action with regard to
international cooperation aimed at developing an
integrated and balanced strategy encompassing research
and appropriate solutions to the challenges posed by the
world drug problem.
In 2015, the international community adopted a
new framework for sustainable development focused
on human beings, which aims to eradicate poverty on
Earth within 15 years, while leaving no one behind.
Through the adoption of the Sustainable Development
Goals, Member States reaffirmed their commitment to
“a world of universal respect for human rights and
human dignity, the rule of law, justice, equality and
non-discrimination” (resolution 70/1, para. 8).
In the light of those principles, we must now evaluate
our actions and the measures taken, so that we can
assess the world drug problem to date and recalibrate
our strategies and policies at all levels to confront the
problem, while developing a comprehensive approach
on the way forward and the measures that need to be
implemented in order to meet the challenges that we have
identified. Like those who preceded us, we note with
concern that, seven years after the commitments made
in Vienna to combat illicit drugs and despite the efforts
and progress made by numerous States, international
organizations and civil society, the drug problem

A/S-30/PV.6

continues to pose a serious threat to the rule of law and
the health, security and the well-being of humankind,
in particular the well-being of young people.
According to data provided by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for
2013, measurable progress has indeed been made in
controlling the use of illicit drugs, in comparison with
the statistics of the previous year. However, when
we take a more comprehensive view in analysing the
data, including in particular the impact of drugs on
security and sustainable development, we get a more
varied picture, with mixed results for the efforts that
have been carried out. African countries in general,
and those of West Africa in particular, have acute
vulnerabilities relating to the drug problem that have
socioeconomic, health and security impacts and, more
important, threaten the very existence of certain States
of the region. Those countries are characterized by high
demographic growth rates, and their populations, which
are mainly made up of young people, are faced with a
lack of professional qualifications, unemployment and
uncertain prospects for the future. Drugs, transnational
organized crime associated with radical ideologies,
violent extremism and terrorism find fertile ground in
those areas.
UNODC has on repeated occasions sounded
the alarm in its recent reports so as to alert the
international community with regard to the increasing
pressure affecting West Africa. These phenomena have
increased to such a degree that they are a major obstacle
to governance and the stability of States.
The trafficking of illegal drugs threatens national
cohesion and sustains violence and the underground
and mafia economy. The connections established by
the major international crime, arms trafficking and
terrorism networks, as well as money-laundering, are
genuine challenges to be met by our country.
In an attempt to respond to these threats, since the
1980s my country, Benin, has taken concrete measures
by establishing a legal and institutional framework
to ensure control of illicit drugs. Several laws and
regulations have been drawn up and administrative
structures and interministerial committees have
been established, including the Interministerial
Committee to Combat the Abuse of Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances. In July 2000, an anti-drug
policy was drawn up, based on a national master plan

16-1122415/33

A/S-30/PV.6

and a national action plan for the implementation of
strategies under the national policies.
In this context, Benin has ratified the three United
Nations conventions — the 1961 Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs as amended by the 1972 Protocol, the
1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances and the
1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. It has
also ratified the Convention against Corruption, the
1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. Benin has also signed the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, of 2009.

21/04/2016

the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which is of great importance
given the dynamics developing in the area owing to
the combination of transnational crime and violent
religious extremist movements.
Critical evaluation of the management of the drug
problem in my country has exposed shortcomings that
call for improving the strategy to fight this scourge.
Benin is working to design a new integrated national
policy document to fight illicit drugs, which should
help to establish a new vision further integrating
the dimensions related to regional and international
cooperation. In that regard, Benin is seeking technical
assistance from its partners, because it wants to
capitalize on the experiences of other countries to
refine our strategy.

Nonetheless, Benin is aware that it cannot succeed
in this struggle by itself. That is why my country is
fully committed, together with its neighbours, to all
subregional and regional efforts aimed at providing our
group of countries with integrated strategies. Benin
participated in drawing up and adopting the Political
Declaration on the Prevention of Drug Abuse, Illicit
Drug Trafficking and Organized Crimes in West
Africa, as promoted by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), and adhered to the
regional action plan to address the growing problem
of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug
addiction in West Africa.

In conclusion, allow me to recall the principled
position of my country against capital punishment in
general and against the imposition of the death penalty
for matters linked to drug trafficking in particular. The
use of the death penalty violates the provisions of article
6, paragraph 2, of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. We therefore encourage all States
to identify in their positive law alternative penalties for
those who are found guilty of such trafficking.

In that regard, my country is grateful for the
support UNODC has provided to the region in the
implementation of the regional action plan through
technical assistance for the West Africa Coast
Initiative, jointly with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, INTERPOL and the United Nations Office
for West Africa. Thanks to the implementation of that
project, regional cooperation among the detection and
repression services has been strengthened and the units
fighting transnational crime are operational in many
countries. The support of UNODC in the creation of the
network of central authorities and prosecutors in West
Africa is a crucial aspect of cooperation and mutual
legal assistance.

In accordance with General Assembly resolution
58/314, of 1 July 2004, I call on His Excellency
Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas Auza, Apostolic
Nuncio and Permanent Observer of the Holy See.

Benin calls on the United Nations, through
UNODC, to continue to support the implementation
of the ECOWAS regional action plan by helping to
mobilize appropriate and predictable resources to
support the efforts undertaken. We must welcome
16/33

(spoke in English)
I now resume my functions as Acting President of
the General Assembly.

Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this special session on the
world drug problem and wishes to thank all those who
participated in the preparatory process leading to this
special session.
The Holy See firmly rejects the use of illegal drugs
and the legalization of the use of narcotics. In his
address to the thirty-first edition of the International
Drug Enforcement Conference, Pope Francis affirmed
that a reduction in the spread and influence of drug
addiction will not be achieved by a liberalization of
drug use; rather, it is necessary to confront the problems
underlying the use of these drugs by promoting greater
justice, educating young people in the values that
build up life in society, and accompanying those in
16-11224

21/04/2016

difficulty and giving them hope for the future. For
the Holy See, attempts, however limited, to legalize
so-called recreational drugs are not only questionable
from a legislative standpoint, but they fail to produce
the desired effect.
In addition, His Holiness Pope Francis insisted
that the fight against drugs cannot be won with drugs.
Drugs are an evil and with evil there can be neither
surrender nor compromise. In saying “no” to every
type of drug use, we must at the same time say “yes” to
life, “yes” to love, “yes” to others, “yes” to education,
“yes” to greater job opportunities. If we say “yes” to all
these things, there will be no room for illicit drugs, for
alcohol abuse, for other forms of addiction.
The Holy See cannot emphasize enough the
importance of the family as the cornerstone of
prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, reintegration and
health strategies. The family forms the very basis of
society. When a member is addicted, the whole family
suffers. The grave consequences of substance abuse by
family members lead in so many cases to imbalance
in household relationships and place severe strain on
family life. The negative effect of illicit drug use on the
family extends to the community and leads ultimately
to the destabilization of civil society.
Research continually reinforces the key role that
the family plays in the fight against drug abuse, as it
confirms that the core principles of social interaction
are learned in the home. Those children who have
nurturing families generally receive the education
necessary to help them say “no” to illicit drugs. The
scourges associated with the production and trafficking
of illegal drugs exist because of the demand of addicted
individuals. Therefore, educating our children and
young people about the harm of drug abuse is one
important element in the fight against drugs on the
demand side. Even within families with strong ties in
communities living harmoniously and peacefully, some
individuals sadly do fall into drug abuse. They, too, need
the support and care of their family and community.
Not all crimes related to illicit drugs are of equal
gravity. International drug traffickers, local pushers
and drug users have to be treated differently according
to the principle of proportionality. Disproportionate
responses would be against the spirit of justice and
would not help in the rehabilitation of those who have
become addicted to illicit drugs.

A/S-30/PV.6

The drug problem and its related evils transcend
borders and affect citizens worldwide. Hence
international cooperation towards an integrated and
balanced strategy is required in order to counter them.
The most basic understanding of human dignity compels
the international community, particularly through the
norms and mechanisms of international law, to do all
that it can to protect all citizens of the world from the
scourge of illicit drugs.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
62/78 of 6 December 2007, I now call on the observer of
the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf.
Mr. Al-Zahrani (Cooperation Council for the Arab
States of the Gulf) (spoke in Arabic): I am honoured
to speak on behalf of the members of the Cooperation
Council of the Arab States of the Gulf.
I would like to thank representatives for the work
they have done in preparing the outcome document
(resolution S-30/1, annex). We shall work together
with the international community to ensure a positive
outcome for this special session with regard to our
common responsibility to combat the world drug
problem. We also appreciate the part played by the
United Nations in combating drugs through the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
Vienna, as well as the training programme and technical
support it provides to States.
The States of the Cooperation Council of the
States of the Arabian Gulf have carefully studied
the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
which is the document on how to tackle the issue of
drugs at the global level. We would like to assure the
Assembly that we will continue to implement the Plan
for 2009 to 2019, which was adopted in the Political
Declaration. We will fully discharge our obligations
under the three international conventions on narcotic
drugs and all other instruments relating to the problem.
I also assure the Assembly that we greatly appreciate
the work carried out by the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, which is the body par excellence on developing
strategies and inputs related to the world drug problem.
The countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council
have always been pioneers in the area of providing
protection against drugs. We have developed plans for
how to address this problem as part of our integrated
strategies to achieve peace, security and the economic

16-1122417/33

A/S-30/PV.6

well-being of our citizens. Accordingly, we in the Gulf
Cooperation Council attach special importance, like all
other countries in the world, to tackling the problem
and reducing the supply and demand of narcotic drugs
and other psychoactive substances.
Drug abuse has increased in recent years for many
different reasons, including greater production of
crops that are used to produce illicit drugs throughout
the world. In the Gulf Cooperation Council, we have
worked closely with international organizations to
develop balanced national strategies to combat the
scourge of drugs and reduce supply and demand,
which are so harmful to our societies. We will continue
our work to that end, which will also help us address
terrorism, extreme violence and money-laundering.
However, international cooperation is needed to tackle
those problems successfully.
Illicit trafficking is a capital offence under our
laws, in accordance with the 1988 United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances. We have done our utmost
in the Gulf Cooperation Council to promote bilateral
and international efforts to stamp out drug trafficking
and related crimes. We established the Criminal
Information Center to Combat Drugs, which has its
headquarters in Doha. We therefore have a single
body for addressing narcotic drugs and other, illegal
psychoactive substances.
We regret that trafficking in illegal drugs, which
has a deleterious effect on human beings, appears to be
increasing. It is hindering the full implementation of the
three international conventions. Every State is sovereign
and can enact its own laws. There have been repeated
requests to abolish the death penalty for certain crimes.
The death penalty is proportionate to the crime because
of the crime’s extremely devastating consequences. We
believe in a common and diversified responsibility.
In conclusion, allow me to say that we appreciate
the work carried out by UNODC and the International
Narcotics Control Board. We also appreciate the
regional efforts the United Nations is making to combat
the scourge of drugs.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 48/2, of 13 October 1993, I now call on the
observer for the Economic Cooperation Organization.
Mr.
Sabzevari
(Economic
Cooperation
Organization): It is a great pleasure for me to represent
18/33

21/04/2016

the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) at
the General Assembly’s special session on the world
drug problem.
The outcome document of this important special
session (resolution S-30/1, annex) has given a role to
regional undertakings in the implementation of its
operational recommendations on addressing the global
drug menace, which is of great relevance to the ECO
region, which is one of the most drug-affected regions
in the world, in the areas not only of drug demand and
supply but also of transit and trafficking.
ECO is an intergovernmental regional organization
that, in the past three decades, has offered a regional
platform for enhancing the economic growth, prosperity
and welfare of its 10 member States and their peoples.
With a territory of 8 million square kilometres and
450 million inhabitants, ECO is a region that neighbours
on China, Europe, Russia and the Persian Gulf. ECO
has developed a wide range of regional cooperation
frameworks in various economic and social sectors
whose success depends on having an environment at the
national and regional level that is conducive to success.
The world drug problem continues to threaten
the regional viability of economic development and
social welfare in some parts of the ECO region. That
is why ECO member States, while collectively striving
for enhanced economic development, have given
due attention to the need to address the challenges
associated with the drug problem.
The ECO Secretary General, in his statement at
the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, eloquently elaborated on how we in the ECO
secretariat see the coming years after this special
session. I would like to inform the special session that
ECO has already developed frameworks, partnerships
and networking within the region and with the
international community, in line with the objectives
of the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action.
Those initiatives also support the implementation of
the operational recommendations of this session’s
outcome document in our region, including in the areas
of supply reduction and law enforcement as well as
alternative development.
A European Union-funded project on the fight
against trafficking was recently implemented through
collaboration with agencies such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization, where capacity-building and
16-11224

21/04/2016

A/S-30/PV.6

technical-assistance programmes have been conducted
in various sectors and corners of the region. ECO
member States have also adopted collective measures
in the areas of law enforcement and supply and demand
reduction. ECO is in the process of establishing an ECO
police organization, which we are calling ECOPOL, as
well as a regional centre for anti-corruption cooperation.
Moreover, the Attorneys General of the ECO member
States have recently embarked on collective attempts
to establish regional frameworks for judicial and legal
assistance cooperation. Some regional platforms for
drug-related data exchange and analysis have also
been developed.

INTERPOL fully welcomes the introductory
remarks by the President of the General Assembly,
the Under-Secretary-General, the Chair of the special
session’s Board, and the many Member States that have
mentioned the link between drugs and organized crime
and corruption as well as the link to human trafficking
and terrorism. Building operational capacity and
providing assistance to law enforcement in order to
effectively tackle the world drug problem must be
done strategically and globally, combining frontline
enforcement and intelligence gathering. For those
purposes, it is crucial that all actors truly work together
in a collaborative process.

ECO is now developing its 10-year vision document
addressing regional socioeconomic realities and needs
in line with the global agenda, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular
the Sustainable Development Goals. Opportunities
emerging from the implementation of the outcomes
of this special session may also be utilized by ECO
to support its member States in realizing the ECO 10year vision.

INTERPOL, as the only global police organization,
can facilitate international law-enforcement cooperation
in three ways. First, INTERPOL provides unique
communication tools and databases so as to enable
communication in real time and information-sharing
related to drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. Secondly, INTERPOL can provide the training
and expertise to build up that operational capacity.
INTERPOL can provide both field and online training
to law enforcement in order to ensure the most effective
use of our tools and services. Thirdly, INTERPOL can
also identify new trafficking techniques, emerging
trends and criminal links through crime analysis.

Commitments by the international community
at this special session to strengthen international
cooperation based on the principle of common and
shared responsibility provides opportunities for
potential partnerships with ECO in order to more
effectively address the drug problem in our region. We
hope that the international community, and the United
Nations in particular, will continue to recognize ECO’s
relevance, needs and requirements in that regard, as well
as the imperative of ECO’s remaining involved in global
development-oriented drug policies and measures,
since ECO is an already existing platform where global
commitments can be translated into regional measures
and achievements in its part of the world.
The Acting President: In accordance with resolution
51/1, of 15 October 1996, I now call on the observer for
the International Criminal Police Organization.
Mr. Roux (International Criminal Police
Organization): I thank the President for giving
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL), an observer to the United Nations,
the opportunity to speak at this important milestone
session on fighting the world drug problem. The Special
Session on the world drug problem provides an ideal
opportunity to revisit the particularities and challenges
posed by that global problem.

As law enforcement worldwide finds itself now
having to deal with more complex transnational crimes
in addition to traditional drug trafficking, resources
once committed to combating drug trafficking are
now stretched into other areas. INTERPOL can help
countries maximize what resources they have and
target them in order to get optimal results by providing
operational and investigative support. INTERPOL
policing capabilities are offered at the local, regional
and global levels in the context of drug-trafficking
operations and investigations. If assistance is required,
INTERPOL provides support in real time, 24 hours a
day, seven days a week, and deploys experts to requesting
member countries. As an organization designed to
enable secure law-enforcement communication across
its 190 member countries, information-sharing is at
the heart of INTERPOL by means of its privileged
structure with its headquarters in Lyon, France, large
offices in Singapore and Buenos Aires, our seven
regional bureaus, and even an office right across from
the United Nations Secretariat here in New York.
INTERPOL, built to deliver and provide support,
is proud to be an active partner in the current special

16-1122419/33

A/S-30/PV.6

session process and is strongly committed to further
contributing to the substantial efforts of the session.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 59/50, of 2 December 2004, I now
give the floor to the observer of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
Mr. Zhankuliev (Collective Security Treaty
Organization) (spoke in Russian): I greet the Assembly
on behalf of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO). I would like to express my thanks for the
invitation to such an important and extremely wellorganized forum.
Since the General Assembly met to discuss drugs
in 1998, the situation of drug trafficking has hardly
changed for the better. Unfortunately, the affected
States and international organizations have seldom
managed to cooperate effectively in dealing with the
drug problem.
In our view, the main problems impacting the
effectiveness of the fight against the world drug
problem include the following. The competent bodies
have had limited modern technological tools to uncover
drug smuggling. Moreover, the mechanism of national
drug-control laws is unwieldy, In addition, there has
been insufficient interdepartmental cooperation within
individual States. The actions taken by international
bodies have taken have not been connected. For more
than 20 years, one of the chief problems for the CSTO
has been the narcotic drugs coming from Afghanistan.
Although drug production in Afghanistan dropped in
2015, the amount of drugs flowing into the territories of
our member States has not decreased. Another problem
is the increase in the illegal trafficking of so-called
designer drugs that contain synthetic cannabinoids
in smoking blends. Today, the circulation of such
substances is comparable to the trafficking in heroin.
Therefore, we try to concentrate on developing
and taking comprehensive anti-drug measures within
the framework of the CSTO. Our Parliamentary
Assembly is working on harmonizing the legislation of
our member States in combating drug trafficking. The
CSTO Collective Security Council has developed an
anti-drug strategy for member States for the period up
to the year 2020. For more than 10 years, we have had a
Coordinating Council of competent authorities to combat
illicit drug trafficking. Within that Council, we have
working groups to exchange information and provide
training to ensure interdepartmental cooperation in the
20/33

21/04/2016

area of prevention. We have also developed scientific
and consultative groups. In addition, we are developing
a joint databank within the Coordinating Council. Each
year, we provide an analysis of the drug situation within
our member States.
We are continuing to work on an anti-drug project
called Canal, through which we work out new algorithms
and anti-drug activities to prevent trafficking. We have
a collective rapid reaction force in the CSTO, including
special units from Russia, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan,
to fight drugs. From 26 August to 3 September 2015 in
Tajikistan, under the coordination of the Coordinating
Council, the Drug Control Agency of the Office of the
President of Tajikistan and the Federal Drug Control
Service of the Russian Federation, we held a two-phase
counter-narcotics exercise called Grom-2015. The
second phase of that exercise took place in Tajikistan
along the Tajik-Afghan border. Four composite units
from the collective rapid reaction force participated
in raids and ambush-search operations, and two
mixed checkpoints inspected transport on the main
roads usually used by drug couriers. Helicopters and
drones of the 201st military base of the Ministry of
Defence in Russia covered the raid operations of those
composite units. The Tajik border guards also provided
invaluable assistance.
Moreover, in 2015, we held the special
anti-drug Operation Canal-Patrol and Operation
Canal-Synthetic-Post, with international headquarters
in Osh, Kyrgyzstan, and in Vladivostok, Russia.
During Operation Canal-Patrol, in difficult weather
conditions and at heights of 4,500 metres above sea
level, composite units of Kyrgyzstan, Russia and
Tajikistan carried out tactical-combat patrolling of the
smuggling routes along the border between Kyrgyzstan
and Tajikistan. We had observers from Afghanistan,
Iran, China, Thailand, India, INTERPOL, the Eurasian
Group on Combating Money-Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism, the Coordinating service of the Council
of Border Troop Commanders from the members of
the Commonwealth of Independent States. During that
exercise, we were able to seize about 35 tons of narcotic
and psychoactive substances, 672 firearms and 11,000
units of ammunition. We reported all of this to the
specialized agencies of the United Nations.
This year, we are planning more large-scale
counter-drug-trafficking operations, and we look
forward to having participation of partners that are not
actually CSTO members. We intend in future to work on
16-11224

21/04/2016

the following: preventing precursors from falling into
the hands of the criminal drug industry, establishing
a mechanism to quickly establish control over new
psychoactive substances, strengthening the relationship
between law enforcement bodies and the armed forces,
preventing the use of modern information technology
by drug traffickers, better organizing efforts to reduce
the demand for drugs, developing partnerships with
drug-treatment services and social organizations
to reduce demand, and strengthening international
cooperation overall.
We call on all interested States and international
organizations to work closely together in this area. We
wish the General Assembly every success at this session.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 253 (III), of 16 October 1948, I
now call on the observer of the Organization of
American States.
Mr. Koncke (Organization of American States)
(spoke in Spanish): The General Secretariat of the
Organization of American States (OAS) considers that
the thirtieth special session of the General Assembly
presents an opportunity to assess of the path taken
by the international community, the Organization of
American States and the region with regard to the world
drug problem. From that assessment come at least two
considerations: the vanguard leadership assumed by the
region, represented by the member States of the OAS,
and the opportunity provided by this debate.
As is known, at the close of the Sixth Summit of
the Americas, held in Cartagena de Indias on 15 April
2012, the Organization of American States received
an explicit mandate from the Heads of State and
Government of the Americas to analyse the results of
the current drug policy and to explore new approaches.
It was considered that there was no single problem
but multiple problems that impact the countries of
the region in diverse forms and at different levels
of intensity, given the diverse realities, conditions,
capacities and institutional frameworks present in each
country. Therefore, the General Secretariat of the OAS
believes that a single, universal approach applicable to
all cases is neither viable nor effective. On the contrary,
what is needed is a certain degree of flexibility that
can adapt to the diversity with which the issue affects
each country.
The 2013 OAS report on the drug problem in
the Americas marked a turning point in the regional

A/S-30/PV.6

debate and also had an impact on the discussion at the
global level. It was followed by a series of positions
taken by the representatives of member States at the
highest political level of the OAS, which resulted in an
outline of the elements of a comprehensive, balanced
and multidimensional approach to tackling the drug
problem. Priority was attached to the human person
rather than to substances. Criminalization yielded
ground to prevention, treatment and the rehabilitation
of the individual.
The President took the Chair.
The OAS will continue to work on drug policies
in an open and constructive spirit and with the critical
thinking with which it has been working to date. That
will equip all available inter-American forums to make
progress in the discusion, to exchange knowledge and
experience, to learn from initiatives carried out and
to identify, based on evidence, what is functioning
effectively and efficiently in tackling the various
aspects of the problem in the countries of the region.
In that spirit the Organization of American States
offers the community of nations, meeting in the special
session of the General Assembly, the experience and
progress it has achieved. My delegation will provide
the Secretariat with a reference document on the drug
problem in the Americas that we hope can serve as
input for future work, a basis for reflection and a source
of possible initiatives.
It is our belief that while the special session of 2016
has represented a relevant moment in addressing the
world drug problem, it is our duty to persist in seeking
initiatives that will place people and their well-being at
the centre of the discussion. We continuously promote
the human rights perspective and the vision that no
drug policy can be compatible with violating the rights
of persons — first and before anything else, the right
to life, but also, especially, the human rights of women,
children and the vulnerable groups who must remain
the subject of our continuous attention and effort.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/181, of 17 December 2015,
I now call on the representative of civil society, the
Kenya Hospices and Palliative Care Association.
Ms. Ali (Kenya Hospices and Palliative Care
Association): I want to share my brother’s story — a
common one in low- and middle-income countries. In
1991 my brother, Harun, was diagnosed with leukemia

16-1122421/33

A/S-30/PV.6

at the age of 31. His last two weeks were horrific. His
three children remember that Baba was always in pain.
As a young physician, I felt helpless to relieve his pain.
Injectable pethidine was the only opioid then available
in Kenya, but his doctor refused to use it. Our beloved
Harun lingered in extreme pain. I held his hand as he
died, but I was haunted long after by anger and guilt.
Why was my brother, like millions of others,
denied access to adequate pain relief? Because the
substances needed to treat his pain, recognized as
essential medicines by the World Health Organization
(WHO), are also subject to control under the United
Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. Morphine, for
example, is the gold standard for the treatment of severe
pain and is included in the WHO Essential Medicines
List under the universal right to health. Under the
universal right to health, essential medicines must
always be accessible, available, and affordable. Yet the
International Narcotics Control Board estimates that
85 per cent of the world population have no access to
pain medications. Efforts to create a drug-free world
have resulted in a profound imbalance in policy and
significant harm, leaving many millions in pain or
with substance-use disorders without the medicines
they need.
As representatives of civil society, we call for
a different approach. The African Union Common
Position recognizes that the world drug problem
requires an integrated approach to drug supply and to
demand reduction and harm reduction strategies, as well
as ensuring the availability of controlled substances for
medical and scientific use. It calls for greater support
to ensure the provision of opiates and other essential
and controlled medicines for palliative care and pain
relief. Governments, drug-law enforcement and health
sectors must collaborate to ensure that vision, reallocate
resources for palliative care and drug dependence, and
pursue alternative solutions for minor offences.
Kenya has come a long way since my brother’s
painful death. Kenya’s National Patients’ Right Charter
now recognizes palliative care and pain relief as a
human right. Kenya’s Ministry of Health purchased
50 kilograms of morphine for distribution to hospices
and public hospitals this year. This is just about 10 per
cent of what is needed in Kenya. Yet the vast majority
of countries in the world, including Kenya, still face
barriers, including lack of knowledge and skills among
health care providers, attitudes, punitive laws, lack of
public awareness, and poverty.
22/33

21/04/2016

Knowing that their disease may not be treated,
patients suffer psychological and physical pain, which
violates the essence of their humanity. We must not
wait until we ourselves, or our dearly beloved relatives,
like my brother, are stricken. We in this Hall, this week,
have the will, compassion and expertise to ensure
progress towards universal access to pain relief. We
all have a duty to end unnecessary suffering, and we
should start today.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/181, of 17 December 2015, I now
call on the representative of civil society of the ForutCampaign for Solidarity and Development of Norway.
Mr. Endal (Forut-Campaign for Solidarity and
Development): I have chosen four key words for my
brief intervention today. The four words are: action,
development, mobilization and prevention.
Taking action now is a challenge for us
all — Member States, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations alike. All of us must
use the years leading up to 2019 for national and local
action and policy implementation. It is simple. The
outcome document (resolution S-30/1, annex) offers an
excellent strategy for a comprehensive, balanced and
effective policy to reduce both drug use and its related
harm. The document contains a long menu of effective
interventions that will reduce drug-related harm — if
those words are turned into action. Some claim that
everything has been tried and that nothing works. One
could not be more mistaken. The reality is that we know
a lot about what works. The problem is rather that too
many countries have failed in using too many of the
most effective policy options.
Using the next three years in a continuing struggle
over words will not make a big difference for those who
suffer. Three years of evidence-based interventions
will make a big difference. We therefore appeal to all
national delegations to go home, pick a few — or pick
the best — interventions that have the greatest potential
for prevention and treatment and then implement
them forcefully.
As to prevention, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime International Standards on Drug
Use Prevention offers a wide range of evidence-based
primary prevention interventions. It cannot be repeated
too often: prevention is effective, humane, costeffective and even empowering for people. Therefore,
prevent; do not promote. We must mobilize citizens and
16-11224

21/04/2016

communities. Even the most powerful Governments
or leaders cannot succeed alone. We need citizens and
local communities on board. Experience from all over
the world shows that prevention efforts really do work
when they are implemented by local communities.
But for that purpose we will need an extra take-home
message addressed to the ordinary people of the world
from this meeting — something big and ambitious,
something that could perhaps set some hearts on fire
and mobilize people and involve local communities.
The special session should invite local communities all
over the world to join in a global wave of prevention.
If we tried, we could reach one million communities
before 2019. That would make a big difference.
Lastly, there is development. Social and economic
development must be at the core of any drug strategy.
We now see that alternative development programmes
show promising results. These programmes need
increased support from the international community.
Donor countries should increase their funding and see
that as a long-term commitment.
We hope that the 2016 special session will prove
to be a turning point, the point where we shift gears
from discussions to taking action. That is also the best
way we can contribute to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. I appreciate this opportunity and
wish “good luck” to all who are present.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/181, of 17 December 2015,
I now call on the representative of the HIV/AIDS
Alliance of India.
Mr. Sharma (HIV/AIDS Alliance of Inida): My
name is Charanjit Sharma. I am from Manipur, a
state in northern India. I work with India HIV/AIDS
Alliance and am also the Secretary of the Indian Drug
Users Forum.
I am here today because harm reduction saved my
life. But I have many friends who were not as fortunate.
Their lives were lost simply because they could not
access harm-reduction services when they required
them. We of the International HIV/AIDS Alliance
family are reaching close to 300,000 people who use
drugs with community-based HIV and harm-reduction
services annually in Asia, Africa and Eastern Europe.
That gives us a unique perspective on what it takes to
prevent HIV and hepatitis C and what it takes to get
treatment to people who inject drugs.

A/S-30/PV.6

I have witnessed at first hand the negative impact
of prohibition and the fallout of law enforcement as a
mechanism of drug control. I have seen police action
against drug users and have myself been subjected to
exploitation, violence and detention for simply being
suspected of using an illicit drug. As drug users, we
are soft and easy targets for law enforcement, while big
players remain elusive. The drug trade continues despite
harmful efforts to control it, and we pay the price.
I know from personal experience the devastating
consequences of forced drug treatment and entirely
ineffective rehabilitation programmes. I have friends
who have been tortured and publicly humiliated for
days and weeks in the name of treatment. I know too
many people incarcerated for years for possession of a
small amount of drugs for personal use. Is that justice?
Is it fair? Is it humane? Will it help to end AIDS?
Widespread criminalization and punishment of people
who use drugs confirms that the war on drugs is, in
fact, a war on drug users, a war on people, a war on us.
On behalf of the people who use drugs in India, in
Asia and in every country around the world, I appeal
for placing the health, rights and security of people who
use drugs at the centre of international and national
drug policy. I appeal to those present to understand
that policy is informed by evidence of what works:
accessible, holistic, people-centred services that are
tailored to the needs of the people who use drugs.
I appeal to Member States to stop arresting and
incarcerating people for the consumption and possession
of drugs for personal use. The death penalty for drugrelated offences must be abolished. I appeal to the
Assembly to support drug users and the organizations
working with us, and to improve access to HIV and
hepatitis C treatment and overdose services. Support
drug users meaningful participation in the design and
implementation of harm-reduction services.
Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan recognized
the failure of the war on drugs. He recently stated that
we need to accept that a drug-free world is an illusion,
and that we must focus instead on ensuring that drugs
cause the least possible harm. Harm reduction saved my
life. Harm reduction saves lives. When lives are saved,
communities thrive. When communities thrive, nations
prosper. We cannot end AIDS until we scale up harm
reduction and end the criminalization of drug users. We
must support, not punish.

16-1122423/33

A/S-30/PV.6

The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/181, of 17 December 2015, I
now call on the representative of the Drug Foundation
of New Zealand.
Mr. Potiki (Drug Foundation of New Zealand)
(spoke in Maori; English text provided by the
delegation): I greet you all. Waitaki is my river, Kai
Tahu is my tribe, Ōtākou is my home place. I greet
you all as Chiefs. I greet the First Nations people of
this place.
(spoke in English)
Sometimes, when we are threatened, we go to war,
and sometimes we go to war against the wrong people.
If we decided to wage a war against cancer, would we
do that by bombing the people who have cancer? Many
nations have joined up to wage a war against drugs and
have ended up attacking and harming people who really
are in need of our help and support.
I started using drugs when I was 13 years old. When
I was 28 years old, a judge gave me a choice — get
help for my drug problem or go to jail. That was 27
years ago. I had a judge who could see that the reason
I kept standing before him was ultimately because
of my drug use. He could see that I needed a health
intervention rather than a criminal justice one. He sent
me to treatment for my drug problem.
And because treatment works, I stand here today as
Chair of the New Zealand Drug Foundation, Director
of Maori Development at the University of Otago and
having not used drugs for 27 years. My journey was
supported by my predecessor and by essential harmreduction services, including opioid substitution
therapy with methadone. It also included screening and
then treatment for hepatitis C.
Those present are here to discuss the world drug
problem, but many directly contribute to that problem
by denying their citizens access to vital support,
such as harm reduction — the support that saved my
life — thereby actively blocking progress towards
provision of help to those who most need it. I believe
that if you are not a part of the solution then you are a
part of the problem, and that the major part of the world
drug problem is those countries that continue to block
progress towards compassionate, proportionate and
health-focused responses to drug use and drug users.
The first thing I ask for in standing before the
Assembly today is to stop punishing people who are
24/33

21/04/2016

in need of our help. We must stop criminalizing people
who need our care and support. I am Kai Tahu, Maori,
from Ōtākou, Te Waipounamu, New Zealand. We
are the first people of that land. We have a history
of colonization, dispossession and deprivation, and
deprivation has consequences.
When we focus only on drug use and the problems
that people present, when we do not ask questions about
the broader picture — about the why — we can miss
so much. My problems did not start the day I picked
up a needle. They went much further back. That is a
story we will hear many, many times, particularly from
indigenous people. In New Zealand, Maori make up
15 per cent of the population as a whole but 51 per cent
of our prison population — and 40 per cent of those
are there for drug offences. We see the same patterns
in Australian aboriginals, Native Americans, Native
Hawaiians and A1askans and indigenous peoples all
over the world — patterns of high levels of drug use
and drug-related harm. That is no accident.
As indigenous people, we have the solutions to
our problems, including our drug problems. In the
outcome document (resolution S-30/1, annex) for the
special session, the Assembly rightly acknowledges the
importance of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. But that puts obligations
on the Assembly to include us in discussions and policy
decisions that affect us. So I ask that from this special
session forward, the unique perspectives and views
of indigenous and First Nations peoples be sought out
and included.
Lastly, if there is a war to be fought — and I believe
that there is — it should be a war on poverty, disparity,
dispossession and the multitude of political and
historical factors that have left, and continue to leave,
so many people vulnerable and in jeopardy. We must
also acknowledge that the people we are all talking
about here are our sons, our daughters, our brothers
and our sisters. If we think just for a minute about how
we would want our sons and daughters to be treated if
they developed a problem with drugs, the way forward
becomes very, very clear.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/181, I now call on Ms. Hamda
Alsabbagh, a Fazza youth representative of civil society
from the United Arab Emirates.
16-11224

21/04/2016

Ms. Alsabbagh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for this amazing
opportunity to address the General Assembly.
In view of the fact that the main goal of this special
session is achieving a better tomorrow for the world’s
youth, I would like to present to the Assembly some of
the conclusions that we, a group of youth leaders from
27 countries, arrived at during the fourth annual Youth
Forum, held in Vienna a month ago under the auspices
of the Youth Initiative of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, with the aim of empowering
young people and making their voice heard in highlevel discussions. We worked together for two days,
sharing and analysing experiences and envisioning
solutions to a problem that has a particularly marked
effect on our peers. I urge the Assembly to take them
into consideration.
Our experiences tell us us as young people that
factors such as abuse, bad parenting, the influence
of the media, poverty and mental-health problems
can lead our peers to start using drugs and increase
the likelihood of negative consequences. We strongly
believe that since people suffering from drug-use
disorders have no control over such factors, they
must not be stigmatized. Only treatment, followed by
reintegration through social support, is in line with the
large amount of scientific data on the subject, as well as
our moral consciences.
The consequences of substance use are dire. Few
of us think that drugs are harmless or fun. We know,
for instance, that substance use restricts the education,
career and life paths of affected individuals. Our
experiences as youth leaders involved in prevention
in different parts of the world have shown us that
prevention measures work, and the research evidence
agrees. For the sake of protecting public health, it is
vital that we implement such evidence-based measures.
Merely distributing scare-mongering information
on the dangers of drugs is not effective. We have all
agreed that other measures, such as providing support
to families, offering counselling in schools and giving
extra support to the children who are most vulnerable,
are more valuable.
The dedication and efforts of young people can
yield positive outcomes. We are committed to providing
information and education to our peers, to equipping
young people with the social skills they need to resist
social pressures, and to helping our peers find their own

A/S-30/PV.6

talents and passions. We are committed to empowering
them to believe in themselves and to supporting human
connection rather than isolation. We are engaged and
enthusiastic, and we want to positively shape our future.
Please do not see young people only as victims,
but rather as rich sources of information — and, most
importantly, as drivers of change.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 70/181, I now call on the
representative of the Association Pro Coalitions
of Brazil.
Ms. Marcondes (Association Pro Coalitions of
Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to take part in this year’s important special session on
the world drug problem.
I am speaking today on behalf of the Association
Pro Coalitions of Brazil, an umbrella organization that
is a partner of the Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of
America (CADCA), a non-governmental organization
that builds community coalitions in the United States
and more than 20 other countries around the world.
Today, I would like to describe the importance
of the involvement of organized civil society in the
prevention of drug use by children and adolescents in
communities in my country of Brazil. Eight years ago
in São Paulo, Brazil’s most important and populous
state, we held a series of CADCA training sessions
on our evidence-based approach to community
mobilization, which enables locaI leaders, adolescents,
young people, health workers and other local
institutions and organizations to come together to build
a comprehensive, community-wide prevention strategy
that integrates every kind of sector and promotes
healthy behaviours. It works to change environments
that are vulnerable to drugs and crime, targeting the
health and safety of adolescents, young people and all
the residents of a community for short-, medium- and
long-term outcomes.
Based on my experience in implementing community
coalitions in a number of cities all over Brazil, I have
learned that we need to create local solutions to local
problems. We have to integrate residents, Government,
parents, religious leaders, teachers, the judiciary,
police, young people and other community members
in efforts to assess which substances pose the biggest
problems and to identify the population in a particular
community that is most affected by them, in order to

16-1122425/33

A/S-30/PV.6

then work together to develop, plan and execute actions
for strategic prevention. Before we developed such
community coalitions in Brazil, those sectors were
working in isolation and duplicating their preventive
actions. That has now changed in the communities
where we have coalitions.
The impact in the cities that have such community
coalitions organized by civil society according to this
methodology — which has been evaluated in partnership
with various universities in Brazil — is visible in
those cities in reduced rates among adolescents of
access to and availability of drugs. In my community
of Pindamonhangaba, the availability of alcohol and
access to it are 35 per cent lower than the national
average, thanks to interventions by our community
coalition, and that is in a country that has unfortunately
witnessed increased drug use in many communities.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin), Vice-President, took the Chair.
While we utilized a methodology developed here
in the United States, we adapted it to fit the realities of
Brazilian culture and society. We now have Brazilian
community coalitions that are continuing to grow and
expand, even in the difficult times we are currently
dealing with in my country. I would also like to stress
the importance of youth leadership in our coalitions.
We involve youth in all aspects of our work, and we
believe that we are developing youth leadership today
and the future leaders of tomorrow.
I would like to conclude by pointing out that, like
many countries in the region, we Brazilians do very
little in the way of drug prevention, and our treatment
system is inadequate to the needs created by our growing
problems with drug use. According to recent research
done at the University of São Paulo, there are more than
a million crack users in Brazil. I believe that we must
continue to increase the resources that we devote to the
prevention of drug use and recognize that prevention
is the most cost-effective way to ensure that our drug
policies protect the young people of all our nations.
Agenda item 3
Credentials of representatives to the special session
of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/S30/5)
of

The Acting President: I now request the Chair
the Credentials Committee, His Excellency

26/33

21/04/2016

Mr. Jan Kickert, Permanent Representative of Austria
to the United Nations, to introduce the report of the
Credentials Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Kickert (Austria), Chair of the Credentials
Committee: On behalf of the Credentials Committee, I
have the honour to introduce the report of the Committee
concerning the credentials of the representatives of
Member States to the thirtieth special session of the
General Assembly, contained in document A/S-30/5.
Having considered the credentials of the
representatives at its meeting on 20 April 2016, the
Credentials Committee adopted without a vote a draft
resolution accepting the credentials. The Committee
also recommended that the plenary of the special session
adopt the draft resolution concerning the credentials
of representatives to the current special session of the
General Assembly, contained in paragraph 14 of the
report of the Committee.
I would like to note that, since the meeting of the
Credentials Committee, formal credentials in the form
required by rule 27 of the Assembly’s rules of procedure
were received by the secretariat of the Credentials
Committee regarding Belarus, Grenada, Guatemala,
Kuwait and Trinidad and Tobago. In addition, since the
meeting of the Credentials Committee, the secretariat has
received information through other means concerning
the appointment of representatives to the thirtieth
special session of the General Assembly in respect of
Serbia. The special session is therefore requested to
adopt the draft resolution approving the report of the
Credentials Committee and the additional credentials
submitted subsequent to the Committee’s meeting.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Committee and to the secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution recommended by
the Credentials Committee entitled “Credentials of
representatives to the thirtieth special session of the
General Assembly”, contained in document A/S-30/5.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
adopt the draft resolution without a vote?
Draft resolution A/S-30/5 was adopted (resolution
S-30/2).
16-11224

21/04/2016

Closure of the session
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 70/181, we shall now hear
summaries by the Chairs of the round tables.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Moitinho de Almeida, Permanent Representative of
Portugal to the United Nations in Vienna and co-Chair
of round table I, held on Tuesday afternoon, 19 April.
Mr. Moitinho de Almeida (Portugal), co-Chair,
round table I: It is my pleasure to present the co-Chairs’
summary of the salient points of round table I, “Demand
reduction and related measures, including prevention
and treatment, as well as health-related issues and
ensuring the availability of controlled substances for
medical and scientific purposes while preventing their
diversion”, which was held on 19 April from 3 p.m. to 6
p.m. The round table was co-chaired by Mr. Ravindra
Fernando, Chairman of the National Dangerous Drugs
Control Board of Sri Lanka, and myself. The salient
points, summarized by the co-Chairs, are as follows.
Many speakers commended the ongoing shift
towards a people-centred public-health approach to
addressing the world drug problem, acknowledging that
drug use and drug disorders are complex and represent
chronic health issues that can and should be prevented
and treated through intervention and service based on
scientific evidence and human rights. In that context,
it was recognized by a number of speakers that efforts
must be strongly reinforced, particularly with regard
to collaboration among various sectors at both the
national and the local levels; training and qualifications
for service providers; and budget investments, with a
view to meeting Sustainable Development Goal 3.5, on
strengthening prevention and treatment.
Speakers
emphasized
the
importance
of
strengthening commitment to our common and shared
responsibility for addressing the world drug problem.
Reference was also made to the need for enhanced
cooperation among United Nations entities, particularly
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), the World Health Organization (WHO), the
International Narcotics Control Board and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. Statements
drew attention to a spectrum of evidence-based
interventions that are being implemented with success
and that should be scaled up, including in the areas
of education on and the prevention of drug use;
accessible services for preventing HIV, hepatitis C

A/S-30/PV.6

and other blood-borne diseases; and overdoses, in the
case of, for example, naloxone; and psychosocial and
pharmacological treatment, as well as rehabilitation
services aimed at recovery.
It was mentioned that special attention should be
paid to reaching and providing services to particularly
vulnerable groups, including women, children, young
people and people with co-morbid mental-health
disorders and in prison settings. In that context, several
speakers commended the International Standards for the
Treatment of Drug Use Disorders (E/CN.7/2016/CRP.4),
recently published by UNODC and WHO. In addition,
the necessity of providing health and social care,
treatment, reintegration and recovery-oriented services
to drug users, as an alternative to criminal-justice
sanctions, was emphasized. Furthermore, problems,
including the non-medical use of prescription drugs,
were mentioned by several delegations, as well as, in
one case, the need to develop treatment and harmreduction options for stimulant users.
It was also highlighted that the 2011 target of
reaching a 50 per cent reduction by 2015 in new HIV
infections among people who inject drugs has been
missed. Reference was made to the fact that the recently
adopted Sustainable Development Goals target 3.3 calls
for ending AIDS as a public-health problem by 2030,
including among people who inject drugs in prison
settings. That has also been endorsed by the 2016
outcome document for the special session (resolution
S-30/1, annex) just adopted.
A number of speakers stressed that scientific and
economic arguments in support of ending AIDS among
people who use drugs by 2030 were available. Reference
was made to the fact that national drug policies and
strategies should be grounded in science, public health,
human rights and gender-responsiveness. Other issues
mentioned included the following: addressing the
stigma and discrimination against people who use
drugs; developing alternatives to criminalization for
drug use and drug possession for personal use; and
the urgent scaling up of harm-reduction services,
particularly opioid-substitution therapy, needle-syringe
programmes, anti-retroviral therapy, as defined by the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS in the technical guide of
2012, in the community and in prison settings. It was
further mentioned that those measures needed to be

16-1122427/33

A/S-30/PV.6

21/04/2016

matched by the allocation of resources, both domestic
and international, based on prioritization and efficiency.

World Customs Organization
Control Programme.

Finally, many speakers reiterated their commitment
under the three international drug control conventions
to ensuring the availability of controlled substance for
medical and scientific purposes, while preventing their
diversion, misuse and abuse. It was recognized that
there was a high degree of discrepancy between high-,
low- and middle-income countries in terms of ensuring
the availability of drugs for medical and scientific
purposes, including pain management and palliative
care. In that context, reference was made to the value
of multisectoral approaches in addressing existing
barriers and in alleviating the pain and needless
suffering of patients.

A number of speakers highlighted the importance
of tracing the illicit financial flows related to drug
trafficking, among others, and emphasized the need
for financial-investigation training to combat moneylaundering. The need to address existing challenges to
efforts to reduce the illicit supply of controlled drugs
within the framework of the international drug-control
conventions was further stressed. Many speakers
noted that a comprehensive and balanced approach
to implementing the international drug-control
conventions was needed, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mrs. Carmen María Gallardo Hernández, Permanent
Representative of El Salvador to the United Nations in
Vienna and co-Chair of round table II, which was held
on Wednesday morning, 20 April.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador), co-Chair,
round table II: It is my great pleasure to present the
co-Chairs’ summary of the salient points of round table
II, entitled “Supply reduction and related measures;
responses to drug-related crime; and countering moneylaundering and promoting judicial cooperation”, which
was held on 20 April. Round table II was co-chaired by
Mr. Tayeb Louh, Minister for Justice of Algeria, and
myself. The salient points summarized by the co-Chairs
are the following.
Several speakers highlighted the need to strengthen
law-enforcement cooperation at the regional,
subregional and international levels, including
meaningful cross-border cooperation, the sharing of
criminal intelligence and judicial cooperation, such as
for extradition and mutual legal assistance.
The United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
of 1988, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its related
Protocols and the United Nations Convention against
Corruption were cited by many speakers as providing
a strong legal basis for efforts by Member States to
target criminal organizations and the range of criminal
activities relating to drug trafficking. Several speakers
commended the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), including the UNODC28/33

Global

Container

The importance of proportionate sentencing and
of alternatives to imprisonment, including treatment,
rehabilitation and aftercare for those who suffer drug
disorders was also noted by a number of speakers. In
that regard, collaboration and coordination among
criminal-justice institutions and with other relevant
institutions, such as health-care providers and
community-based prevention and treatment actors
were considered an essential element in an effective
criminal-justice responses. Some speakers stressed
that successful law-enforcement efforts proved to be
those that are primarily aimed at dismantling organized
and violent criminal groups, including, in some cases,
gangs. Several speakers highlighted the growing link
between drug trafficking and other forms of organized
crime, including money-laundering, corruption, the
financing of terrorism and trafficking in firearms,
which represent a threat to world peace and security.
Some speakers noted that transit countries needed
targeted strategies to deal with their specific problems.
Several speakers noted that organized criminal
groups increasingly used the Internet to facilitate
drug trafficking, and they highlighted the need for
programmes that support capacity-building and
technical assistance for investigating and prosecuting
such crimes.
Many
speakers
recognized
the
growing
threat and global availability of new psychoactive
substances, emphasizing the need for international
cooperation to address the problem. With a view to
addressing the challenges posed by new psychoactive
substances, speakers emphasized the importance of
information-sharing at the regional and international
16-11224

21/04/2016

levels and of improving the forensic profiling of the
substances concerned.
The need to maintain effective control over
precursor chemicals and pre-precursors and to
monitor and prevent diversion from licit sources was
highlighted by many speakers. Another point made was
that legal differences should not impede international
cooperation. Several speakers noted that alternative
development efforts had yielded good results, based
on the principle of common and shared responsibility,
supported by strong cooperation at the international
level, including through the sharing of best practices and
lessons learned. A number of speakers also highlighted
the importance of addressing the challenges faced by
farmers following the eradication of crops.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Pascal Strupler, Secretary of State of Switzerland
and co-Chair of round table III, held on Wednesday
afternoon, 20 April.
Mr. Strupler (Switzerland), co-Chair, round table
III (spoke in French): The work of the co-Chairs having
been done in English, I will address the Assembly
in English.
(spoke in English)
It is my great pleasure to present the co-Chairs’
summary of the salient points of round table III,
entitled “Cross-cutting issues: drugs and human rights,
youth, women, children and communities”, which was
held on 20 April 2016. Round table III was co-chaired
by Mr. Karoly Dan, the Vice-Chair of the Board for
the General Assembly special sessions and myself.
The co-Chairs’ summary of the salient points that I
will be presenting was not itself subject to negotiation.
The salient points summarized by the co-Chairs are
as follows.
Many speakers representing Member States, civilsociety organizations and United Nations entities
welcomed the convening of a round table dedicated
to discussing human rights as they relate to the world
drug problem. In that regard, a number of speakers
noted with appreciation the references to the section on
human rights in the outcome document of this special
session (A/S-30/1, annex).
In the course of the discussion, references were
made to the right to life, the right to the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health,
access to controlled substances for medical purposes,

A/S-30/PV.6

non-discrimination and gender equality, the rights
of children, indigenous peoples, the prohibition of
arbitrary detention, torture and other forms of inhuman,
cruel or degrading treatment and extrajudicial killings.
The rights of families were also mentioned.
Some speakers underscored the need to consider
the specific needs of women and vulnerable groups
for reasons of age, ethnicity, racial or socioeconomic
conditions. Many speakers highlighted the importance
of a public health-centred approach, as part of
comprehensive and balanced drug-control policies that
place human beings at their centre and are grounded on
the principle of common and shared responsibility. The
importance of effective law enforcement as part of such
policies was also mentioned.
Many speakers noted the need to ensure access to
effective and evidence-based prevention, treatment,
care, recovery and social-reintegration services. In that
regard, the supporting role of families was highlighted.
The importance of informed consent to drugdependence treatment was also noted. Reference was
further made to the stigmatization and criminalization
of drug use as constituting barriers to full access to
such services.
Several speakers referred to the benefits of riskand harm-reduction measures, including opioidsubstitution treatment and needle- and syringe-exchange
programmes in the context of the prevention and
treatment of HIV and other blood-borne diseases.It
was also mentioned that the international drug-control
conventions allow States the flexibility to adapt their
policies to national circumstances. In the context of
criminal-justice measures, many speakers highlighted
the importance of proportionality in sentencing and of
alternatives to conviction or punishment for non-violent
and minor drug-related offences. It was also mentioned
that both aggravating and mitigating circumstances
should be taken into account.
Many speakers stated their opposition to the use of
the death penalty in all circumstances, and in particular
for drug-related offences. Other speakers noted that
national sovereignty with respect to drug-policy
decisions and national policies aiming at a drug-free
environment should be respected.
Many speakers referred to the necessity to
implement gender–sensitive and gender–responsive
policies tailored to the specific needs and vulnerabilities
of female drug users and drug offenders, and to mitigate

16-1122429/33

A/S-30/PV.6

the negative impact on their families. Reference was
made to stigmatization, violence, disproportionate
sentencing, prior victimization, poverty, the specific
needs of pregnant women and women with caretaking
responsibilities. The United Nations Rules for the
Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial
Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules)
were mentioned in that regard.
Speakers also pointed to the need to focus on the
promotion and protection of children’s rights, in line
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which
requires measures to protect children from the illicit
use of drugs and to prevent their exploitation in illicit
drug production and trafficking. The need to invest in
the proper development of children and young people
through prevention and education was stressed. To that
end, it was necessary to foster cooperation among the
health, child-protection and justice systems.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Khaled Shamaa, Chair of the Board for the General
Assembly special session on the world drug problem
and co-Chair of round table IV, held on Thursday
morning, 21 April.
Mr. Shamaa (Egypt), co-Chair, round table IV: It
is my great pleasure to present the co-Chairs’ summary
of the salient points of round table IV, entitled “Crosscutting issues: new challenges, threats and realities in
preventing and addressing the world drug problem in
compliance with relevant international law, including
the three drug-control conventions; strengthening the
principle of common and shared responsibility and
international cooperation”, which was held on 20 April.
Round table IV was co-chaired by Mr. Urmas Reinsalu,
the Minister of Justice of Estonia, and myself. The
salient points summarized by the co-Chairs are
as follows.
Many speakers reaffirmed their strong commitment
to the three international drug-control conventions
emphasizing the flexibility they offer in addressing
evolving challenges of the world drug problem, in
accordance with their national needs and circumstances.
Many speakers welcomed the section dedicated to
new psychoactive substances and amphetamine-type
stimulants in the outcome document of this special
session (resolution S-30/1, annex). There was broad
consensus that new psychoactive substances were a
collective challenge that required an immediate and
effective response. In particular, the fast-evolving
30/33

21/04/2016

nature of the market in such substances and the high
number of substances entering the market were
highlighted as a threat to public health and the capacity
of law-enforcement responses.
Some speakers referred to the fact that the
packaging and continued chemical evolution of the
compounds allowed drug traffickers to circumvent
legislation. The challenges posed by the trafficking
in chemical precursors were also highlighted.
Many speakers reported on their national legislative
responses as they addressed the challenges posed by
new psychoactive substances, and in that regard it
was emphasized that legislation alone would not solve
the problem.
It was mentioned that investments in developing
public-health policies were needed and that policies
should target those new substances with prevention
strategies based on scientific evidence and effective
treatment responses. Many speakers offered to share
their expertise and experience with the international
community. The need to strengthen the capacity of
Member States in forensic and toxicological analysis
and in reporting was also mentioned. In that regard,
several speakers referred to the need for cooperation
among health authorities, laboratories and law
enforcement agencies in order to identify the new
psychoactive substances and develop technical and
forensic information for prevention, treatment and
enforcement purposes.
Many speakers recognized the need for establishing
national early-warning systems for new psychoactive
substances and called upon all countries to share
information on public-health forensic data through the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
Early Warning Advisory on New Psychoactive
Substances. Several speakers recognized the important
role of international organizations, such as UNODC,
the World Health Organization and the International
Narcotics Control Board, in supporting Member States
in addressing the threat posed by those new substances
and in alerting the international community in a timely
fashion of harmful single or groups of substances
entering the market.
Many speakers highlighted the importance of a
balanced, integrated and comprehensive approach
in responding to the evolving threats and challenges,
based on the principle of common and shared
responsibility. There was a broad consensus on the need
16-11224

21/04/2016

A/S-30/PV.6

to enhance international and cross-border cooperation
in addressing and countering the world drug problem.
In that regard, the importance of capacity-building,
technical assistance, intelligence-sharing, as well as
law-enforcement cooperation and judicial cooperation,
was highlighted.

2 p.m. to 5 p.m. The round table was co-chaired by His
Excellency Mr. Ollanta Humala Tasso, the President of
Peru; His Excellency Mr. Bernard Nottage, the Minister
of National Security of the Commonwealth of the
Bahamas; and myself. The salient points summarized
by the co-Chairs are as follows.

A few speakers pointed out that, with the
globalization of synthetic-drug markets, the traditional
distinction between producing, transit and destination
countries within the developed and the developing
countries has become less valid. The importance of
enhancing cooperation to address drug-related issues
at the regional and international levels was stressed, as
was the importance of partnerships with civil society.

A number of speakers stressed that poverty, food
insecurity, marginalization, vulnerability, insecurity
and the lack of access to land and markets were some
of the key factors that fostered illicit crop cultivation.
The speakers noted that alternative-development
programmes are geared towards not only reducing the
illicit cultivation of coca, opium poppy and cannabis,
but also improving the socioeconomic conditions of
marginalized farming communities, which, in many
cases, have no other means to earn a livelihood than to
engage in illicit crop cultivation.

Many speakers referred to the transnational
challenge posed by the increased use of the Internet
and social media for the purposes of drug trafficking,
selling and advertising and the recruitment of drug
couriers. The difficulties faced in implementing drugcontrol policies with regard to shipments via the postal
services was also mentioned. At the same time, the
Internet was recognized as an opportunity to reach out
to a wider audience for drug-prevention purposes.
It was also emphasized that drug policies
should be people-centred and public health-centred,
respecting human rights and human dignity, with
due consideration given to proportionate sentencing.
Some speakers underlined the need to further discuss
whether the existing international drug-control system
could adequately address the current challenges and
threats posed by the world drug problem and referred,
in that regard, to new approaches, including the
decriminalization of possession for personal use. Many
speakers recognized the need to increase investments
in data collection and analysis with a view to better
informing the policy responses to the current challenges.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Reza Najafi, Permanent Representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations in
Vienna and co-Chair of round table V, which was held
on Thursday afternoon, 21 April.
Mr. Najafi (Islamic Republic of Iran), co-Chair,
round table V: It is my pleasure to present the co-Chairs’
summary of the salient points of round table V, on
alternative development, regional, interregional and
international cooperation on a development-oriented,
balanced drug-control policy and efforts to address
socioeconomic issues, which was held on 21 April from

The speakers recognized that there can be no
sustainable development without peace, and a holistic
response is needed to the world drug problem, including
by addressing the broader socioeconomic issues and by
ensuring a development-oriented approach to the world
drug problem. The speakers highlighted that alternative
development should be included in broader national
development strategies. The speakers also stressed
the importance and added value of this special session
in further advancing alternative development as an
important development-oriented drug-control approach
that addresses the root causes of illicit drug crop
cultivation. The speakers reiterated the importance
of incorporating alternative development into the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1) and recognized that it directly contributes to the
accomplishment of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Several speakers stressed that alternative
development required a long-term, sustainable,
integrated comprehensive approach, including the
provision and improvement of access to infrastructure,
health, education and markets, among others. The
importance of addressing the needs of women
and the issues of environmental sustainability in
the implementation of alternative development
were highlighted.
The speakers noted that, in order for alternative
development to unlock its full potential, it is important
to address the discrepancy between the political
endorsement of alternative development and the limited
funding that alternative development has received,

16-1122431/33

A/S-30/PV.6

which has often been provided on a short-term basis.
Alternative-development funding must be stepped
up so as to meet the actual needs of the vulnerable
farming communities.
Speakers also noted the need to strengthen the impact
of research and to broaden the evidence base in order
to measure the outcomes of alternative development.
A number of speakers highlighted that alternative
development must be designed with a human-centred
approach on human rights. The speakers pointed
to the critical importance of involving all relevant
stakeholders, particularly farming communities, in all
phases of alternative-development implementation to
ensure their full participation in the implementation
and ownership of the alternative-development
programmes. Some speakers stressed the importance
of implementing the United Nations Guiding Principles
on Alternative Development when designing relevant
policies and implementing alternative development on
the ground. International and regional cooperation,
including South-South cooperation, were mentioned as
critical for ensuring successful alternative development.
Several speakers highlighted the importance of
market access and of establishing market links for
alternative-development products.
Several speakers noted the balloon effect that often
took place in illicit crop cultivation areas and stressed
that addressing the world drug problem must continue
to be a common and shared responsibility through a
comprehensive and balanced approach, where both
supply and demand must be addressed and the farming
community recognized. The importance of preventive
alternative development, both in rural and urban
settings, and the need to share best practices and lessons
learned on alternative development were highlighted.
Some speakers highlighted the need to consider
implementing alternative development in urban settings
so as to encourage the development of viable economic
alternatives, particularly for communities affected by
poverty and drug-related activities in urban areas, in
particular, for women and youth.
Finally, UNODC was encouraged to play a
facilitating role with donors, United Nations agencies
and other actors in the implementation of the outcome
document of the special session of the General Assembly
(resolution S-30/1, annex) and its recommendations,
and the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action,
noting that adequate resources would be required.
32/33

21/04/2016

The Acting President: I shall now deliver the
closing remarks of the President of the General
Assembly on his behalf.
“In a few minutes, I will have the honour to close
the thirtieth special session of the United Nations
General Assembly on the world drug problem.
“Over the past three days, and indeed in the
months and years leading up to this session, I believe
we have witnessed a truly historic process — a
process of reflection culminating in a moment of
genuine realization.
“Those assembled here, the Member States,
have worked hard to adopt an outcome document
on the world drug problem (resolution S-30/1,
annex) that reflects where the world, as a whole,
stands today. At the same time, we have identified
important issues and set our sights on even greater
heights on our way to 2019 and beyond. The
stakeholders — members of civil society, academia,
the scientific community, parliamentarians,
women, youth and children — have also contributed
greatly to our debate. With our experience and
expertise, we have drawn attention to the immense
human cost of this problem and indeed, at times,
the cost of the approaches we have taken to address
it. As we move forward, I hope that efforts will be
made, administrative and otherwise, to strengthen
engagement in this process.
“Over the past three days, together, Member
States and civil society alike have delivered a clear
message, namely, that we care about the world drug
problem. Or more precisely, that we care about the
people most affected by this problem. More than
ever before, the global consensus recognizes that
the solution to the problem lies in a more humane,
public health-oriented, human rights-compliant,
evidence-based approach that addresses this issue
in all its complexity.
“In addition, Member States have shown that
they are willing to debate how best to address
the problem and that they are willing to listen to
different views, to different experiences. It is my
firm wish and my steadfast hope that this feeling
of common and shared responsibility, this pledge
to flexibility and openness, to consensus and
commitment, will permeate future discussions of
the world drug problem.
16-11224

21/04/2016

A/S-30/PV.6

“As valuable as these discussions have been,
however, right now, we need to do more. People
suffering from addiction, communities torn apart
by drug-related crime, people who need controlled
substances for medical purposes and others need
more from us. They need a renewed commitment to
action at the local, national and global levels. They
need a more comprehensive and humane approach
to the world drug problem now and in preparation
for 2019. They need action for the health and
well-being of humanity, as mentioned in our
international drug-control conventions. They need
interventions that have been proven to work and,
perhaps as importantly, they need honesty about
those interventions that have failed.

“In conclusion, 1 wish to thank, once again,
the co-Chairs of the Round Tables for their work
and for the presentation of the salient points of the
discussions. I also wish to thank the United Nations
agencies and the United Nations Secretariat,
both in Vienna and here in New York, for their
constant support and assistance in preparing this
special session.

“Over the past few days, I have heard many
stress that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) cannot be achieved
unless we address the world drug problem, and I
could not agree more. As we leave here, therefore,
as we gear up to address this problem in the
context of the Sustainable Development Goals,
I encourage Member States to be mindful of the
key principles behind the 2030 Agenda — the
commitment to leave no one behind, to advance
a more people-centred approach and to achieve a
sustainable and just world.

We have now come to the end of the thirtieth special
session of the General Assembly.

“And, finally, I thank everyone — Member
States, civil society and other stakeholders — for
their contributions to the thirtieth special session
of the General Assembly and for their continued
commitment to address more effectively, more
humanely, this complex world drug problem.”

I invite representatives to stand and observe a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The Acting President: I declare closed the thirtieth
special session of the General Assembly on the world
drug problem.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

16-1122433/33
