TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 1 JULY 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1483) . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

Page
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ........................

1

Adoption of the agenda ......................................

1

The situ.ation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9284) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV. 1483

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are corhposed of capital letters cbmbined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
lDoc:xu~~:; of ilre Security Council(symbo1 S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
S::pplemenfs of .Ihc Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are pubhshed in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutily Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND EIGHTY-THI

on Tuesday,

President: Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).

MEETING

1 July 1969, at 3 pm.

at their request, to invite the repr&entatives of Jordan,
Israel, the United Arab Republic, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Morocco to participate in our debate,
without the right to vote. Since then, further requests for
participation have been received from the representatives of
lraq [S/929 71 and Indonesia [S/9298]. In accordance with
the practice of the Council, I propose that these representatives also be invited to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1483)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

5. In view of the limited space available at the Council
table, and in conformity with the established practice in
such cases, I shall invite the representatives of Jordan and
Israel to take places at the Council table and the other
representatives to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber, on the understanding that
when one of these representatives wishes to speak he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9284).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
__ It- is my
pleasant duty and privilege, as President of the Security
Council, to pay a tribute to my predecessor for the great
contribution he has made to the work of the Security
Council, over which he presided during the month of June.
On behalf of all the members of the Council, I wish to
express my sincere gratitude to Ambassador Solano Lopez
who constantly combined modesty and courtesy with the
highest competence.

A? the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Fan-a
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table, and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. J. M. Baroody [Saudi Arabia), Mr. G. J,
Tomeh (Syria), Mr A. T Benhima (Morocco], Mr. A.
Raouf (Iraq) and Mr. H. R. Abdulgani (Indonesia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

2. Mr.

6. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenchj: The Secu-.
rity Council will now continue its consideration of the item

SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, I should like to expressmy deepest
thanks to you for the generous words with which you
referred to my work as President of the Security Council
during the past month of June.

on the agenda. Before calling on the first speaker on the
list, I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the’ report of the Secretary-General dated 30
June 1969 (S/9149/Add.I]
submitted in pursuance of
resolution 252 (1968) adopted by the Council on 21 May
1968. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
the United Arab Republic, whom I invite to take a place at
the Council table and to whom I now give the floor.

3. At the same time, I am very happy that you yourself,
one of the finest and most brilliant representatives of Africa
in the United Nations, are now assuming the Presidency for
the month of July. I am certain that you will guide our
deliberations with your characteristic tact, diplomatic skill
and devotion.
Adoption

7. Mr. El KONY (United Arab Republic): Allow me to
express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Council for permitting me to participate in
the Council’s deliberations on Jerusalem. The Security
Council is confronted with a serious and grave act of
defiance and utter disregard of the will of the United
Nations and the principles enshrined in its Charter, By
persisting in its illegal measures of annexation and the
systematic obliteration of all that is Arab in Jerusalem,
Israel has again confirmed its real expansionist designs.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9284)

8. The issue before the Council is Jordan’s complaint
concerning Israel’s outrageous refusal to honour its obliga-

4. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French): At its
1482nd meeting yesterday afternoon the Council decided,
1

I

the guise of administrative measures, is but a &ring
example of the Zionists’ usurpation tactics.

tions under the Charter and to carry out the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council
regarding Jerusalem. The question before the Council is
definitely not the discussion of licence permits or the
registration of commercial enterprises as Mr. Tekoah contended in his usual manner in order to divert the attention
of the Council. Mr, Tekoah has desperately attempted to
belittle the irrefutable legitimacy of the Jordanian complaint; but his barren arguments have no chance of
misleading anyone, for the Council, on 21 May 1968, has
already passed its judgement and invalidated Israel’s arbitrary measures.

12. ‘Ambassador El-Farra has lucidly presented to the
Council the true picture of what is occurring in Jerusalem. I
do not need to repeat the manifold illegal Islraeli measures
that prompted Jordan to bring its legitimate complaint
before the Council. Likewise, I hardly need to emphasize
that the provisions of the new Israeli laws, as well as its
Absentees’ Property Law of 1950, could not easily lo
dismissed simply as administrative formalities, as referred to
by the representative of Israel yesterday. All this wasfully
presented and documented by Ambassador E:l-Farrayesterday. I shall therefore confie my remarks to pointing out
some of the legal and political implications of the serious
offences committed by Israel.

9. It must be made clear that Israel is appearing before the
Council not to preach or be given a forum to propagate
more falsehoods. Israel is present at the Council table for
one reason only: to answer for its unacceptable delay in
carrying out the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and Security Council on, Jerusalem. It is in the
light of the aforementioned facts that we participate in the
Council’s deliberations.

13. In this regard, permit me to cite from the principles of
international law recognized in the Charter of the Nurema
berg Tribunal,, which were reaffirmed by ia unanimous
General Assembly resolution (95 (I)J in 1946 and later
elaborated by other organs of the United Nations. In
article 6, sub-paragraph (b), of the Charter of the Tribunal,
it states that war crimes include “plunder of public OI
private property, wanton destruction of cities, towns, M
villages . . .“. In sub-paragraph(c) of the same article, the
crimes against humanity are listed as: “murder, extermlna.
tion, enslavement, deportation, and other inhumane acts
committed against any civilian population . . . or persecu.
Lions on ioliticaI, racial or religious grounds”.i

10. Over the centuries, Jerusalem has always been the
living symbol of a peaceful city in the Land of Peace and
the cradle of civilization. Jerusalem has throughout the
centuries been a haven for religious freedom and a harbour
for safety and tranquillity. This was the state of affairs in
Jerusalem until the Zionists injected their alien practices of
racism and religious discrimination. Jerusalem has now been
transformed into a city of tension, of persecution against its
Arab inhabitants. The Israelis are trying to make it a city
untenable for any Arab to live in. Those who were not
expehed, deported, imprisoned or *dispossessed.are under
constant and unrelenting pressure to yield to the yoke of
the occupier. The Israeli measures of annexation, destruction of houses and economic installations, and deportation,
which are being carried out daily in the Arab territories, are
meant to achieve but one objective-namely, the consolidation by all methods of Israel’s occupation. The Arab
populations of the occupied territories are enduring hardships and all forms of atrocities, arbitrary imprisonment
and mass deportation. Even Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, the Major
of Jerusalem, who had an opportunity to present his case
before the Council last year [1421st meeting], was not
spared.

14. It is appropriate at this juncture to recall that the
membership of the United Nations reacted indignantly la
the face of the Israeli measures. Mr. Perez Guerrero, Ihe
representative of Venezuela, stated before the General
Assembly the views of his country, which epitomize t!~
conscience of mankind, in the following word.son I4 July
1967:

“It is intolerable that the attempt to annexthe part ofa
city held in veneration by three major world religions
should be consummated by the refusal of the Govcm
ment of Israel to implement the General A~~mblr
resolution. There can be no possible justification for this
or for any annexation brought about by force, and it is
outrageous that the fact that the inhabitan1.s of the Old
City are now enjoying the social servicesof Israel ShOMhl
be advanced as an argument to justify this ihe@
act . . .“.s

11. The Israeli machinations are actively pursuing a dual
policy: to blackmail and despoil possessionsin the occupied
Arab lands and simultaneously to attempt to refurbish
Israel’s nefarious and illegal behaviour, presenting it to the
world community in an entirely different form. The form
might vary, but the crux of the matter has not changed. We
hear Israeli spokesmen audaciously justifying such measures
by invoking all kinds of irrelevant elements, whether
touristic, administrative, civil or civic. In point of fact, all
that Israel has been seeking throughout the last two years is
more territories, I need hardly dwell on the “rosy” picture
which the representative of Israel tried to convey to the
Council yesterday /1482nd meetingJ when he treated the
gallery to a guided tour of present Arab Jerusalem. All of us
realize his predicament, but certainly it takes audacity to
speak unabashedly on this subject while the facts belie his
false pretences. What is happening in Jerus&m nbw, under
” ^ .

Moreover, the representative of Ethiopia, Mr. Makonnsn,
stated in the General Assembly on 4 July 1967::
“I would also like to make it clear beyond any daub!
that my Government cannot accept any right of cca.
quest, nor indeed any arbitrary adjustment of intern%
tional territories or frontiers. In this connexion I wish te
say here and now that the steps taken by the Government
of Israel with regard to the Old City of Jerusalem art
unacceptable to my Government”3
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 82 (1951),p, 286.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth limer@‘~j
special Session, Plenary Meetings, 1553rdmeeting,
pata.97.
3 Ibid., 1547thmeeting,
para.39.
2

15. I could continue to cite from the records of the
General Assembly and Security bouncil, which abound
with similar statements by the overwhelming majority of
representatives. The will of the international community on
the question of Jerusalem and its status has been demonstrated in two General Assembly resolutions (2253 (ES-V)
0zd 2254 (ES-V)] as well as in Security Council resolution
252 (1968). The three resolutions have a common
denominator. As already mentioned, they invalidate Isr%li
measures, reaffirm the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territories by war and call upon Israel to rescind and desist
forthwith from changing the status of the Holy City, The
resolutions were adopted by a virtually unanimous vote.
Thus, it is inconceivable to entertain any of the circuitous
argumentation put forward by Israel in order to procrastinate about its compliance with the decisions of this lofty
body. Israel is under a clear-cut obligation to carry out the
decisions on Jerusalem of the competent organs of the
United Nations.
16. The members of the Council will recall that after the
Israeli’s perfidious attack of 5 June 1967, Israel prom&
gated its Law and Administration Ordinance (Amendment
No. 11) Law of 27 June 1967, which was declared invalid
by the General Assembly. The Assembly, moreover, Rt its
fifth emergency special session[resolution 2253 (ES V) of
4 July 19671, called upon Israel to rescind all measure8
already taken and to desist forthwith from taking any
action which would alter the status of Jerusalem. Ten days
later, faced with insolent non-compliance by Israel, the
Assembly adopted resolution 2254 (ESV) which, inter alia,
deplored Israel’s failure to implement the earlier resolution
and reiterated verbatim its earlier cal1 on Israel. Israel’s
reaction to these two virtually unanimous resolutions was
in the negative. Its Foreign Minister stated in the Assembly
that he would not respect, comply with or implement
resolutions expressing the will of the international community, and, ironically enough, he kept his promise. In
1968, due to Israeli persistence in the annexation, the
question was brought before the Security Council. The
Mayor of Arab Jerusalem, Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, gave
abundant and irrefutable evidence before the Council
[142Lst meeting] of Israeli illegal practices, and on 21 May
the Council adopted resolution 252 (1968) which reaffirmed the Assembly resolutions already referred to.

“It was repeatedly emphasized that the population of
East Jerusalem was given no opportunity to state for
itself whether it was willing to live in the Israeli State
community.“4
18, At this very moment, a competent committee is
discussing how to commehorate the tenth anniversary of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples [see General Assembly
Msohtion
1514 [XV) of 14 December 19601. The balancesheet of the United Nations is, nevertheless, still marred by
the codtinuation of apartheid practices in South Africa and
gouthem Rhodesia, as well as by the continuation of
Porhgde~e
cofonia~sm in Africa. It is our firm belief that
the Security Council will not wish to tarnish the anniversary of this Declaration by tolerating another colonial
situation in the Middle East.
19. The status ‘of Jerusalem should be determined within
the framework of certain fundamental legal norms. Israel
occupied Jerusalem in June I967 by force. It is thus
imperative to apply the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, to which
Israel is a party; article 53 of that Convention stipulates
that:
“Any destruction by the Occupying Power of real or
personal property belonging individuarly or collectively to
pdvate persons, or to the State, or to other public
authorities, or to social or co-operative organizations, is
prohibited . +,“,s
Israel has adamantly refused to heed United Nations
resolutions and has persisted in its destruction of Arab
homes and disposal of Arab property, despite its clear-cut
obligations under the article just quoted. It is also relevant
to quote here article 54 of the same Convention which
states that:
“The Occupying Power may not alter the status of
public officials or judges in the occupied territories, or in
any way apply sanctions to or take any measures of
coercion or discrimination against them, should they
abstain from fulfilling their functions for reasons of
conscience.“5

17. Thus, it is clear that the United Nations has from the

20. It might be redundant for me to remind the members
of the Council that Israel has throughout the past two years
perpetrated all the violations which are strictly prohibited
under the aforementioned Convention. The Security Council has been promptly apprised of all such serious violations.
The world press has also fully reported their occurrence.
The cruel and inhuman treatment to which the Arab people
in Jerusalem and the other occupied Arab territories have
been subjected at the hands of the Israeli oppressors is a
cynical reminder of the atrocities committed by the Nazis
in the occupied European territories during the Second
World War. Those crimes have been condemned by all and
are still bitterly remembered long after the downfall of the

outset refused to accept any of the flimsy Israeli argumen-

tation to annex or change the status of Jerusalem. The
Arabs of Jerusalem have consistently refused to accept
Israel’s attempts to annex their Holy City. They have
clearly conveyed their response to the United Nations
through the Secretary-General’s personal representative,
Mr. Ernest.0 A. Thalmann. On 12 September 1967, the
Secretary-General reported to the General Assembly, under
resolution 2254 (ES-V), that the inhabitants of Jerusalem:
(6. * . were opposed to civil incorporation into the Israeli
State system. They regarded that as a violation of the
acknowledged rule of international law which prohibited
an occupyirii Power frcm changing the legal and administrative structure in the occupied territory and at the
same time demanded respect for private property and
personal rights and freedoms.

4 A/6793. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year, Supplement
for JuIy, August and September 196 7, document S/8146, pans. 131
and 132.
5 United Nations, TreurySeries, No. 75 (1950), No. 973, ’

3

Nazi oppressors, The Israeli oppressors, who have learned
and are applying these repellent acts of persecution, should
also learn the lesson of history that their crimes will, for a
long time, be strongly condemned and bitterly remembered.
21. The Israeli representative, in his desperate attempt to
divert the attention of the Council from the item on the
agenda, has referred to what he called warfare and acts of
aggression against Israel openly pursued by Arab States.
Such deceitful statements by the representative of Israel
reveal once more how an aggressorstill occupying other
people’s territories attempts to mislead world public
opinion. In this respect, it might be useful to shed more
light on the situation in the Middle East at present. I do not
intend to take much of the Council’s time, but may I be
allowed to state in a few words the following facts? First,
we have declared time and again that we accept Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967,
which the Council adopted unanimously for a peaceful
settlement. Secondly, we have made clear our readiness to
implement all the provisions of that resolution. Thirdly,
Israel has refused to accept or implement the resolution,
and its repressive actions and expansionist designs in the
occupied Arab territories clearly manifest its utter disregard
for the Council’s decision. FourthIy, we have co-operated
fully with Mr. Gunnar V. Jarring, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and we have replied
positively to his questionnaire, while Israel, for its part,
cannot claim any positive co.operation. The least that could
be said about its attitude is that it is completely negative.
Fifthly, we did not object to the talks between the four
permanent members of the Security Council, in the hope
that their assistance in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) would be conducive to the
achievement of a just peacein the Middle East.

24. The PRESIDENT (translated from Rench): Before
calling on the next speaker, I wish to inform the ICouncil
that I have just received a request [S/9300] from the
representative of Lebanon who wishes to participate in the
Security Council’s discussion. If I hear no objections, I shall
invite him to participate in the discussion, without tlhe right
to vote. I shall first invite him to take a place at the side of
the Council Chamber, and when the time comes for him ta
speak he will take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber,

25. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
may I first of all congratulate both the retiring President
and you, Sir, who now succeed him. The English historian
Macaulay once said of Ministerial office that it is “a
laborious, invidious, closely-watched slavery which is
mocked with the name of power”. The samemight be said
of the high office of President of the Security Counc:il.
26. I congratulate the Ambassador of Paraguay on so
successfully completing his period of “closely-watched
slavery” and doing so with such good sense and such good
humour. At the same time 1,congratulate the Ambassador
of Senegal on his arrival today at such an exacting
elevation, I have little comfort to offer him exoept to
report to him that my careful enquiries indicate that there
are several highly placed representatives who hope that July
will be a month devoted more to bilateral than intemational diplomacy. May I add very respectfully that the
Ambassadors of Paraguay and Senegal, so different in
themselves and so different in the countries they represent,
are both amongst the most respected and best-loved
Ambassadors at the United Nations.

22. Israel, on the other hand, asis well known, is rejecting
all methods which might assist in the implementation of
that resolution, For the past two years the attention of the
Security Council has focused on the Palestine question.
Time and again we have expressed the gravity of the
deteriorating situation in our part of the world. We have
pointed out that the continuation of Israeli occupation of
Arab territories portends evil for international peace and
security. Time and again we have conveyed to this
important body the legitimate rights of the Arab people
and their resolve to regain their lost lands. The time has
come ,for the Council to move from the stage of passing
resolutions of condemnation and injunction, which Israel
disregards, to the stage of measures and actions to enforce
its decisions. My delegation fully supports the measures
suggested by the representative of Jordan, Mr, El-Farra, in
his statement at the previous meeting of the Council.

27. I wish to speak shortly, but I hope very plainly. I call
speak shortly, for what I need to do is to reaffirm the
position of my Government, the position which my
Government has taken all along. Since June 1967 the
position of my Government on the question of Jerusalem
has been absolutely clear. I will repeat the words used in
the General Assembly by my Foreign Secretary on 21 June
1967:
“Article 2 of the Charter provides that
“ ‘All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State . . .‘.
“Here the words ‘territorial integrity’ have a direct
bearing on the question of withdrawal, on which much
has been said in previous speeches. I see no two ways
about this; and I can state our position very clearly, In
my view, it follows from the words in the Charter that
war should not lead to territorial aggrandizement.”

23. To conclude, I should like to stress again that
Jerusalem is as dear to us as any city in my country, These
same feelings of affection and attachment bind every Arab
to that sacred city. For the sake of peace, basedon justice,
let this Council pronounce itself clearly and firmly against
usurpations and all related Israeli measures. Only by such a
firm position will the Council be able to discharge its
responsibility and forestall unnecessary strife which, however long and fearful it may become, cannot change the
ultimate fate of the city, which will remain Arab.

I continue with the words of my Foreign Sec.retary
speaking in the General Assembly just over two years ago:
“Reports suggest that one particular point may be of
special urgency. This concerns Jerusalem. I call upon the
4

State of Israel not to take any steps in relation to
Jerusalem which would conflict with this principle. I say
very solemnly to the Government of Israel that, if they .
purport to annex the Old City or legislate for its
annexation, they will be taking a step which will isolate
them not only from world opinion but will also lose them
the support that they have.“6
We have spoken and voted throughout in support of the
principle that no unilateral action should or can change the
status of Jerusalem. We reaffirm that position,
28. It is mainly to confirm the position of my Government that I speak today, but I wish also to say.something
about the violence of which we hear daily from the Middle
East-violence which serves no purpose except to increase
suffering and to add to hate.
29. I wish also to say something about the place of
Jerusalem in the wider negotiation and in the final
settlement, and then I wish to refer shortly to the
obligations of the members of this Council and our hopes
for advance to a settlement,

like to be positive. It is essential, so I believe, for the
Council to require that nothing should or can be done by
unilateral action to preiudice the future of Jerusalem. That
is essential in order lo hoId open the door to a just
settlement, to keep alive the hope of a permanent peace.
34. I go on to sajl that when we insist that the future of
Jerusalem must be kept open, and when we say that it must
be discussed and decided as part of a final settlement
ensuring a permanent peace, we mean that it must be
settled’ with respect to the rights of all, including both sides
and a11the religious denominations which look to Jerusalem
as the Holy City. We do not wish to attempt any final
answer now to the question of how that can be achieved.
All we say now is that no permanent obstacles should be
put in the way of free negotiation, no permanent barriers
should now be erected to prevent eventual agreement, no
permanent divisions should now be created which cannot
be later bridged, no permanent wall should be erected now
to bar the way to peace.
35. Let me now say something else about the function and
the duty of the Council. I have heard it said that the
problem of the Middle East can be settled only by the
peopIes of the countries immediately concerned, and that
all the rest of us should mind our own business. No one is
likely to dispute the vital concern of the countries of the
Middle East, Their commitment and their agony and their
sacrifice and their need for peace are not in any doubt.
Their need to live together in peace is paramount; it is
desperate. Nor do I doubt the need for them to negotiate
about their future, to negotiate without malice and without
duress. But to tell the rest of the world that it has no
legitimate interest in peace in the Middle East would be
extraordinary. Every country here represented has a legitimate interest. Even if we had no legitimate interest in peace
we would certainly very soon find that we had an
immediate interest in another war.

30.. It is sad that we cannot speak about Jerusalem
without also speaking of violence. Whatever we think about
the future of Jerusalem and whatever we think about
violence I wonder if we could not all agree that violence is
specially offensive and contemptible in the Holy City. More
than that, we surely should all abhor violence which kills
and daims innocent people. Such violence is indiscriminate.
It kills and wounds old and young, women and children,
irrespective of nationality.
31. I would certainly include in the spiral of violence the
blowing up of houses, and the expulsion of innocent people
from their homes. We include reprisals generally and
particularly the use of napalm. What good can this do? We
are entitled to ask that question, both from those who
initiate violence and those who escalate violence, from all
those who trade in hate.

36. Above all, the Council has a legitimate interest in a
permanent peace. To suggest otherwise would be to deny
the whole conception of international responsibility for
peace and security. My country will certainly not be denied
the right to continue to search for and to work for a
permanent and just peace. Agreement by outside Powers
without the agreement of the countries and the peoples
directly concerned would not secure a pernianent peace.
But if there were no agreement in the rest of the world, if
past divisions persisted, if the Middle East were to be again
a fishing-ground for anyone liking to fish in troubled
waters, there would be little or no hope. Worse still, if the
Middle East were to become the centre and fhe prize of
international rivalry and international ambition, as some
would say it has been for long past, if there. were no
assurance of international acceptance of the settIement and
commitment to it, then also there would be little or no
prospect of maintaining a permanent peace.

32. I have heard it said that some believe that violence will
encourage the four-Power talks. Others apparently believe
that violence will discourage the talks. The two are equally
wrong. Every act which brings human suffering and every
violent act against innocent people is an act directed not
against talks or no talks, but against justice and against
peace, a just peace for everyone. These are acts directed
against the true interests of the people of both sides. Is it
too,much to hope that there are still people on both sides
who see that justice does not come from violence and peace
does not come from hate?
33. I turn for a moment to consider what place Jerusalem
has in the wider context of negotiations for peace in the
Middle East. To prejudice the future of Jerusalem would be
to deny the hope, the possibility, of any peaceful settlement at all. It would be to declare against any settlement. It
would bar the door to peace. It would be to make another
conflict inevitable. Let me put it the other way round, for I

37. To be permanent, the peace must be just. To be
permanent, it cannot be imposed or dictated. It must be
just and seen to be just and internationally accepted as just.
No one has a monopoly of interest in peace. We all want it.
We all need it. We can all make a contribution to getting it.
My country, in any event, does not propose to spare any

6 Official
Records
of the General Assembly,
Fifth l+nergencY
Special Session, Plenary
Meetings,
1529th meeting,paras. 1.5 and
16.

5

’

43. The situation in Jerusalem, which the Jordanian
Government has invoked as grounds for requestingthis
urgent meeting, has already been the subject of many
debatesin this Council. A number of resolutionshavebeen
adopted on this question. Without going back very far, I
shall confine myself to recalling resolution 252 (1968) of
21 May 1968, which constitutes the legal basisfor the
complaint before us today; this resolution, in paragraph2,
statesthat: “all legislativeand administrative measures
and
actionstaken by Israel,including expropriation of land and
propertiesthereon, which tend to changethe legalstatusof
Jerusalemare invalid,” and, in paragraph 3, “urgently calls
upon Israel to rescindall such measuresalready taken and
to desistforthwith from taking any further action” of this
kind.

effort to find it and to secure it. We are not to be told that
we should not search for and work for a peace which is just
and lasting. What is more, the Council is not to be told by
anyone that its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security is diminished or
deferred.
38. What is needed is not less international effort, but
much greater international effort and much more urgent
international effort in the search for agreement. It is only
on the firm ground of agreement-agreement in the Middle
East and agreement in the wider world-that peace can be
soundly built. We believe that everything else must be
subordinated to the need to facilitate and accelerate a just,
over-all settlement. I am not likely to underestimate the
difficulties. They have been formidable. So they are.now.
But I believe that the news we get daily from the Middle
East provides the best argument for increasing and speeding
our efforts to find the settlement so desperately needed
-desperately needed if only to escape from the vicious
circle of violence and the dead-end of suffering.

44. On 8 February 1969, the Amman Government requested a meeting of the Security Council on the same
question. Referring on that occasion also to resolution
252 (1968), it statedin its request that the Israeli authorities had never relented in their disregard of this clear
warning and of the Assemblyresolutions on the subject.It
alsostressedthe fact that the most recent Israelimeasure
was “the enactment of legislation designedto destroy the
character of the city and incorporate the Arab life and
institutions into Israelilife”. [S/8998/

39. Jerusalem is the heart of the whole problem. All we
ask is that the just and complete settlement we seek should
not be ruled out in advance, should not ,be rendered
impossible, by any act designed to prejudice the future
status of the city. We hope that this debate will contribute
to that purpose, and we trust that the debate will in no way
add to the difficulties of the search for agreement on which
we are engaged. That search is our constant aim and our
overriding obligation.

45. It is, in fact, public knowledge that, sinceJune1967,
variousmeasuresaffecting personsand property have been
taken in the occupied territories, and particularly in
Jerusalem. These measureshave been the subject of
numerous protests addressedto the Council and to the
General Assemblyby the Jordanian Goverriment. In February, when France waspresidingover the Council’swork,
a meetingof the Council waspostponed [seeS/9000/ aRer
the Israeli Government had decided to postponefor three
months-that is, until 23 May 1969-the entry into force of
the legislativeprovisionsof which the text wasannexedto
the report of 11 April [S/9149/ of the Secretary-General,
Sometime later, information which was unfortunately not
confirmed gavegroundsfor hoping that the postponemknt
might be extended for an additional period of six months.

40. The PRESIDENT (translated .from French): I thank
the representativeof the United Kingdom fo; the kind
wordshe hasspokenabout me.Like him, andfor a number
of reasons-if only that I may be releasedfrom the
enslavingbondsof the Presidency-I sincerelyhopethat the
rest of the month of July may be devoted to bilateral
diplomacy.

41. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from Bench}:
Allow me, Mr. President,to follow in your footstepsand
add my thanks to those which you addressedto your
r: e6. ,The Jordaniancomplaint of 26 June 1969[S/9284],
predecessor,
AmbassadorSolanoL6pez of Paraguay,who
which appearsto be a ctintinuation of the previousone,
presidedlast month over the debatesof the Security ,’ also denouncesthe Israeli Government’s defiance of the
Councilin what I would term a masterlyfashion.I usethis
provisions of resolution 252 (1968). It statesthat on 27
term in its fullest sense.I meanthat AmbassadorSolano
April “further provisions and new regulations were enL6pez was,and shouldbe, anexamplefor usto follow. If I
acted”. It mentions “arbitrary arrests, detention, torture,
were askedwhat a Presjdentof the Security Councilought
demolition of housesand deportation” which it accuses
the
to be, I would say: “Look at what AmbassadorSolano
Israeli authorities of having committed. It affirms that the
Ldpez was during the past month; that is exactly what a
Tel Aviv Government has “plans for the establishment
of
Presidentoughtto be”.
Israeli settlements in the city and repeopling of its
inhabitants”.
42. Our regretsat seeinghim give up the Presidencyare
mitigated by our satisfactionat seeingyou assumethis
47. An exact assessment
of the violations of the provisions
office. The time you have already spent at the United
of resolutibn 252 (1968) is hampered by the difficulty of
Nationshasenabledus to appreciatein you qualitieswhich obtaining specific information from Israel regardingits
we like and admire: the great eiperience of the United intentions, and even regardingthe purport of the legislative
Nations which you have rapidly acquired, great discern- provisionsinvolved.
ment, qualities of good sense,moderation,and a senseof
justice, which lead all of us aroundthis table to haie full
‘48. At its fifth emergency special session,which was
confidencein you. And it is with pleasurethat we haveseen* prompted by the events of June 1967, the General
you take over the direction of our work today.
Assemblywasinformed of the measurestaken by Israelon
6

29 June to “unify” Jerusalem. In its resolution 2253
(ES-V) of 4 July 1967, it expressed its deep concern at the
situation
prevailing in Jerusalem as a result of those
measures. It considered them as invalid; it called upon Israel
to rescind them and to desist from taking any action which
would alter the status of the city. In a second resolution,
2254 (ES-V) of 14 July 1967, the Assembly took note
“with
the deepest regret and concern of the non-compliance by Israel with resolution 2253 (ES-V)” and reiterated the call it has addressed to that country in its previous
resolution.

Israel will consent to discontinue forthwith the measures
which have been condemned and to safeguard the character
of a city whose future status should in no way be
prejudiced. Therefore we wish to express the hope that the
Council will again pronounce itself, in the clearest possible
way, in favour of compliance with its previous resolutions
aimed at maintenance of the status quo in this divided city
which represents for all of us one of the highest seats of
culture, thought and civilization.
55. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I wish to
thank the Atibassador of France for the flattering words he
has addressed to me. I will simply say that, if I have very
rapidly acquired experience in United Nations matters, I
owe it largely to you, M. BBrard, and I have always had the
most frank and complete co-operation with you.

49. France voted for these resolutions, as it did in the
following year for Security Council resolution 252 (1968).
The French delegation explained its vote then as follows:
“In our view there is no legal basis for such measures
and they are likely to have the most serious consequences. They can only stir up ill-will, increase tension
and complicate a problem which should be solved by
peaceful means.” (1417th meeting, para. 501

56. Mr. ZAKHAROV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): First of all, Mr. President,
I am happy to welconie you to the Presidency of the
Security Council, and I take this occasion to express our
satisfaction at the good relations constantly existing between our countries. We are convinced that your experience
and your devotion to the principles of peace and the United
Nations Charter will have a beneficial influence on the work
of the Council.

50. France, which spared no effort to prevent the conflict
of June 1967, has since opposed with conviction and
determination
anything more that could complicate the
tragic situation created by the conflict, or perpetuate and
intensify tension in the Middle East, or lead to increasing
bitterness
and hostility between the parties which would
make it even more difficult to establish between them the
real peace which my country so whole-heartedly desires.

57. I also take this opportunity to express our gratitude to
the distinguished representative of Paraguay, Ambassador
Solano Lbpez, for his efforts and the skill he displayed in
the office of President of the Security Council.

51. It seems incontestable that all the legislative or other
measures taken by the Israeli authorities with a view to
facilitating
and accelerating by virtue of a de facto
occupation-the
process of integration of part of Jerusalem
of the United
-are
contrary to all the resolutions
Nations. Some’of these measures are also contrary to the
rules of international law governing armed occupation, and
to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

58. The Security Council is again obliged to consider the
question of the situation in Jerusalem in connexion with
the continuing arbitrary action of the Israeli authorities in
that city and the illegal attempts of Israel to annex the
Arab part of it. The question of Jerusalem reflects the
essence of that dangerous situation created in the Middle
East by Israel’s aggression against the Arab States in June
1967, and by Israel’s subsequent policy aimed at the seizure
of Arab territories and the undermining of efforts to
achieve a peaceful political settlement.

52. The Israeli authorities have indeed repeatedly given
assurances that they would take all necessary measures to
protect the Holy Places and ensure free access for all to
places of worship. But the problem is a political, religious
and legal one and not only an administrative and social one.
Obviously,
the future of Jerusalem cannot be decided
unilaterally. However, that is what we are now witnessing,
in a political context in which one might have hoped for
other results.

59. In this cbnnexion we should like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the assessme& of the
situation in the Middle East presented in the basic
document of the International Congress of Communist and
Workers’ Parties which was recently held in Moscow. This
document, which reflects the will of the peoples fighting
for peace and progress, states inter alia that:

53. It is to be deeply regretted that, at a time when serious
efforts are being made to arrive at a peaceful settlement of
the Middle East crisis, steps should be taken to alter the
existing state of affairs and further complicate the task of
the negotiators. Everyone is aware that Jerusalem, the Holy
City of three religions, will constitute one of the most
delicate points of any settlement. It is therefore all the
more important that the Government at present exercising
authority
over the city should refrain from any action
which might have irreversible consequences and jeopardize
the results of current talks.
’

“The ruling forces of Israel, supported by world
reaction including Zionist circles, are disregarding the
demands of the Arab States and the peace-loving peoples,
are ignoring the decisions of the United Nations calling
for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the occupied
territories, continuing to pursue a policy of expansion
and annexation and are constantly committing new acts
of military provocation.”
The document further states:
“The Arab peoples are continuing their determined
struggle in deference of freedom, independence and

54. My delegation, which cannot remain indifferent to the
fears expressed by the Jordanian Government, hopes.that
7

national progress, for the restoration of all the occupied
territories, and recognition of the national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine. The resistance movement
against the occupation is spreading, taking various forms,
and receiving increasing support. On the side of these
peoples are the Soviet Union, the other socialist States,
the international communist movement, and the solidarity of the national liberation forces in an increasingly
wide section of the public in the capitalist countries.”
60. At present the Security Council is considering only
one aspect of the general question of the situation in the
Middle East: the situation in Jerusalem. The fate of this
city after Israel’s attack in June 1967 became a matter of
immediate concern to the United Nations and the world
public, since Israel advanced its claims to all of Jerusalem
including the Arab part of it, immediately following its
seizure by Israeli armed forces.

at changingthe Arab character of the Old City; they are
forcefully expelling the Arab inhabitants from it, they are
destroying the Arab residential quarters and public bui’ldings, they are establishingIsraeli settlementsin the Arab
part of the city in order to changethe national compositilsn
of its inhabitants, they are trying to extend to Jerusalem
the application of Israeli laws and to subordinate its
economyto the.needsof Israel’seconomy. All theseactions
of Israel are illegal and constitute criminal arbitrary
conduct by the occupationauthorities.
64. The exampleof Jerusalemis highly typical of the wily
the Israeli.occupiersact. Disregardingthe decisionsof tlhe
United Nations, flouting international law, and paying no
attention whatever to the demandsof public opinion, they
are trying to expel the Arab population from lands that
have belongedto it for centuries, and to seizethose IanIds
for further Israeli expansion. If anybody still needsconfirmation of Israel’sexpansionistpolicy towardsthe neighbouring Arab States, of its aggressivepolicy against the
sovereignty and integrity of Arab countries, such con.
firmation will be found particularly in Israel’sactions with
regard to Jerusalem.Having seized foreign territory by
armed aggression,
the Israeli leadersnow loudly proclaim
that they are preparedto give the Arabs and other peoplles
the possibility of accessto the historical and religious
monumentsand Holy Placesin this city, assuming
that, by
doingso, they will be ableto compel the world to reconcile
itself to the fait accompliof their aggression,

61. Since June 1967, the Security Council and the General
Assembly have repeatedly considered the question of
Jerusalem and have unequivocally expressed their firm
opposition to Israel’s annexationist actions. They have
termed these actions illegal. In the decisions of the General
Assembly on this matter, based on the authority of the 100
States which in July 1967 voted for resolutions 2253
(ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) and reflecting the conscience of
the entire world community of States, it was stated that the
measures taken by Israel to change the status of this city
“are invalid”; and Israel was called upon “to rescind all
measures already taken and to desist forthwith from taking
any action which would alter the status of Jerusalem”.
However, subsequent events have shown that the Government of Israel has remained deaf to this appeal of the
General Assembly and has defiantly continued to pursue its
annexationist policy with regard to Jerusalem.
62. The Security Council, after having considered, in April
and May 1968, the question of the situation in Jerusalem,
confirmed the above-mentioned resolutions of the General
Assembly and noted that “Israel has taken further measures
and actions in contravention of those resolutions” [resolution 252 (1968)]. That havingbeensaid,the Councilalso
declared, in its resolution 252(1968), that all legislative
and administrativemeasurestaken by Israel wereinvalid
and urgently called upon Israel to rescind*them and to
desistfrom taking any action which tended to changethe
status of Jerusalem.However, the actions of the Israeli
authorities in Jerusalem,which have been describedin
detail here yesterday and today by the distinguished
representativesof Jordan, the United Arab Republicand
Saudi Arabia, show that the Government of Israel is
obstinately ignoring thesedemandsof the Security Council
aswell.

65. This was the very theme developed by the representative of Israel in his speech in the Security Council
yesterday, in which he carefuly evaded the substanceof
the item on the agenda of the Council-namely, the
questionof Israel’sviolation of the Council’sdecisionson
the questionof Jerusalem.Instead, the Israelirepresentative
again propoundeda colonialist and predatory philosophy,
implying that prosperity and civilization had beenbrought
to the Arab land of Jerusalemon the bayonetsof the Israeli
occupiers.He did not concealthe fact that Israelnot only
has no intention of complying with the demandsof the
Security Council concerning the city of Jerusalem,but is
not even intending either to withdraw its troopsfrom the
occupiedArab part of the city of Jerusalemin order to put
an end to illegality and arbitrary rule, This aloneshowsthe
need for a seriouswarning and severe condemnation elf
Israelby the Security Council.
66. The annexationist plans of Israel with regard to
Jerusalemhave been condemned and rejected by the
overwhelmingmajority of States Membersof the United
Nationsand by world opinion, including representativesof
variousreligions.If Israelis hoping that the peoplesof the
world will yield to the cynical claims of the aggressors
and
their attempt to dictate their terms, it is profoundby
mistaken. The designsof the Israeli extremists are not
destinedto succeed.The Israeli leadersshould seriously
ponder the dangerousconsequences
of sucha policy for the
State of Israelitself.

63. The statementsby the Israeli leaders,calling for the
so-calledunification of Jerusalemthrough annexation of
the Arab part of that city by Israel,arewell known. These
statements,which have never beendeniedby the Government of Israel or its official representatives,are directly
contrary to the decisionsof the GeneralAssemblyandthe
67. With each new provocation, with every month of
Security Council. But the matter is not confined to mere ‘delay in the achievementof a peaceful settlement of the
statements. The Israeli occupation forces are, in fact,
Middle East conflict and in the withdrawal of Israel’sforces
carrying out a programmeof measures
in Jerusalemaimed from all Arab territories, the position of the Israeli
8

invaders-in the eyes of tiorld public opinion and in view of
the growing opposition of the Arab peoples to the illegal
occupation-is becoming increasingly complicated,
68. The situation in Jerusalem again confirms the need for
the speediest possible elimination of the consequences of
Israeli aggression and the restoration of peace in the Middle
East, In order to arrive at a peaceful settlement in this area,
it is essential that Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967 is complied with in all its parts and
provisions; it is essential that Israel withdraws its armed
forces from all the Arab territories it has occupied as a
result of the aggression of 5 June 1967, including the Arab
part of the city of Jerusalem. This is the firm position of
the Soviet Union on the question of a peaceful political
settlement in the Middle East.
69. The Soviet Union fully supports the just struggle of
the Arab States. The Secretary-General of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Leonid Brezhnev, declared at the International Congress of
Communist and Workers’ Parties that:

73. The PRESIDENT (translated ffom French): I wish to
thank the representativeof the Soviet Union and to stress
that, as he has just said, Senegalwas one-of the first
countries of French-speakingAfrica south of the Saharato
maintain, sinceits independence,diplomatic relationswith
the Soviet Union. We hope these relations will develop
harmoniously in the obvious interest of the Soviet and
Senegalese
peoples.
74. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from Frerwh):
Before referring to the item on our agenda,my delegation
wishesto associateitself with you, Mr. President,and with
the delegationsprecedingus in congratulating Ambassador
Solano LBpez of Paraguayon the way he presidedover our
work last month, when a problemof critical importanceto
Africa wasdebated.
75. As far as you yourself are concerned, Mr. President,
you can readily imaginehow happy the Algerian delegation
is to see you presiding over our work this month. This
feeling is justified by the fraternal ties which unite our two
countries in a single destiny-that of Africa. We are
convinced that your human qualities, and your talents asa
lawyer and diplomat are proof of the greatnessof Africa, a
greatnesswhich restsnot on military or economic power,
but on generosityof feeling and a deepsenseofjustice and
dignity. We are convinced that under your guidanceour
work will have a happy conclusion.

“The Soviet Union is giving and will continue to give
every kind of assistance to the Arab States which are
victims of aggression. We strongly advocate full implementation of the provisions of the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967, which opens the way
for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East ,”

76. A year hasalready elapsedsincethe Security Council
adopted its resolution 2.52(1968) on Jerusalem. That
resolution, needlessto say, followed upon two resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly at its fifth emergency
special session(2253 (ES-V) and 2254 t&S-V,J/ immediately after the Israeli aggressionof June 1967 againstthe
Arab countries. By promptly and almost unanimously
adopting those resolutions, the international community
intended to show the occupier the particular importanceit
attached to the fate of the Holy City.

70. We consider that the Security Council must draw
conclusions from the fact that Israel has failed to comply
with its decisions on the question of Jerusalem, and with
the resolutions of the General Assembly on this question,
The Security Council, discharging its duty in conformity
with the United Nations Charter, must take the necessary
measures to ensure implementation of its decisions and
must resolutely condemn Israel for its illegal actions in
Jerusalem. The Council must call upon Israel to cease
forthwith its attempts to Israelize occupied Arab Jerusalem.

77. In fact, however, defying the wishesof the hundreds
of &lions of liuman beings for whom Jerusalemis the
symbol of faith, on 8 June 1967 the Zionists begantaking
preliminary measuresto absorbthe Old City. A week later
the Cabinet of the invading power was asked to consider
new laws for its annexation. Since that time we have been
witnessing the implementation of this plan, in flagrant
violation of all the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council on the one hand, am1
despite the opposition of the population of Jerusalemon
the other hand.

71. Yesterday, the representative of Jordan, Mr. El-Farra,
set forth in his statement some considerations regarding the
actions the Security Council should take. The Soviet
delegation supports those well-founded and just demands
by Jordan. That is exactly the way the Security Council
should act.
72. In this connexion, we were somewhat surprised that
the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon,
today raised the question of so-called acts, of violence in
connexion
with the consideration of the question of
Jerusalem-or,
to be more accurate, the question of Israel’s
disregard for the decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. The Soviet delegation considers it is its
duty to draw attention to the fact that we are now talking
about the unlawful acts being committed by Israel in
Jerusalem, which are entirely unjustified and which are
contrary to the clearly expressed will of the overwhelming
majority of States Members of the United Nations. It is
specifically this, and nothing else whatever, which should
be the subject of consideration by the Security Council.
The Council must not be diverted from this problem which
has been raised by the representative of Jordan.

78. Resolution 252 (1968) of the Security Council,
adopted on 21 May 1968, statesthat: “all legislativeand
administrative measures
and actionstaken by Israel,including expropriation of land and progerties thereon, which
tend to changethe legal statusof Jerusalemareinvalid and
cannot change that status”, and it calls upon Israel: ‘“to
rescind all such measuresalready taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any further action which tends to
changethe statusof Jerusalem”.
79. To these two imperative provisions adopted by the
supreme organ of the United Nations responsiblefor the
9

maintenance of international peace and security, the.
Tel Aviv authorities have responded first by the adoption of
administrative measures imposing the oCcupier’Slegislation
on the Arab population of Jerusalem;‘secondly, by the
systematic destruction of the possessions and property of
the Arab population; and, thirdly, by intimidation, torture
and daily expulsions aimed at the total disintegration Of the
Holy City.

apparent disagreement concerns only the methods. All of
them, military men and civilians alike, are unanimously in
favour of creating faits accomplis and settling foreign and
hostile populations in the midst of the indigenous population. This expansionist process is also intended to destroy
the gconomic structures of the neighbouring countries of
Palestine in order to keep them in a state of permanent
under.development.

80. The inhabitants of dozens of buildings have also been
expelled from their homes. Even schools have not been
spared. For example, a hundred-year-old Moslem instltution, the Tankaziye, was evacuated at the order of the
occupation authorities. This led to a protest from the
Supreme Moslem Council, which has just issued an appeal
to the municipalities and the Chambers of Commerce of the
occupied territories, calling on them to draw the attention,
of world public opinion to the barbarous acts perpetrated
by the Zionists against the population.

87. The events occurring in Jerusalem are attracting the
particular attention of the international community. This is
quite understandable, since we know that Jerusalem, the
symbol of Arab identity, is being depersonalized and
destroyed by the Zionist occupier. It is also wholly
understandable when we know that Jerusalem, the city of
peace and a lofty centre of spiritual life, has become the
headquarters for conferences of Zionist millionaires who
are financing the occupation and consolidating the faits
accomplis created by the Zionists, and who are attempting,
first and foremost, to impose the economic domina.tion of
international monopolies on the Arab peoples of the region.
This shows how great is the determination of the Tel-Aviv
authorities to maintain their occupation, with the sipport
of the Zionist financiers, in defiance of the entire international community which has opposed the annexation of
Jerusalem.

81. Furthermore, in his statement yesterday, the representative of the Zionist authorities praised the results of the
measures taken in response to the decisions of the Security
Council, and drew a complete picture of the alleged
benefits of Zionist colonization. According to him this
colonizatibn has brought the benefits of modern civilization, art, town planning, and even trade union rights to the
people of the region.

88. The Security Council must today consider the refusal
of the Zionist authorities to comply with its previous
decisions on the question of Jerusalem. It is that refusal
which is the cause of the permanent tension which
characterizes the situation in the Middle East. How can we
believe that in these circumstances a just solution of the
conflict in the Middle East can emerge, when the Security
Council allows this decision to remain a dead letter and
tolerates the fact that, in complete disregard of al1
resolutions, Israel has for the last two years continued to
occupy the territories of Member States of the United
Nations and to annex the Holy City of Jerusalem? The
vacillations of international bodies-and we must. stress
this-encourage the aggressor to persist in his attitude.

82. The arguments used yesterday to justify the annexation and occupation of the Arab territories by brute force
can only be likened to those of the advozates ofapartheld
in Rhodesia and South Africa. Have we not heard all too
often that South Africa is the most prosperous country,
where Africans enjoy a high standard. of living never
attained by the Africans of other independent States?
83. The false excuses and alibis put forward to try to
justify the brutality of the occupation in no way change the
true nature of the problem. The colonid venture of the
Zionist movement in Palestine cannot escape the laws and
methods of all colonization. This phenomenon is so well
known today that the peoples who have experienced it have
learned all its lessons. In 21 years the Zionists have
occupied Palestinian land and that of other Arab territories
as a result of three successive aggressions. With each
aggression the over-all objective was the same: to possess
more Arab lands and have fewer Palestinians, This, moreover, is the very essence of the Zionist doctrine.
84. The object is to destroy, to disintegrate the Palestinian
people, to turn it into a mass of refugees which in the
course of time will be displaced in small scattered minor&
ties all over the world. In short, to bring about a new
Diaspora.

’ 89. With respect to the problem concerning us today, the
Security Council must condemn Israel for its refusal to
comply with the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, particularly Council resolution 253
(1968); it must take specific measures within the framer
work of the Charter to ensure compliance with1 thcss
resolutions, and to fix a deadline for the implementation oi
the resolutions in order to put an end to the policy of
destruction, expropriation and oppression.
90. The Algerian delegation considers that it is hi& time
for the Council to assume its responsibilities ,in accordance
with the Charter, and to tackle the causes af thle crisis
which has been convulsing the Middle East for 21 years
Refusal to recogriize the national rights of the Palestinian
people and the continuation of the occupation of the
territories of the Arab countries by the aggressive forces or
Israel are the principal causes of that crisis.

85. The systematic destruction of dwellings, sometimes
even of whole villages such as Qalqiliya, is part of the
depersonalization of the people and the territory. The land
of Palestine as a whole is being subjected to this sorry
undertaking.

91. In order to bring about a just and lasting peace in Lhc
tiiddle East it is essential to restore their lawful rights to
the Palestinian people, and to ensure the total withdrawal

86. This objective has been clearly stated by the enemy of
the peoples of Palestine and of the other Arab States; any
10

of the aggressive forces from the occupied Arab territory.
In so doing, the Council would merely be assuming its
responsibilities in conformity with the principles of selfdetermination, the sovereignty of peoples, and the territorial integrity of States. To continue to ignore the
existence of the Palestinian people, and its struggle to
regain its national rights as a decisive element, is to
disregard the political realities of the region and to overlook
One of the indispensable factors in the search for a lasting
peace in the Middle East.

Jerusalem’sspecialhistory and specialplace in the world
community. Unfortunately, there have been acts of many
kinds that have broken the peacein Jerusalemandthat are
of deep concern to my Government and to the international community.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Fkemh): I thank
the representativeof Algeria for the fraternal sentimentshe
hassokindly addressedto me. As he knows,Algeriaholds a
privileged place in the heartsof the Senegalese,
and we shall
have occasionto expressour solidarity andfraternity at the
next Pan-African Cultural Festival which is to be held at
Algiers,
92.

93, Mr. YOST (United Statesof America): Mr. President,
may I first of all expressmy admirationand appreciation
for the tact and dexterity with which your predecessor,
AmbassadorSolano Lopez, conducted the difficult deliberations of this Council last month, Weare all deeplygrateful
to him.
94. May I also welcomeyou, Mr. President,and express
our confidence that you likewise will lead us, with your
great experience and wisdom, your customaryability and
authority, to constructive action, You will have our full
support in so doing.
9s. Once again the Council has been summonedto deal
with certain actions taken by the Governmentof Israel in
Jerusalem,We have listenedcarefully to the statementsof
the representativesof Jordan andseveralother Arab States,
aswell asto the reply of the representativeof Israel.
96. The discussionthus far hasmade amplyclearthat the
status of Jerusalemis not an isolatedproblem,but, rather,
an integral part of the whole complex of issuesin the
current Middle Eastern conflict which must be resolved.
This is not a novel conclusion. The Council clearly
recognized that fact in its resolution 242 (1967), which
treats the entire Middle Easternsituation asa package.That
resolution remainsthe basisof our approachto a just and
lasting peace in the area. You are all well aware of the
strenuous efforts my own Government is makingto help
Mr. Jarring promote a peacefulsettlement.Progress
in those
efforts has, admittedly, been slow. This is not surprising
when one reflects on how deepthe roots of the conflict go.
I3ut the important thing is that someprogressis being
made, The fact that it hasnot beencrownedwith dramatic
successshould not give groundsfor despair.Nor should it
be exploited as justification for action which will make
greater progresseven more difficult. This appliesto actions
in Jerusalem as elsewherein the area..Indeed,Jerusalem
occupiesa very specialplace in all our mindsand all our
hearts as one of the holiest citiesin the world. Jerusalemis
a sacredshrine to three of the world’s largestand oldest
religious faiths: Islam, Christianity and Judaism.By virtue
of that fact, the United Stateshasalwaysconsideredthat
Jerusalemenjoys a unique international standingand that
no action should be taken there without full regard to
11

97. We understandthe deep emotional concernswhich
move all partiesto the Arab-Israeli dispute on the subjectof
Jerusalem.We do not believe, however, that any of those
concerns are served by what is now taking place in East
Jerusalem,whether it be actions by those now exercising
authority there or by individuals considering themselves
aggrieved and therefore justified in resorting to violence.
The expropriation or confiscation of land, the construction
of housingon suchland, the demolition or confiscationof
buildings, including those having historic or religious
significance,and the application of Israeli law to occupied
portions of the city are detrimental to our common
interestsin the city. The United States considersthat the
part of Jerusalemthat cameunder the control of Israel in
the June 1967 war, like other areasoccupied by Israel, is
occupied territory and hence subject to the provisionsof
international law governing the rights and obligationsof an
occupying Power, Among the provisions of international
law which bind Israel,asthey would bind any occupier,are
the provisions that the occupier has no right to make
changesin lawsor in administrationother than thosewhich
are temporarily necessitatedby his security interests,and
that an occupier.may not confiscate or destroy private
property. The pattern of behaviour authorized under the
Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 and international
law is clear: the occupier must maintain the occupiedarea
asintact and unaltered aspossible,without interfering with
the customary life of the area, and any changesmust be
necessitatedby the immediate needsof the occupation. I
regret to say that the actions of Israel in the occupied
portion of Jerusalempresenta different picture, onewhich
gives rise to understandable concern that the eventual
dispositionof East Jerusalemmay be prejudiced, and that
the private rights and activities of the population are
already beingaffected and altered.
98. My Government regrets and deplores this pattern of
activity, and it hassoinformed the Government of israelon
numerousoccasionssince June 1967. We have consistently
refused to recognizethose measuresashaving anything but
a provisional character and do not accept them asaffecting
the ultimate statusof Jerusalem.
99. I have explained in some detail the oppositionof the
United Statesto certain measurestaken by the Government
of Israel in Jerusalem,sincethis is the preciseobject of the
complaint brought before us by the Government of Jordan.
But, as I suggestedearlier, we cannot logically and
intelligently consider the problem of Jerusalemwithout
putting it in its proper perspective-the Middle East
situation asa whole. In this connexion I would recall that
one of the first major policy decisionstaken by President
Nixon after assumingoffice this year was that the United
States Government shouldtake new initiatives in helpingto
try to bring peaceto the Middle East. For the pastseveral
months we have been devoting our best efforts to this task.
We shall continue to do so, but for theseefforts to succeed
we shall require the goodwill and co-operation of the

pa&es themselves. A just and lasting peace in the MiddIe
East is long and tragically overdue. It will not be found
through terror bombings, which inevitably harm innocent
civilians, any more than it will through unilateral attempts
to alter the status of Jerusalem. It will be found only
through the instruments and processes of negotiation,
accommodation and agreement. It will come OdY througPl
the exercise by the parties of the utmost restraint-not just
along the cease-fire lines or in public statements, but also
on the ground, in Jerusalem itself.
100. In treating the problem of Jerusalem, since we view it
in the context of the total situation in the Middle East, my
delegation will subject any proposal for Council action first
of all to the test of whether that proposal is likely to help
or to hinder the peaceful settlement process. I hope all
members will do likewise. For example, one constructive
move the Council might make would be to request the
parties to lay aside their recriminations, to desist from any
action, in Jerusalem or elsewhere, that might be construed
as prejudicing or prejudging a final, comprehensive settlement, a just and lasting peace. Thus, our consideration of
the situation in Jerusalem could provide a fitting occasion
on which to insist once more that the parties to a dispute
which keeps the world’s holiest city in turmoil act
responsibly to resolve the whole digpute; and until it is
resolved, that they take no action anywhere which could
further jeopardize its resolution. 4
101. The PRESIDENT (translated from I;)-en&\: I thank
the representative of the United States for the all too
generous words of praise he has addressed to me. As you
know, long before acquiring independence, my country
maintained consular relations with the United States, with
what I might call, if you will ‘forgive me, the benevolent
complicity of France. Since its independence, my country
has been maintaining close relations with the United States,
and it is our hope that these relations may continue to
develop felicitously.

attitude, both in principle and in practice. In principle,
we do not hold with a situation whereby Powers arrogate
to themselves the right to discuss the destinies of nations,
and countries without the participation of those con. *
cemed and in lieu of the immediate colloquy between the
nations themselves. From the political and practical point
of view, we cannot but react negatively to the discussions
of Powers concerning our destiny while we are fully
aware that one of them is engaged in a trend hostile to us,
as the outspoken representative of the Arab States, the
rationale of the discussions being that the representatives
of the other countries should try to reach a compromise
with this Power.”
105. At the 1481st meeting of the Security Council, on 24
June 1969, the representative of the USSR, Mr. Malik,
declared: “Experience of life shows that malice and slander
have always been and continue to be signs of falsehood and
impotence” [1481st nzeethg, para. 124/. It is regrettable
that the Soviet representative who today occupies
Mr. Malik’s seat has not followed that opinion. What is it, I
should like to ask in plain language, that the Soviet Union
really wants? After all, it has never recognized Jordan’s
occupation of part of Jerusalem. On the contrary, the
representative of the USSR, at the 197th meeting of the
Security Council, on 20 May 1948, stated that:
“ 4. . none of the States whose troops have entered,
Palestine can claim that Palestine forms part of its
territory. It is an altogether separate territory without
any relationship to the territories of the States which
have sent their troops into Palestine.“7
106. What is it, then, that the Soviet Union objects to:
that Israel succeeded in chasing away, in 1967, the foreign
troops which the USSR declared in 1948 to be aggressors?
What is it that the Soviet Union objects to in the Jerusalem
of today? Is it that the average monthly salary of unskilled
Arab workers in Jerusalem has risen in the last two years
from $23 to $109? Shall I draw any comparisons between
these salaries and those of engineers and doctors in certain
parts of Europe? Does the Soviet Union object that there
are Arabic-language newspapers in Jerusalem free to
criticize the Israel authorities? Or is it the fact that Arab
inhabitants enjoy complete freedom of movement and
travel?

102. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Israel, who wishes to exercise his right of reply; I now call
on him.
103. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I ,should like to extend to
YOU, Mr. President, my delegation’s profound respect and
best wishes in your exalted office; may I also join in the
expression of appreciation to the Ambassador of Paraguay
for the sagacity and tact with which he guided the Council’s
deliberations last month,

107. AS the Soviet representative, as well as others, has
referred today to the general situation in the Middle East
and to Israel’s policies in general, I should like to observe
that even if this debate may serve no other useful purpose,
it has again unmasked the USSR’s intransigent position and
destructive policy in the Middle East; and thus Israel is still
being abused with accusations of aggression in 1967, two
Years after the USSR had failed in the United Nations,
together with the Arab States, to shift responsibility for the
outbreak of hostilities from itself and from the Arab States
to Israel. A year and a half after the Security Council, in its
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, called for the
establishment of a just and lasting peace through agreement
between the parties, the Soviet Union still proposes, as the

104. I feel that certain comments in the course of today’s
meeting on talks between permanent members of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East make
it necessary and appropriate for me to bring before the
COUnCil the following excerpt from a st&ement made in the
Knesset yesterday by Israel’s Prime Minister, Mrs, Golda
Meir:
“There are those who complain of Israel’s intransigence
and quote as an example our attitude to the Big Four
talks. It would be a fatal error to try to’explain Israel’s
stand in psychological terms such as stubbornness, suspicion and the like, whilst disregarding our balanced

7 Set

Official

Records

of

NO. 70, 297th meeting,p. 5.
12

the

Secun’ty

Council,

Third

Year,

Soviet representative has today, political settlements, and
other such make-shift arrangements. In response to the
Security Council’s decision and the expectant hope of the
entire world that secure and recognized boundaries would
at last be established between Israel and the Arab States,
the Soviet Union continues, as it has again done today, to
demand withdrawal to the chaos and vulnerability of the
preJune 1967 military lines.

i

108. Even on the question of the cease-fire, the Security
Council’s first step towards lasting peace, not a word is
heard from the Soviet Union in this Council to the effect
that it should be observed scrupulously by regular and
irregular forces. On the contrary, the Soviet representative
finds it appropriate even to express encouragement for the
continuation Of terror warfare against Israeli civilian men,
women and children. The Soviet position remains, thus, as
extreme as before, its attitude towards Israel as hostile as
ever, its total identification with and support, military and
political, for Arab belligerency and relentless warfare
against Israel unchanged. Under these circumstrinces, to
regard the Soviet Union as a partner in the search for a
solution of the Middle East conflict is to expose the
situation to sinister manoeuvres, destructive counsel and
dangerous designs.
109. It was only yesterday that I indicated the frivolity of
the Jordanian complaint. I could not have expected that
this would be demonstrated so convincingly and so soon by
the proponents and supporters of the complaint. Surely,
had there been any genuineness in Jordan’s alleged concern
for the situation of the Arab community in Jerusalem, had
there been any foundation for the Jordanian arguments and
claims, had Jordan truly sought recognition and remedy
fr?m the Security Council for any real difficulties that
might have arisen in Jerusalem, it would not have brought
before this organ the advocacy of the delegations that
appeared on its behalf today. It would not have looked for
support to countries that stand condemned in the eyes of
the Security Council, countries which by their behaviour
have put themselves outside the fold and deprived themselves of the right to be heard on questions of international
obligations, civilized conduct or human rights.

for the fate of millions of its own citizens plunged into
catastrophe by their Government’s persistence in aggression? Egypt is up in arms because of the relocation of
seventeen families, made necessary by measures to protect
the lives of thousands who visit and worship daily at the
Western Wall. Is it so that the world should forget that
Egypt has made half a million of its citizens homeless and
has driven them out of the towns and villages along the
west bank of the Suez Canal for the sinister purpose of
turning this sector into a line of incessant armed attacks in
breach of the cease-fire?
112. The representative of the United Arab Republic has
found it proper to criticize the demolition of two slum
structures after compensation had been paid to their
owners. He must surely remember how the armed forces of
his own country destroyed entire villages in Yemen and
used poison gas against their own Arab brethren. Has his
Government, befpre deciding to participate in this debate,
made a comparison between security measures Israeli
authorities are sometimes cornpilled to take in defence
against Arab terror warfare and the manner in which
Egyptian security forces killed, last year in Alexandria, 16
demonstrating Egyptian students or the way in which the
United Arab Republic used brutal force to put down the
frequent demonstrations and riots in Gaza during the
occupation of the area by that country?
113. Last but not least, when Mr. El Kony asked for the
floor to speak of human rights, did he give any thought to
the Jews of Egypt, still oppressed, still deprived of their
liberties and human rights, still lingering in concentration
camps? It may be that the United Arab Republic regards
the Security Council as only a stage on which the wickedest
of players can act the roles of saints. If this is so, however,
it becomes even more important to bear in mind that
Egypt’s appearance before the Security Council is only ,a
play, or rather a farce.
114. Can anyone consider seriously advice from such
Governments? Can anyone suggest that Israel should learn
from their ways? It is obvious, however, that Jordan has
found it appropriate to accept and even request support
from those States, because its complaint to the Council is
nothing but another exercise in hatred and hostility
towards Israel, In such an exercise the credentials of
participants are of little import as long as they are able to
contribute abuse and slander, and this in fact they have
done today in great profusion. Of such Cato said: “We
cannot control the evil tongues, but a good life enables US
to despise them.”

110. How can Egypt and Algeria speak of law and justice
if they do not even attempt to conceal their repudiation of
the United Nations Charter in relation to Israel? How can
they invoke Security Council resolutions if they reject the
call for a just and lasting peace through agreement with
Israel contained in the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967, ‘which remains the basis for all peacemaking efforts in the area? The United Arab Republic and
Algeria pursue openly warfare against Israel with regular
and irregular forces. Algeria has not even gone through the
motions of accepting the cease-fire but has publicly
proclaimed Israel’s destruction as the primary objective of
its policy. What right, then, do these two countries possess
to put forth views in this Council on what Israel does or
does not do or to assess Israel’s actions in the light of the
very tenets which they have debased, defied and discarded?
Since when are criminals ,to be allowed to masquerade as
judges?

115. A few random examples will suffice to illustrate the
baseness of the Arab statements we heard today and the
baselessness of the allegations contained in them. The Arab
representatives and some of their supporters have spoken
repeatedly of Jerusalem as being Arab. Repetition of the
falsehood does not turn it into truth. At the 1482nd
meeting, I quoted the President of the Institute of Holy
Land Studies, who on 9 December 1968 stated inter da:
“It is also erroneous to say ‘Jerusalem has been
overwhelmingly Arab from the seventh century unti1 the
modern influx. , .‘. Historically the opposite is true. The

Ill.
Egypt pretends concern about the Arab community
of Jerusalem. Is it to conceal Egypt’s utfer lack of concern
1’3

Jewish population has been the majority in Jerusalem for
many, many years; long before modern times.”
In modern times, of course, we have the census to rely on.
In 1844, according to the Encyclopaedia Britannica, of the
total population of 15,510 there were in Jerusalem 7,190
Jews, 5,000 Moslems and 3,300 Christians. In 1876,
according to the Guide Indicateur de la Terre Sainte, there
were 12,000 Jews, 7,560 Moslems and 5,470 Christians. In
1896, when the Jewish population rose to 28,112, the
Moslems numbered 8,560 and the Christians 8,748, this
according to the Calendar for Palestine of 1895-1896. The
number of Jews in Jerusalem reached 40,000 by 1905 in a
total population of 60,000. The number of Moslems
declined to 7,000. In 1910 there were 47,400 Jews, 9,800
Moslems and 16,400 Christians. By 193 1, the Jewish
inhabitants of Jerusalem numbered, according to the
Government census of Palestine, 51,222. There were
19,894 Moslems and 19,335 Christians. In 1948, Jerusalem
was a city of 100,000 Jews, 40,000 Moslems, 25,000
Christians; and on the eve of the June 1967 hostilities,
200,000 Jews, 54,903 Moslems and 12,646 Christians
resided in Jerusalem. Today there are in the city more than
200,000 Jews, about 60,000 Arabs and 5,G30 persons of
other nationalities.
116. There seems to be, however, a strange tendency
among our Arab cousins to bestow the title “Arab” on
various parts of land and sea even if there is no foundation
for it. Thus, the Gulf known universally as the Persian Gulf
is claimed by the Arabs to be the Arab Gulf. Parts of
certain countries in Africa and Asia are marked on Arab
maps as Arab for no other reason than the Arab desire to
consider them as such. And the same method seems to be
applied to Jerusalem. The Arab element has undoubtedly
been prominent in the city, but not predominant; and this
has been the situation for centuries. Even within the walls
of the Old City of Jerusalem the Arab Quarter was only one
of four Quarters, the others being the Jewish, the Armenian
and the Christian. There is no doubt that a good part of the
Christian Quarter would protest against being regarded as
Arab.

the title-holders of empty structures. The attitude of the
Israeli authorities is illustrated
by the example of
Mr. Mahmud Mustafa al-Balbishi, the owner of a small
souvenir kiosk in one of the structures recently cleared
away. His annual rent for the store was 1,500 Israeli
pounds. The compensation he received was 150,000
pounds; that is, the equivalent of rent for 100 years.
120. The true situation in Jerusalem today, not the one
painted in a distorted manner by the Arab representatives,
is characterized by simple but significant facts as, for
instance, the following: the municipal budget for the Arab
inhabitants-the Arab inhabitants-of
the part of Jerusalem
formerly occupied by Jordan was, in 1968, $3.7 million.
This is five times more than the total municipal budget
under Jordanian rule, which in 1966 was S700,pBO. The
wages of Arab workers in East Jerusalem have risen in the
last two years in terms of real constant wages-that is,
allowing for changes in purchasing power-as follows:
unskilled labour by 264 per cent; construction workers by
137 per cent; hotel employees by 125 per cent; municipal
employees by 164 per cent.
121. The Security Council has been flooded with outcries
about the clearing of slum dwellings. Has any of the Arab
representatives, however, thought of mentioning the fact
that, since June 1967, 91 new houses have been constructed in Jerusalem by private Arab owners, including 14
public institutions, a church, a school, a boarding-house and
a youth club?
122. What could give the lie to accusations we heard at
today’s meeting more effectively than the observation in
the Magazine section of The New York Rimes of 11 May
1969 made by Ahmad Barham, a forty-six-year-old staff
member of the Arabic daily, Al-Anba, published in Jerusalem? Speaking of the days under Jordanian rule, Mr. Barham says:
“Had I written then half of the things I write now
against the Government-and
I have a lot against the
Israeli Government-I would have been thrown into jail.
Being a journalist now is so much easier.”

117. What is no less important, however, is the fact that
Jerusalem, holy to Islam, Christianity and Judaism, and
venerated as such by the Israeli authorities, hasthroughout
its history of thousands of years served as the capital of one
nation only and one nation alone: the Jewish people.

It is understandable, of course, that Arab representatives
find it difficult to accept such facts. This does not alter,
however, the reality of Jerusalem’s life today. Life in the
city goes on and must go on. No harassment by the
Jordanian Government and its supporters, whether by acts
of sabotage in the city or by political campaigns in the
United Nations, can arrest it. The Jordanian and the Arab
Governments must realize once and for all that violence,
harassment and pressure will not weaken Israel’s determination and will not deter it from pursuing its goal of real
peace and real security-for Jerusalem, for Israel as a whole,
and for its inhabitants.

118. After the Arab conquest of Jerusalem in 635 and
during the relatively brief period of Arab rule, Jerusalem
remained neglected and forlorn. It became a capital again
only with Israel’s rebirth; and this is the mystery and
miracle of Jerusalem’s eternal link not only with the Jewish
religion, but with the Jewish people.
119. Another claim which was voiced today by the Arab
representatives was that the various projects and security
measures have left Arab families homeless. I should like to
state categorically that not a single Arab family has been
asked to leave its house or apartment without receiving
either alternate accommodations or compensation. It is to
be observed that compensation was paid not only to
kmntS
actually residing in a particular house, but also to

123. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of Israel for the words he has addressed
to me. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic, whom I invite to take a place at
the Council table, and on whom I now call.
124. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I would not have taken the time
of this important body had it not been for the invectives
14

I

I

,

expounded by the representative of Israel; these are the
kind of invectives usually resorted to by that representative
whenever he finds himself in utter despair, not able to say
anything but trying to disguise himself as a lamb when he is
known to be a wolf. TO begin as he did, let me say that it
looks as though the representative of Israel supposes that all
of us are ignorant about what the press relates every day.
Just to refute his last allegations, let us look at the
statement that was made by his Defence Minister on 27
June 1969. From Jerusalem the following was reported:

enced the hatred, the division, the bitterness and resentment, that come from small incidents of neglect, from
insignificant oversights, from discrimination, which result
in hatred, bloodshed and disaster. The history of our
Jewish people everywhere in the world is full of such
lessons.
... . .

1‘

“The Arab population of Israel . , . are a people in need
of a prophet, a people in pain, a people tilled with fear,
They have much to say and wish to be heard. I come to
you today as their representative, bowed down by the
weight of their problems, the outpourings of their hearts,
the yearnings, deep, silent, profound yearnings, which
have issued from their very depths,”

“Defence Minister Moshe Dayan indicated today that
Israel planned to retain considerable territory on the west
bank of the Jordan River that she seized in the 1967 war.
Speaking at a meeting of industrialists in Jerusalem,
Mr. Dayan said: ‘We are not talking of minor rectifications of the border, but major ones’.
1

In an official text handed by the same Catholic Archbishop
Raya to Prime Minister Meir, he says this:

“We must have great faith and confidence in ourselves
and believe in the most elementary things. This is our
homeland, and if I say ‘homeland’ I mean also Nablus and
Jericho.”

“I have, for the past four months, made daily rounds of
the villages and small towns, as well as the major cities.
My office in Haifa is filled every day and at every hour of
the day and part of the night with delegations and
individuals who come and pour out their difficulties and
worries of their daily lives. Everywhere I go, and from
everyone I see, I discover an attitude, a psychological
situation, which disturbs me greatly and which should be
of primary concern to our Government.”

The report adds that:
“The reference was to two west-bank area towns taken
from Jordan in the six-day war. As for the Golan heights
territory captured from Syria, Mr. Dayan said that this
was no longer negotiable and suggested that ‘we consider
it part of Israel like the Jezreel Valley or the Galilee’.”

Then he goes on to refer in detail to the many acts of
discrimination to which the Arab minority in Israel is
subjected, and he says this:

125. Such statements which abound and which have
become legend by now, made by responsible Israeli
speakers who are speaking irresponsibly, would indeed form
a volume. But Mr. Tekoah today went again into an
argument about which the least that can be said is that it is
a pity that it should be repeated in the second half of the
twentieth century, after the signature of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. What does his argument amount to? It amounts
again, as stated by the representative of Algeria, to
picturing in a very rosy manner the benefits that have
accruead to the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem and of the
occupied area as a result of the Israeli aggression in 1967. In
other words, we are told that Israel waged thesix-day war
in order to build schools for the Arabs and bring in water
and build houses. That is ridiculous, to say the least, and it
is an insult to the intelligence of people who have to listen
to such arguments.

“Many of the young people wish to study, but they are
without hope that following the completion of their
studies they will be able to find suitable employment.
They are bluntly told that ‘as Arabs’, even capable and
qualified, they are not welcome to responsible positions.
The ‘Arabs’ are not permitted to broaden their fields of
intellectual endeavours. They are limited to the humanities and social sciences. The other fields of science and
electronics are closed to them. Many of the young men
resent the fact that they are not allowed to pursue their
interests in the scientific field, and this resentment is
turning into gall and bitterness.”
127. Now, in the same vein, I wish to speak about the rosy
picture which the neo-colonialist, the representative of the
Government of Tel Aviv, tried to paint when earlier in this
meeting he talked about the rise in the wages of labourers.
Now, statistics, for those who know statistics, are really a
very tricky question. You can play with them any way YOU
want and you can always prove things by them the way YOU
want. However, the President of the Catholic Women’s
Guild gave an account, in April 1968, of the life of the
Arabs in Jerusalem. Her name is Mrs. Giustiniani, and she
said:

126. However, I have here in my hand a document from
Israel itself, It is a speech delivered by Archbishop Joseph
Raya of Acre, Israel, on the occasion of his visit to the
Israeli Prime Minister, Mrs. Golda Meir. It is dated 13 June
1969 and reads in part as follows:
“Now, gazing at our situation as minority groups in
Israel, we wish to pour from our hearts into your own,
Madam Prime Minister, an anxious thought which is
disturbing us.

“Laborers have difficulty in locating work, and eight
months after the war the banks of Arab Jerusalem remain
closed. A Palestinian printer has only 5 per cent of the
work which he had formerly and he has been forced to
pay his employees out of his own savings at one half their

“Having lived in America for many years, I have seen
the dangers that ensue from the presence of a minority in
the midst of a majority group. I have seen and experi15

representative were to review the text of the British
Mandate for Palestineshe would find therein the following
two articles: article 7, stating that the nationality of this
country is the Palestiniannationality and that Jewswho
come to settle in Palestinemay acquire that nationality,
and article 5, statingthat the Mandatory Powerhasno right
to cede any part of Palestineto foreign elements.That is
not a figment of the imagination; it is an international
document, It is the British Mandate for Palestine.But it
might be saidthat this is ancient history.

former rate of pay. Although Jordan collected 1967 taxes
from the people of Jerusalem, Israel is exacting Israeli
taxes for the same year: those who cannot pay have their
property confiscated. The Israelis have also interfered
with the tourist industry upon which many Arab residents of Jerusalem depend for their livelihood.
“Schools in Arab Jerusalem are experiencing economic
difficulties. All non-local students from St. George’s
School have been removed, and the school run by the
Sisters of Zion will be closed at the end of this academic
year for lack of students.”

129. When the Mandatory Power, Great Britain, threw, so
to speak, the problem of Palestineinto the lap of the
United Nations, it alsosuppliedinformation indicating the
This Italian Catholic lady goes on to say, quoting an article
ownership of land in Palestineas divided betweenArabs
which appeared in the Internationnl Herald Tribune about
and Jews;I have it with me here. With particular reference
the desecrationof the Holy City of Jerusalem:
to Israel, this information9 submitted by the Mandatfory
Power
proves that, in Palestine, the percentageof Jewish
“The most reprehensiblething is the conspicuous
display of smut on the newstandsof recently occupied land ownershipin the sub-district of Jerusalemwas2 per
cent ascomparedwith 84 per cent owned by the Arabs and
East Jerusalemand Bethlehem. One can hardly avoid
I4 per cent by public and others. But to throw the Arabs
seeing magazines,published in Israel. . . with photographsof unclad women and of far worseunprintable out of Jerusalemin particular and Israel asa whole is part
andparcelof the Israelimasterplan to occupy Israel.
pornographicsceneson the covers, exhibited and sold
closeby Bethlehem’sMangerSquare,hungup just outside 130. We know of the ‘assassinated
Count Folke BernaOld Jerusalem’sDamascus
Gate and near other historic dotte, who was a messengerof peace.He had said in his
shrines.For all their shortcomingsin other matters,the
report:
previous Hashemite and British mandatory regimes
strictly prohibited suchobscenityin the two holy cities.”
“There have been numerous reports from reliable
sourcesof large-scalelooting, pillaging and plundering,
128. In hisusualmannerthe Israelirepresentativewent on
and of instances of destruction of villages without
at greatlength, delvinginto the pastandinto the present,in
apparent military necessity. The liability of the Proan attempt to prove that Israelasa wholeand Jerusalem
in
visional Government of Israel to restoreprivate property
particular have always been Jewish, predominantly and
to its Arab ownersand to indemnify those ownersfor
only Jewish.I would be taxing the patienceof the Council
property wantonly destroyed is clear . . .“.I e
if I wereto gointo detail to disprovethese.fallacies
andthis
For that, Count Folke Bernadotte was assassinated
by
propagandizedversionof history. I shallrevert to this at a
IsraeliZionist assassins
andterrorists.
later meeting. But in what context should we place this
argumentthat the Arabs possess
nothing and that the Jews
131. However, it is not sufficiently known that, after the
possesseverything? Here again the best and the most
cessation
of hostilities in 1948, and between 1948 and
eloquentand telling answerwasgivenvery recently by the
1953, 160 Arab villages and towns were razed to the
Prime Minister of Israel, Mrs. Golda Meir, about whom
Mr. Ben-Guriononce saidwhen shewas a memberof his ground by the Israelis. I give as a reference for that a
publication of the Greek Catholic Episcopatein Haifa, Al
cabinet: “She is the only manin my cabinet.” Mrs. Meir, in
an interview publishedfirst in London and later in the Rabitah, No. 12, November 1953, pages10 to 15.
Washington Post on 16 June 1969, wasaskedthe following
132. The Israeli representativeagain tried, in his routine
question:
manner,to describethe Arabs asthe aggressors
in the 19G7
war. Here againI will give the answerto Mr. Tekoah from
“Do you think the emergence
of the Palestinianfighting
his own leaders.?‘!zeTimes of London on Sunday 16 July
forces, the fedayeen, is an important new factor in the
1967 quoted Brigadier Mordecai Hod, Commanderof Ihe
Middle East?”
Israeli Air Force, who led the Blitzkrieg on the morningof
Shestatedin reply:
5 June 1967-when we were deliberating in this same
Security Council-having saidthe following:
“Important, no. A new factor, yes. There wasno such
thing as Palestinians,When was there an independent
“Sixteen years’ planning had gone into thoseinitial 80
Palestinianpeoplewith a PalestinianState? It waseither
minutes.We lived with the plan, we slept on the plan, ‘we
ate the plan. Constantly we perfected it.”
southernSyria beforethe First World War andthen it was
a Palestineincluding Jordan. It wasnot asthough there
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Second Session,
wasa Palestinianpeoplein Palestineconsideringitself asa Supplement No. 11, vol. II, annex 20.
Palestinianpeopleand we cameand threw them out and
9 Seethe Reportof Sub-Committee 2 to the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Palestinian Question dated 11 November 1947: Offiiial
took their country away from them. They did not exist,”
Records of the General Assembly, Second Session, Ad Hoc
Commr’ttee on the Palestinian Question. Summary Records, documents and annexes, document i/AC.14)32 and Aid.1, appendix
V.
10 Ibid., Third Session, Supplement No. II, part one,chapter V,

That is the most eloquent answerthat could be given to
Mr. Tekoah’s figuresand numbersand historical diatribes:
the Palestinians
havenever existed.Yet if the learnedIsraeli

para.7.

16

On S June 1967, at 0837 hours GMT, the Jerusalem Israel
Domestic Service broadcast General Moshe Dayan’s statemerit :

that today he did not leave the Chamberwhen I beganto
speak.
138. Mr. Tekoah characterized the Arab participation in
this debate asan exercisein hatred. He usedsuchwordsas
“abuse” and ‘fslander”, saying that thesehad beendirected
againsthis people. But what modem Europe hasdone to us
during the last half-century is something that I cannot
expressin words. The woundsarevery deep.After they had
healeda little bit when the Mandateswere terminated, what
happened? What do we find? A new incursion into our
midst-not merely people treading on our doorsteps, but
people slaughteringthe indigenouspeopleof Palestine.And
we are supposed to say nothing, in spite of all that
happened. I am sure my brothers from the Middle East do
not harbour any rancour, any malice or hatred, because,
were they to do so, they would becomesick. I am sure,too,
that the Israeliswill try to banishmalice and hatred, for if
they were not to do so they would becomepsychopathic.

“We have no invasion plans. Our only target is to foil
the Arab armies’ aim of invading our country.”
On 10 August 1967, The Jerusalem Post published the
following summary of a statement by General Dayan, not
unlike the one I quoted at the beginning of my reply. He
said :
“People abroad must realize that with all the strategic
importance to Israel of Sinai, the Golan heights, and the
Tiran Strait, the mountain range west of the Jordan lies at
the heart of Jewish history. . . If you have the Book of
the Bible, and the People of the Book, then you also have
the Land of the Bible-of the Judges and of the Patriarchs
in Jerusalem, Hebron, Jericho and thereabouts.
“On no account will we ,force ourselves to leave the
Hebron . . This may not be a political program, but it is
more important-it
is the fulfilment of a people’s ancestral dream.”

139. What we are witnessingin Jerusalemis not only a
clash between Arab nationalism and a brand of imported
European colonialism masqueradingunder the banner of
Zionism; it is also a clashbetween Judaismand Islam.I am
sorry to say this. Such a clashis deplorable,becausethere is
much in common between Judaismand Islam. The question, however, is not religious; the whole question is
political. People come from Eastern and Central Europe,
holding up the banner of a new ideology foreign to our
land, and they expect the inhabitants of the area to be
docile and not to react. If we sit around this table, it is to
expressthe displeasure,the violent reaction, of the people.
We, as Arabs, deplore this. After all, why should we be
gratified in casting aspersionson others? Most of us, I
believe, try to avoid doing so. But if you carefully read
Mr. Tekoah’sspeeches,his eloquencein the useof insulting
terms is becoming proverbial. There is an Arab proverb
which says: “He struck me, but he was the first to cry.”
They camefrom outside, they struck us, and they are still
weeping. This happensnot only in our area.Whensomeone
wants to rationalize his conquest of a land or a country, or
to rationalize some violent act in order to make it
acceptable to the community-whether a national community or the world community-he says: “I have always
been maltreated and I should now be excused for crying
and weeping.”

133. And on the evening of Friday, 2 June 1967, the
Minister of Labour, Yigal Allon, in uniform, spoke to a
rally in Tel-Aviv at the end of a day in which broadcasts
sought to minimize military dangers to Israel in the event of
war. This was reported in Ha-Aretz on 4 June 1967.
Mr. Allon said: “There is not the slightest doubt about the
outcome of this war and each of its stages, and we are not
forgetting the Jordanian and Syrian fronts either.” Now, if
any proof needs to be given of the premeditated, vicious
and malicious aggression, these words, these statements,
speak for themselves.
134. I do not wish to take any more of the Council’s time
or tax its patience any further, except to say that the
arguments repeated time and again by the Israeli representative are, to say the least, taken from the garbage can of
history and its greatest criminals.
135. Ambassador Charles Yost, towards the end of a
remarkable book, entitled The Insecutity of Nations,1 1
published in 1968 before he assumed his new position as
Permanent Representative of the United States to the
United Nations, quoted Albert Camus as follows: “I’m
going to tell you a great secret, my friend. Don’t wait for
the last judgment. It’s taking place every day.”

140. But then we come to the historical distortions. I do
not know how deep Mr. Tekoah has gone into the history
of that land. I derive a lot of my knowledgefrom Jewish
sources-from Jewish scholars,not publicists. He said that
in the seventh century, when the whole fertile crescent
surroundingthe peninsulawasArabized, Jerusalemwasnot
Arab. But it wasSemitic; it wasneither Arab, so to speak,
nor Jewish. It was Semitic. Who lived in that part of the
world after the Romansdisappeared?We had Alexander
the Great before the Romans;then the Ptolemies;then the
Romans;then the Byzantines. It wasthe indigenouspeople
of the land. And who were those indigenouspeople of the
land? They were a conglomeration of peoplesthat were
semitized-they did not all have to be Semitic-just as
Mr. Tekoah was semitized. The Khazars were semitized-in
religion only, but not in culture. They are now studying
Hebrew, sinceonly SOyears agoor so they spokeYiddish,

136. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table, and I give
him the floor.
137. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr, President, were I
to extol your virtues or those of Ambassador Solano L6pez,
the previous President of the Council, I am sure it would be
embarrassing, because it would be like trying to praise
brothers. I will therefore not say anything other than that I
am deeply grateful to you.for allowing me to exercise the
right of reply in order to correct certain historical distortions on the part of the gentleman sitting to my right. I see
11 New York, Frederick A. Praeger, 1958.

17

I

i

which is a combination of Hebrew and German, without
even a grammar. There is nothing wrong with having a weak
grammar in a language. Hebrew is a basic language;Yiddish
is not a basic language.
141. These are the Ashkenazim, the Khazars of Eastern
and Central Europe, who, because they embraced a Semitic
religion, think that they should wear the mantle of
Semitism not only in the Middle East, but all over the
world. Hence when anybody speaks against a Jew they say
he is an anti-Semite. If anybody is an anti-Semite he is
against me: I am the Semite of the Semites. It SO happens
that my family comes from the Arabian peninsula; but
there are many Arabs who are better Semites than I and
they were Arabized. The Berbers of North Africa were
Arabized and actually semitized. The Sudanese, of another
part of Africa, who happen to be pitch-black, are Arabs,
not by force, but because they found culture in Arabism.
The religion which happens to be Islam is a Semitic religion.
They embraced Islam. So the Arabs do not claim that they
have so-called pure Arab blood; nor do the Semites have
such a claim.
142. As I have said time and again there are cultures,
languages, traditions, customs, and not physiological characteristics, that determine a people.’ If a people were
determined by biological factors, then it would be like the
Samaritans, who live not far from Nablus. The Samaritans
in Palestine would never marry anyone from outside; and
today we find that they have liquidated themselves: there
are only 150 left. There is nothing wrong in the intermarriage of peoples.

of them were Christianized by St. Augustine, who came
from the shores of Lebanon, as you know. He lived in
Tunis. He went to England; and in England and in France
the people were, I would not like to say heathens, but they
were pagans. And then they thought that because they had
become Christians they had a right to Palestine; and. their
hordes marched into the Holy Land to massacre the people
of P&stine. But I said they were swept by the winds of
history, so let us set the record straight. The Zionist
movement was born in Europe, was nourished in Europe,
and, from Europe, was forced into our part of the wodd. It
is neo-colonialism. If it is not neo-colonialism, I would like
to know what is neo-colonialism, as the term is used here in
the United Nations.
145. Our colleague, Mr. Tekoah, recited certain statistics.
He said that in 1844 there were approximately 7,000 Jews,
5,000 Moslems and 3,000 Christians in Jerusalem. Elut of
what nationality were they? Those Jews were really
Semitic Jews. They were Jews of the area. They were real
Semites. They were not Europeans, Khazars. There might
have been a sprinkling of them, motivated by religious
sentiments, who had chosen Palestine. We know that in the
nineteenth century many Jews went and lived there out of
religious sentiment, but not under a political banner, I
mentioned yesterday that one of the Montefiores in
England in 1858, if my memory is correct, out of
philanthropy established what was later known as the
Jewish Quarter; but this does not make the Jews of
Palestine European, those very Jews who had lived in
Palestine for centuries.
146. I must also correct other distorted statements by our
colleague from Israel, because I believe he has not yet
understood the ethos of the people of the area. In the best
tradition of Europeans, he talks of standards of living. This
reminds me of the white man’s burden during colonial days.
Those Europeans who went to civilize Africa and Asia
carried what was termed the white man’s burden in doing
so. Perhaps some Asians and Africans were fooled, but they
went there to exploit Africa and Asia. If we go by, standards
of living, every country that has a better standard of IivIng
should go and encroach upon another with a lower standard
of living. I thought these yardsticks had been forgotten, but
they are being revived by none other than the European
Zionists in our part of the world. They recite, “Those
skilled workers were receiving $23 and now they receive
$129.”

143. And where does the Semitism of our colleague
Mr. Tekoah, or of the Zionist leaders from Eastern and
Central Europe, come from? They adopted the Jewish
faith; and we are happy, because otherwise they would have
been pagans. They were pagans in the sixth century. We are
glad they adopted a monotheistic religion. But for them to
claim that they are the Semites of Palestine is, I think, very
grossly wrong, because their background is more European;
their customs are European; their t&hnology is European;
their language is Yiddish-but mostly European. They are
not racially or ethnologically Semitic, nor, for that matter,
are the people of the fertile crescent purely Semitic; but
they evolved a culture, a commdn language, which happened to be Arabic. At one time“they spoke Aramaic, or
Syriac; in a few enclaves in Syria they speak Aramaic or the
Syriac language, the language that Christ used. Incidentally,
Christ did not speak Hebrew. Perhaps that is why the Jews
in those days disclaimed him. He spoke Aramaic.

147. I go back to the Crusades; the Crusaders tried to buy
the people with wheat after they had stayed on for a
hundred years or so. Wheat was the grain of life. In those
days, people bartered things more than they bought them.
It became a proverb in our part of the world: “Content
yourself by eating tears and do not be tempted by the
golden wheat of the Crusaders,” This is what is happening
today. We do not want European skills or technology to be
imposed on us. We are sending our young men all over the
world. Here in the United States and in Canada we have
12,000 students; they learn technology. I do not know
whether so much technology is making the world happier.
These students go back and develop their countries.
Likewise the colonialists, when they went there, were
bringing civilization; they were bringing bathtubs. He spoke

144. So when Mr. Tekoah talks about the seventh century
and the fact that the country was not Arab, of course it was
not Arab. But it was Semitic, and those people embraced
Islam and Arabism; and time and again I have told him that
many of the people who had embraced Aiabism and Islam
no doubt were Jews. So the Zionists are fighting those who
were originally Jews. But where do they come from? Again
I Say they come mostly from Eastern and Central Europe.
And this is a European intrusion in the midst of the Middle
East. It is a clash, another clash between Europe and the
Middle East. Yesterday I mentioned the clash that took
place between the Christianized Europeans-because most
18

yesterday of latrines. They were bringing all those things,
toilets and basins. We had baths, public baths and private
baths, in our own way. We do not want those baths of
theirs. He said the Jordanians and Arabs lived in filth and
squalor. I would remind my colleague from Israel of a
passage in the Bible that says one should not be too much
attracted by the white sepulchres. They are white from
outside but they are putrid inside. It is what you are inside
that matters, All the perfumes of Arabia will not cleanse
the stench of the soul.
148. I do not want to answer for my colleague from the
Soviet Union. Mr. Tekoah tried to inject some politics, to
arouse the Western world, as if all our evil comes from the
Soviet Union. The Soviet Union is playing its own game. It
is a big Power. It found an opportunity to set foot in the
Middle East. I wiIl not go into this, That is their business.
Yesterday I told you who paved the way for the Soviet
Union there. I watched the game at Lake Success, the game
of power politics. None other than the late General
Marshall, who was United States Secretary of State, advised
Mr. Truman not to be hasty about the partitioning of
Palestine, because, according to the experts in the Pentagon, it might open the door to trouble. The State
Department experts told Mr. Truman the same thing. Look
at the trouble we are having today. That is how Israel was
created. If it were not embarrassing, I would show
documents and letters I received in 1947 from persons
whom the Zionists tried to purchase with money. There
was an Ambassador from Latin America; when he’returned
home, his wife returned with a fur coat. I suppose that
everything is fair in war, but that was before the war, even
before Palestine was partitioned,

at that time., By the same token, I think New York City
should be declared a Jewish city and should have a Jewish
mayor. Anyway they have twenty Commissioners here, I
have heard, who are Jewish. Why not? There are more Jews
here in New York City, I understand, than there are in
Israel. Two hundred thousand Jews emigrated to Israel, but
many of them returned to America or went to other parts
of the world, where there is less tension and more
opportunity. If we use this yardstick, we should then
declare New York City the fifty-first State of the United
States. But I think people would laugh at us. The Jews
themselves would not want that because they are good
American citizens, prospering here. As I said at the last
meeting, this is their promised land, not Jerusalem; otherwise, they would have gone to Jerusalem. How many have
gone to Jerusalem from the United States? It shows you
that most Jews are intelligent and know which side their
bread is buttered and where they can lead a decent life, to
their liking,
153. But Mr. Ben-Gurion and his successors still want
them to be Israeli citizens, whether the whole world like it
or not; and this is their grudge against the Soviet Union.
They want the Soviet Union to give honorary citizenship to
the 2.5 million Jews-Israeli honorary citizenship. Of
course, the Soviet Union is not prepared to do so. If it
were, it would have already issued two passports, one a
Soviet passport and the other an Israeli passport. It is
unacceptable that a person should have dual nationality,
because nationality involves loyalty to the State where a
person is born or the State which he has adopted as his
homeland.
154. Then Mr. Tekoah speaks about compensation to the
Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem. Suppose they do not want
to be compensated? Suppose they cling to their ancestral
land? I want to remind him of a famous episode that took
place in Egypt, an episode which he maligned today. Egypt
was conquered and subsequently Arabized. The famous
General ‘Amr Ben Al’aas wanted to build a mosque in
Egypt. Egypt was not a Moslem country, but it was
subsequently Arabized and became Moslem. It so happened
that a Jew owned a comer of a plot of land, and he would
not sell it because he was attached to that piece of land; he
was a real Semite, that Jew, just as are the Palestinians now
attached to the land. So ‘Amr Ben AI’aas said, “Try and
compensate him.” They tried to compensate him. He would
not accept any price. He was really attached to the land
where his ancestors had lived since the Jews had gone to
Egypt during the seven-year famine in Palestine. For
thousands of years his ancestors had Iived there. Then ‘Amr
Ben Al’aas, being a military man, said: “Raze that house.”
And the house was razed. The Jew asked, “Who has
authority over ‘Amr Ben Al’aas? ” They said, “The Caliph.”
“Where is the Caliph? ” he said. They said, “The Caliph is
in Mecca.” And that Jew was a very tenacious Jew. He
made the trip. And those were difficult times in which to
travel to Mecca. He asked to be received by the Caliph. He
said, “Where can I see the Caliph? ” They told him the
Caliph was praying in the cemetery outside the town. He
went to the cemetery and he found there a Bedouin, an
Arab guard. He asked him, “Where is the Caliph? ” The
guard replied, “I am the Caliph.” He said, “You? ” “Yes, I
am the Caliph, a simple Bedouin. What can I do for you? ”

149. Oyr colleague has spoken here of a just and lasting
peace. What kind of peace, I should like to know? An
arbitrary peace, a forced peace? If it is to be just, let us
heed the aspirations of the Palestinian people. He described
some of my brothers here as engaging in criminal acts and
he takes exception to their sitting around this table and
arrogating to themselves the right to be judges. If there is
anything more wounding and sarcastic and cynical than
these phrases, I should like to know what could be worse.
150. He talked of demonstrations in Egypt. He forgot to
mention the demonstrations these days all over the world
by students. It is a symptom of the age. Taking things out
of context to bolster his argument that the Zionists are the
owners of the land is really puerile and childish, to say the
least.
15 1. But I was heartened a little when he said “our Arab
cousins”. Well, I have always said the Jews of the area were
our brothers; they were not our cousins. It is heartening to
hear the Israelis now counting themselves as our cousins.
But how well they treat their cousins in the Holy Land and
in Jerusalem!
152. Then our colleague from Israel said there was a
concentration of Jews in Jerusalem. He cited certain figures
from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to prove that
there were more inhabitants, according to the flnCYclopaedia Britannica, of the Jewish faith in Jerusalem, without
_ taking into account their ethnic origin or their nationality
19

He said, “I am a Jew.” And he told him what had happened
in Egypt. According to the history of that episode, there
wason the ground a scapula of an animal, probably a sheep.
He scribbled a few words on it and he told him to take that
to the General, the conqueror of Egypt, and that he was
sure justice would be rendered unto him. The ‘Arm Ben
A]‘aas had gone to Persia. The Persians had a civilization
that had gone on for centuries before, and Kisra Anisharwan-Kisrox as he is called by Europeans-was the Ring in
Persia. Of course, the Arabs came from the desert and they
were enamoured by what they saw in Persia. There wasa
famous Palace called Al Iwan. It was a most symmetrical
palace, a most beautiful palace, architecturally speaking.
But a corner was rounded. And the curious Arab visitors,
‘Amr Ben Al’Aas and the Caliph, asked, “Why is this corner
rounded? ” And, they replied: “Because at one time there
was a house whose owner would not sell, and finally the
Ring of Persia asked that the house should be spared and
that the architects should make that comer of the palace
rounded rather than encroach on somebody else’s
property.” We go back to that scapula. That Jew from
Egypt began to rue his lot and regret that he had come to
Mecca only to have something scribbled on a piece of bone,
not knowing what it meant. And all that ‘Amr Ben Al’aas
wrote; it was about what they had seenin Persia: “Is Kisra
of pagan Persia to which we brought Islam more just than
we are, Oh ‘Amr? ” And that General wept and knew that
he had done wrong to that Jew. That is the Arab tradition.
15.5. But what do you do? You find a few houses that
have been occupied for centuries by Semites who may
originally have been b.ws-they may have been Islamized or
Arabized-and you raze ,them. Because you are from
Europe, you go for utilitarian things. The next thing we
hear you will build a Hilton or an Intercontinental hotel
near the Holy Sepulchre. We prefer maintaining the
antiquity of the Holy Places, the quaintness.

secular. You are economic; you talk of statistics; you talk
of technology; you talk of skyscrapers; you taIk of
bathtubs, you talk of all kinds of modern facilities.
158. We want to keep Jerusalem holy for all the three
faiths. It is the indigenous people of Palestine who have
title to Jerusalem, who have title to the whole of Palestine.
These distortions cannot be left unanswered. You speak of
budgets. You speak of money all the time. Remember that
we do not live by bread alone.
159. Shall we go on like this in the Council, interminably,
day in, day out; year in, year out? I believe the situation is
getting dangerous. Islam is becoming conscious that Jerusalem is as holy to 600 million, as it is to 3 million Zionists.
The mills of history grind slowly, but they grind persistently. Do not think that people like myself, now and in
the future, will be happy to see human beings, regardless of
their religion or ethnic origin, sacrificed for that narrow
nationalism of today. We deplore the loss of every single
life, those of us who are committed to the United Nationaand we are all committed to the United Nations.
160. We hear our fellow diplomats weighing every word
they say, to balance it lest one might take one phrase as
meaning something tangible. I do not want to mention who
they are, but they open new loop-holes in their arguments
here, so that people may scan what they have written and
see where they can get out of the impasse in which we are
today.
161. The Soviet Union is helping the Arabs because,
originally, the Western countries brought this neocolonialism in our midst. Of course, it is not doing it
altogether for the beauty of Arab eyes. It is a big Power and
is serving its own interests, like the other big Powers. But
who will suffer? As we say in Arabic, there was a big
conflict between the wind and the sea; in other words, it
was a tempest. But who paid the price? The sailor in the
small boat. Israel is in that small boat; we are in that small
boat. If you do not watch out, it will sink, because of
power politics and the conflict between big Powers. We will
sink in the area, but there will still be some Semites, do not
worry.

156. I made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem in 1925, and that
was 44 years ago. We went with the reverence we had for
the Holy City. We revered every cobblestone there. We ‘do
not want asphalt roads in the Holy City. Here in the West
and in America they buy wooden shackswhere Washington
slept, or where somebody elsein Europe spent the day, and
they revere them. This is a Holy Place to us, Jerusalem, a
Holy City. You demolish it; you expel the people, you
European Khazars, embracing Judaism, which should have
instilled more fear of God in accordance with the Mosaic
law, and what Isaiah said and Micah and Job said in the
Bible. Your prophets are our prophets but you are
Europeans. Religion did not touch your heart enough, it
seems. Otherwise you Europeans would not have engagedin
that carnage within 50 years, killing one another, Christians
killing one another. Why should you not kill us? This
religion is only a motivation for a political and economic
end. You know that Western countries are increasing their
taxes because of the pressuresof population. Only the rich
know how to use the loop-holes, but they will not be able
to use the loop-holes for long, the multimillionaires here
who are exploiting the people. So Palestine is a pied&terre
for the exploitation of the whole of western Asia.

162. Sephardic Jews living in America, who came from
Brazil in the sixteenth century, had left Spain in the
fifteenth century, after Columbus; they had come to
Recife. They are our brothers here in America. I know their
families. They are Jews, But I do not think that many
Ashkenazim, converted Jews from central Europe, will
survive. If they do survive, the other Semites who happen
to be Arabs will see to it that they will not suffer because,
after all, they are human beings and in our tradition, leaving
aside excessesthat are spontaneous here and there, we have
never maltreated anyone because of his faith. The Jews
flourished amongst us.
163. YOU mentioned the Encyclopaedia Britannica. GO
and read about Malmonides. Go and read about an Arab of
the Jewish faith who wasone of the most generous of men.
Go and read about how the Caliph in Baghdad, when the
Chief Rabbi went to the Synagogue, sent his guard. of
honour to accompany him. Go and read how well you were

1%‘. YOU are secular. I pity only those who are prompted
in Israel by a genuine religious sentiment. But you are
20

tolerated-not YOU, but those of the Jewish faith-in
Ottoman Empire.

the

164. We are Asians, we have suffered a great deal. We have
mixed with many peoples of different ethnic origins, and
our traditions, our sufferings and our tribulations in that
area have caused the prophets to emerge from amongst us,
the prophets of the area who are the common prophets of
us all. They all belong to the monotheistic faith and
worship the same God. But I hope that you Europeans will
learn a new lesson, that you will not continue to rationalize
the exploitation of your fellowmen, whether they be in
Asia or in Africa. We are your brothers no matter where we
are. It does not have to do with the colour of our skin. All
we ask is that the Council get out of its rut and do
something besides deliberate. Of course this means that the
statesmen or politicans who are behind us in our respective
countries should take a more serious attitude about this
matter so that peace may prevail in the end.
165. In conclusion, I must say that I for one represent a
State to which Jerusalem is as important as Mecca and
Medina. We know this from the pilgrims that flock into our
country every year. His Majesty King Faisal, a man of few
words, has said time and again that Islam will never allow
things to go on as they have in Jerusalem. Islam may not be
able now to do anything, but as long as Islam is alive in the
hearts of 600 million people hope will never be extinguished that in the long run, even though there may be
more suffering and tribulation, finally peace will indeed
reign over the Holy Land of Palestine.
166. Mr. ZAKHAROV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The lack of seriousness and
the ludicrous nature of Mr. Tekoah’s propagandistic insinuations are so self-evident that there is no need to refute
them. It is not without cause that Mr. Tekoah has become
known in United Nations circles not so much as a
permanent representative but as a permanent distorter of
facts and truth. It was precisely him-the permanent
distorter from Israel-whom Ambassador Malik had in mind
in the statement from which Mr. Tekoah has quoted today.
It was precisely the representative of Israel to whom
Ambassador Malik was addressing himself when he explained to that representative that lies and slander have
never yet brought anyone any credit.
167. Listening to Mr. Tekoah, we can only express surprise at the irresponsibility and the provocative manner
with which the representative of Israel treats, the Security
Council, the opinion of its members and the opinion of
States Members of the United Nations, and at his attitude
to the solution of the problem of a settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East. The statement by Mr. Tekoah,
made in the form of a challenge, contains no sign of Israel’s
willingness to choose the path of co-operation with the
Security Council and compliance with its decisions. We
have not heard any statement from the Israeli representative to the effect that his Government is willing to
implement the decisions of the Council on the question of
Jerusalem, nor have we heard any clear statement from the
Government of Israel on its willingness to effect a political
settlement in the Middle East, based on the well-known
resolution of the Security Council. On the contrary, all the

actions and statements by ruling circles in Israel, includ~g
the recent statement by the Prime Minister which
Mr. Tekoah has quoted here today, show that the ruling
circles of Israel are disregarding the Security Council
resolutions callidg for a peaceful settlement and the
withdrawal ‘of Israeli forces from the occupied
Arab
territories, and are continuing to pursue a policy
of
expansion and annexation. What do the Israeli extremists
hope to gain by obstructing a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East? Time inexorably works against the aggressor.
The main objective of the aggressor, the weakening of the
Arab States, has ,not been and cannot be achieved, The
voice of the representatives of the Arab States, ringing out
in the Security Council yesterday and today, has again
demonstrated that the Arab peoples are fully determined to
continue the struggle for the complete liquidation of the
consequences of Israel’s aggression.
168. The Soviet Union and the other socialist States have
given and will continue to give assistance to the Arab States
in this struggle. The Viet-Namese people have a wise
proverb which the Israeli aggressors would do well to
ponder. It says: “He who seizes the knife by the blade is
bound to cut himself.” It is time the Israeli leaders
understood-as the whole course of events in the Middle
East over the past two years has shown-that it is only by
withdrawing their forces from all the occupied Arab
territories, and by fully complying with the decisons of the
Security Council, that peace and tranquillity can be
established in that region. That is what the representative of
Israel should have been thinking about, instead of engaging,
here in the Security Council, in slanderous talk about the
Soviet Union which strongly advocates a peaceful political
settlement in the Middle East, based on the Security
Council decision of 22 November 1967.
169. As in the past, Mr. Tekoah has today againheld forth
on the claim that the Israeli aggressors have brought
prosperity
to the Arab population and Jerusalem. He cited
some figures abbut compensation for people forcibly
evicted from their homes. But, as the representative of the
United States of America rightly recalled in his statement
here, Israel is the occupier of the eastern part of Jerusalem,
and as such-that is, as the occupier-it has no right
whatever to introduce its methods in the occupied territories.
170. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Allow me, Mr, President, to touch on a different
matter as we reach the end of our meeting today. I would
be remiss in an elementary duty to myself if I failed to
express my heartfelt thanks to the representatives, including those of four permanent members, who have been kind
enough to refer at this meeting to the work I did during the
month of June in fulfilment of my duties as President of
the Council. I realize how much generosity, and therefore
exaggeration, there is in these statements; but I cannot
forget that if a person may be known by the opinion others
hold of him, the representatives who have spoken of me
today certainly honour me in granting me the invaluable
gift of their appreciation for the work I have done with, at
least, the greatest goodwill. Many thanks to them, and also
to you, Mr. President.

Council, the next meeting has been scheduled for tomorrow
afternoon at 3 o’clock.

171. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no o&r speakers on my list, and if ,no representative
‘wishes to speak at this stage, I shall adjourn the meeting. As
a result of consultations with the members of the Security

The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

22
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

82100-November

1972-2,050
