UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3283
29 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 29 September 1993, at 3.30 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. JESUS
Mr. CHEN Jian
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. LAKATOS
Mr. MARUYAMA
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. McKINNON
Mr. MARKER
Mr. LOZINSKIY
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Taylhardat

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. INDERFURTH

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86641 (E)

S/PV.3283
2

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
EXPRESSION OF WELCOME TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
DONALD CHARLES KcKINNON, DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE OF NEW ZEALAND
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

At the

outset of the meeting, I should like to acknowledge the presence at
the Council table of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs and Trade of New Zealand, His Excellency the Right
Honourable Donald Charles McKinnon, to whom, on behalf of the
Council, I extend a warm welcome.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
SECURITY OF UNITED NATIONS OPERATIONS
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL (S/26358)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

The Security

Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the security of United Nations operations,
document S/26358.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26499,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
I should like also to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/26444, which contains the text of a letter
dated 13 September 1993 from the Permanent Representative of
New Zealand to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.3283
3

(The President)
I shall first call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements before the voting.
Mr. McKINNON (New Zealand):

Thank you very much,

Mr. President, for your very warm welcome and for the opportunity
of speaking to this draft resolution.
New Zealand welcomes the draft resolution on the safety and
security of United Nations personnel, which the Security Council is
about to adopt.

As Council members will be aware, New Zealand has

made the issue of the safety of United Nations personnel a
particular priority since we began our term on the Council at the
beginning of this year.
Events since then, particularly in Somalia, Cambodia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, have underscored the urgency of the issue.
We must ensure that United Nations personnel are adequately
protected - especially those whom this Council mandates to go into
difficult situations in the cause of maintaining international
peace and security and those who risk their lives in the no less
noble cause of delivering humanitarian relief to the victims of
conflict.
During our presidency of the Council in March the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement on this issue in
connection with the Secretary-General’s report "An Agenda for
Peace".

As a result of the request made in the March statement,

the Secretary-General produced the excellent report on the nature
and adequacy of existing arrangements for the protection of United
Nations personnel which we shall approve in the draft resolution we
are to adopt today.
New Zealand welcomes the Secretary-General’s thoughtful
proposals about what further steps should be taken to protect
United Nations personnel.

We appreciate the Secretary-General’s

commitment to undertake additional steps within his area of

S/PV.3283
4

(Mr. McKinnon, New Zealand)
responsibility to increase the level of protection for his people
in the field.
The Secretary-General’s report confirms that the protection of
United Nations personnel is a multifaceted issue that must be
tackled on a number of fronts.

It requires concerted action by

this Council, by the General Assembly, and by the
Secretary-General.
The draft resolution before us confirms that attacks on
personnel engaged in operations mandated by this Council will be
considered interference in the exercise of the Council’s
responsibilities.

It warns that the Council will take appropriate

measures in any such case.

It also confirms that if a host country

fails or is unable to adequately protect United Nations personnel,
the Council will take appropriate action.

This might include

specific steps to deal with those who attack United Nations
personnel.
In line with the Secretary-General’s proposals and, I would
note, in line with suggestions New Zealand put before this Council
in March, today’s draft resolution puts special emphasis on those
matters which the Council should address when deciding to establish
or to renew a peace-keeping operation.

It determines that on each

such occasion the Council will require the host country requesting
the operation to take appropriate steps to ensure the safety of all
persons engaged in the operation, and to conclude without delay an
agreement establishing the legal framework under which the United
Nations personnel will operate.
These practical steps, which too often have been honoured in
the breach rather than in the observance, will go some way towards
ensuring that there is no misunderstanding between the United
Nations and the host country of the responsibilities that go with
any request for the dispatch of a United Nations mission.

I am

pleased to note that even before the adoption of today’s draft

S/PV.3283
5

(Mr. McKinnon, New Zealand)
resolution, the Council has in recent weeks moved to establish a
more consistent practice in this area.
One matter that this draft resolution does not address
directly is the responsibility of individuals who attack United
Nations personnel.

It does not do so because it was the consensus

of the Council that, while such matters can properly be taken up by
the Council in the specific circumstances of a particular incident
or operation, a more general pronouncement of individual
responsibility for attacks on United Nations personnel is more
appropriately the business of the General Assembly.
In this connection, as Council members know, at New Zealand’s
initiative, the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly has on its
agenda a new item on responsibility for attacks on United Nations
and associated personnel and measures to ensure that those
responsible for such attacks are brought to justice.

We will be

proposing that the General Assembly adopt a new international
convention along the lines of other international conventions
establishing criminal responsibility.

This new convention should

establish beyond doubt that those who attack United Nations
personnel, and those who order the commission of such attacks,
commit a crime punishable by any country in which they may be
found.
I am pleased to note that the Secretary-General’s report
endorses the conclusion of a new international convention in this
area and that the draft resolution we are about to adopt welcomes
our initiative in the General Assembly.
We look forward to working with all Members of the United
Nations in moving as quickly as possible to the establishment of
clear international rules in this area.

We will then bring home to

those who are responsible for attacks on peace-keeping and
humanitarian-relief personnel that their actions will never be

S/PV.3283
6

(Mr. McKinnon, New Zealand)
tolerated and that they will be held personally responsible for the
consequences of their actions.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

The issue of safety and security

of peace-keeping personnel is rightly receiving the greater
attention of the international community.

The sharp rise in the

incidence of attacks on United Nations personnel underscores the
necessity for the Security Council to effectively address this
serious problem.

United Nations personnel are increasingly being

required to operate in extremely difficult circumstances.

New

peace-keeping operations have been deployed in conflict situations,
exposing such personnel to greater physical risks.

As noted by the

Secretary-General in his report contained in document S/26358, the
rate of casualties among peace-keeping personnel has almost doubled
during the current year.
Attacks and the use of force against United Nations
peace-keeping personnel to prevent them from implementing their
mandate are a matter of special concern to my delegation.
Pakistani troops serving peace under the United Nations flag have
suffered many casualties.

They continue to be targeted by elements

that seek to undermine the authority of the Security Council.

Such

reprehensible acts are wholly unacceptable.
We fully endorse the draft resolution that is about to be
adopted.

It should be a clear signal to those who seek to use

violence against United Nations personnel to further their own
criminal ends that the Council is prepared to take the measures
necessary to ensure the safety and security of those engaged in
United Nations operations.

States or parties to a conflict must

fully cooperate with the United Nations to ensure their security
and safety.

The international community cannot allow any party to

create impediments to peace-keeping operations and prevent them,
through the use of force or by any other means, from implementing
their mandate as authorized by the Council.

S/PV.3283
7

(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
My delegation is pleased to note the Secretary-General’s
intention to introduce measures as indicated in his report which,
among other things, would ensure that security matters would become
an integral part of the planning for operations and that any such
precautions would extend to all the personnel.

We share the

Secretary-General’s view that both short-term and long-term
strategies for enhancing the security and safety of personnel
involved in United Nations peace-keeping and other operations must
be considered.

The adoption of the present draft resolution by the

Council today will constitute an important first step in this
direction.
My delegation welcomes the initiative taken by New Zealand
during the current session of the General Assembly on the subject
of safety and security of peace-keeping personnel.
most timely.

We view it as

The international community as a whole must resolve

to hold persons or parties responsible for their criminal actions
against United Nations personnel.
Before concluding, I should like to place on record my
delegation’s deep appreciation and gratitude to the thousands of
brave women and men who are currently engaged in United Nations
peace-keeping operations.

In particular, I should like to pay a

special tribute to those who have lost their lives or
suffered injuries in the service of mankind.

Their sacrifice

should serve to strengthen our commitment to promote and establish
peace throughout the world.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

My delegation welcomes the report

of the Secretary-General on the subject of security of United
Nations operations and personnel.

With its brief account of United

Nations practice, synopsis of relevant factors and issues, and
outline of the present situation, it is extremely useful.
It is hard to dispute the contention that the nature of United
Nations peace-keeping has changed and present-day missions are

S/PV.3283
8

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
likely to face dangerous, life-threatening hostility.

The Council

must focus Member and non-Member attention on this vital matter and
consider the necessary steps whereby all parties might lessen this
danger.

The draft resolution before us is one such step, which is

why we support it.
We must thank the Secretary-General for the emphasis he places
on the safety and security of non-United Nations military and
peace-keeping personnel, the civilian personnel, and private staff
of non-governmental organizations and contractors who are
participating in these operations at considerable risk to
themselves.

These organizations, when engaged by the United

Nations as implementing partners to provide resources, must receive
more recognized and official status with regard to safety and
security.

International law with regard to United Nations and

foreign personnel in a country is, as the Secretary-General notes,
contained in a collection of documents, multilateral and bilateral
treaties, international agreements, historical practices, the
United Nations

Charter and so on and so forth.

It will be very

helpful and clarificatory for the international community to enact
a new international instrument codifying and consolidating this
widely scattered body of law and understanding, specifying the
safeguards, privileges and immunities for United Nations
peace-keeping and civilian contractors and non-governmental
organizations and their personnel, as the Secretary-General also
notes.
All this is quite good and necessary.

But my delegation still

wonders if the new international strongmen - the warlord types such
as we have seen in Bosnia, Angola and Somalia - will be deterred by
such formality.

These are situations in which the host Government

itself is powerless to act to protect.

However, criminals and

violators of protected personnel must know that an enforcement
mechanism is in place, one which can and will act.

S/PV.3283
9

(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
In addition to tightening up loopholes now existing in United
Nations peace-keeping security operations, which this draft
resolution does, we look forward to seeing the new procedural
measures for the communications, training and regulations review to
be undertaken by the Secretary-General.
The frightening rise in United Nations and non-United Nations
casualties must be reversed, and these measures are a necessary
step in that direction.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I now

propose to the members of the Council that we proceed to the vote
on the draft resolution (S/26499).
If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,

Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
15 votes in favour.

There were

The draft resolution has been adopted

unanimously as resolution 868 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

The

issue of the security of United Nations operations and the
personnel taking part in them is of prime importance for my
Government.

As members know, France has placed almost 10,000 men

under our Organization’s flag; 21 of them have lost their lives in
the past two years in the service of the United Nations, while
another 311 have been wounded - gravely in many cases - in the

S/PV.3283
10

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
cause of keeping the peace.

Other countries have, unfortunately,

had to mourn the loss of their soldiers in United Nations
operations, especially in the recent past.
Many of those casualties could have been avoided if the
parties to the conflicts in which the Organization is intervening
had taken the necessary measures to prevent and halt attacks or
acts of force against United Nations operations and their
personnel.

This is a crucial point, and we should remind the host

countries of their responsibilities in this area.
Over the past year we have seen the growing concern of our
Organization and its Member States vis-à-vis the security of United
Nations operations.

This interest has been reflected in General

Assembly resolution 47/72, in the presidential statement made in
the Security Council in March and the subsequent report of the
Secretary-General, in the proposals of the Special Committee on
Peace-keeping Operations and, finally, in the inclusion of the item
in the agenda of the forty-eighth session of the General Assembly.
My delegation welcomes the fact that this interest is today
reflected in the adoption of a resolution on the security of United
Nations operations.

This text clearly shows our Council’s will to

take appropriate measures to ensure the security of an operation
from the very moment that the planning begins, or measures to
respond to situations in which the host countries for the operation
cannot or will not discharge their obligations in this area.
In the latter case, the Council will envisage measures that
are called for in each situation, without excluding any a priori.
This could, for example, involve a reconsideration of the operation
in the context of its possible withdrawal or, on the other hand, of
its strengthening.
France has always hoped that the security of operations would
be guaranteed first through practical measures taken at the very

S/PV.3283
11

(Mr. Mérimée, France)
moment when such operations are established.

In this regard, my

delegation expresses its satisfaction with the Council’s decision
to formulate here and now those conditions that must be met during
the establishment of future operations:

measures taken by the host

country to guarantee security, the application of these measures to
all personnel participating in the operation, and the signing of an
agreement on the status of the operation and of all its personnel
in the host country.
I can assure the Council, in conclusion, that my delegation
will participate actively in all United Nations efforts to improve
the security of operations and their personnel, whether it be when
resolutions creating or renewing operations are adopted in our
Council, or when the drafting of new instruments on the security of
United Nations forces and personnel is discussed in the organs of
the General Assembly.
Mr. LOZINSKIY (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian Federation, as an active participant in a

number of United Nations peace-keeping operations, is seriously
concerned about the problem of the security of forces and personnel
of United Nations peace-keeping in various regions.

Unfortunately,

the situation in this regard has recently deteriorated and urgently
requires an appropriate response and practical measures on the part
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General.
The Russian Federation favours the firmest of measures in
order to ensure reliably the personal security of the military,
civilian and police personnel of United Nations operations, as well
as that of the representatives of other international and
non-governmental organizations and programmes rendering
humanitarian assistance in emergency situations.

Their lives,

health and dignity must be protected from attacks by extremists.
There is a need for resolute and tough action regarding those
individuals who bear direct blame for the organization and

S/PV.3283
12

(Mr. Lozinskiy, Russian Federation)
execution of armed attacks and other acts of violence against
international personnel.
In our view, the resolution that has been adopted adequately
reflects the general approach of the members of the Council to
resolving this relevant problem and takes into account the
important proposals and recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/26358).
The Russian delegation regards as extremely important the
resolution’s provision that security matters should be an integral
part of the planning for any United Nations peace-keeping
operation.

There is a need for Governments of host countries to

take appropriate measures to ensure the security and safety of
United Nations personnel and for all parties to the conflict to
cooperate closely with the United Nations on these questions.
The Russian delegation voices the hope that the implementation
of the provisions of the resolution adopted today will promote an
improvement of the situation concerning the security of United
Nations personnel.
Mr. SARDENBERG (Brazil):

The resolution we have adopted

addresses an issue of increasing concern to the international
community.

Brazil attaches great importance to the security and

safety of all personnel engaged in United Nations operations.

As

was mentioned by Foreign Minister Celso Amorim in his statement in
the general debate in the ongoing session of the General Assembly,
Brazil is currently participating with a significant contingent in
the United Nations peace-keeping efforts and intends to expand its
presence in this field.

We are actively examining ways and means

to do so.
A special word of recognition is due, I believe, to the
Government and delegation of New Zealand for the very constructive
role they have been playing in the consideration of this question,
both in the Security Council and in the General Assembly.

S/PV.3283
13

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
We listened with great attention to the thoughtful statement
just made in this Council by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs and Trade of New Zealand,
Mr. Donald Charles McKinnon.
We thank the Secretary-General for the carefully drafted
report he submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
presidential statement adopted by the Security Council under the
New Zealand presidency on 31 March 1993.

The Secretary-General’s

report constitutes an important input for the consideration of this
urgent question by the relevant bodies of our Organization.
We are all disturbed by the number of attacks on
peace-keepers, the frequency of which, according to the
Secretary-General’s report, has more than doubled in the past few
years.

These unconscionable acts deserve our strongest and

unequivocal condemnation.

Brazil has experienced casualties of its

own nationals serving in peace-keeping operations.

In the past

12 months, two Brazilian officers have died while serving in the
missions in Angola and El Salvador, and other Brazilian officers
have had to be repatriated for serious injuries suffered while
serving with the United Nations Protection Force.
We sympathize wholeheartedly with other Member States that
have suffered even greater casualties.

We share the feelings of

pain and indignation caused by these senseless losses.

These sad

experiences should not weaken our resolve to support the role of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Brazil fully supports the efforts undertaken by both the
Security Council and the General Assembly to enhance the safety and
the security of all persons engaged in United Nations operations.
We also note with satisfaction that the General Assembly, during
its forty-eighth session, will start to tackle the question of the
safety and security of peace-keeping operations.

In this regard,

S/PV.3283
14

(Mr. Sardenberg, Brazil)
it is very important that the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Secretariat work in close coordination in order to
address the relevant issues within their respective spheres of
competence in a mutually reinforcing manner.
It should be underscored that United Nations missions and
operations are established and deployed in the name, not of the
Security Council alone, but of the United Nations as a whole.

In

the resolution the Security Council has adopted, Brazil
particularly values provisions designed to serve as guidelines for
the future work of the Council with a view to the achievement of
enhanced levels of safety for the personnel assigned to United
Nations peace-keeping operations.
Just as we have cooperated with New Zealand and other
delegations in the Security Council in the consideration of this
matter, the Brazilian delegation is also committed to participating
in a constructive manner in the deliberations on the item included
this year in the agenda of the General Assembly.

It is in this

spirit that we fully supported the adoption of resolution
868 (1993), a timely decision on a subject of concern to all Member
States.
Mr. MARUYAMA (Japan):

My delegation heartily welcomes

His Excellency the Right Honourable Mr. McKinnon and wishes to
thank him for his constant and serious interest in the question of
the safety of United Nations personnel.
The increasing number of attacks and other violent acts
against United Nations personnel is a source of serious concern.
Although the Secretariat and various United Nations forums have
worked vigorously to ensure their safety, we still encounter a lack
of cooperation, inadequate precautionary measures and
misunderstanding on the part of some authorities and people.
The urgent task of the United Nations is to enhance the
effectiveness of its activities in the field where assistance is

S/PV.3283
15

(Mr. Maruyama, Japan)
desperately needed.

But if not even the minimum requirement of

ensuring the safety of peace-keepers and other United Nations
personnel can be guaranteed, it will be impossible to enhance the
quality of their work or, indeed, even to maintain their presence
in the field.
Japan condemns any attack against United Nations personnel,
regardless of whether the motive is political or criminal or
whether the violence is deliberate or random.
The complexity of the question requires good coordination
among various United Nations organs.

Towards this end, it would

surely be useful to undertake certain legal measures, operational
adjustments and public relations efforts.

But Japan places perhaps

even greater importance on issuing a political appeal to gain the
cooperation of the local authorities concerned.

This, quite

simply, is the most basic prerequisite.
For these reasons, Japan heartily welcomes the adoption of
this resolution.

It demonstrates the commitment of the Security

Council to ensuring the safety and security of the United Nations
personnel, and it reaffirms the Council’s determination to
discharge its responsibilities.

I can only hope that this urgent

message will be heeded by local authorities and will somehow
reassure United Nations personnel in the field.

The Council will

remain seized of the matter and will vigilantly follow events in
the field.
Mr. RICHARDSON (United Kingdom):

First and foremost, I

should like to join others in warmly welcoming the presence amongst
us of the distinguished Minister of Foreign Affairs of New Zealand,
and I wish to thank him, his Government and his delegation for
bringing to the Council’s attention and sharpening its focus here
on a subject which I believe is of growing concern not only to
Council members but, more generally, to troop contributors and many
other delegations in the wider membership of the United Nations.

S/PV.3283
16

(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
I should also like to thank and warmly commend the
Secretary-General for his excellent report.

Not only is it well

written; it contains a number of extremely important and very
concrete proposals.
Our own consciousness of this problem has been heightened just
in the past 24 hours, when we were notified by the United Nations
Secretariat that two more British soldiers had been wounded in
Bosnia following a mortar attack.

The subject is very alive for

us, as for many others in this room.

It is true that peace-keepers

have always been at risk; by definition, they are always operating
in a tense and unstable environment.

But, as the Secretary-General

has pointed out, there is a new phenomenon:

United Nations

personnel are being attacked just because they are working for the
United Nations.

This is not only worrying, but frankly completely

unacceptable.
We have to take all possible steps to ensure the safety of
United Nations operations.

We have to have proper arrangements for

the investigation, trial and punishment of those who commit attacks
on persons engaged in such operations.

It is not only vital for

the protection of the individuals concerned - it is also vital if
we are to maintain political support for our peace-keeping efforts.
I wish to say in this connection that I am particularly glad that
the Secretary-General made it clear that safety and security issues
are not just a question of protecting United Nations staff,
narrowly defined, but of protecting all personnel who work for the
Organization - volunteers or those on contract.

They share the

same risks and they should receive the same degree of protection.
The resolution we have just adopted will heighten awareness,
we hope, on the part of host Governments and others of their
responsibilities in this field.

But it is only a first step.

we now have to do is to put it into practice.

What

Here, I believe, we

have to distinguish between the short term and the long term.

In

S/PV.3283
17

(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
the short term, we particularly welcome the emphasis of the
resolution on the need to ensure that security is an integral part
of the planning of an operation and that it extends, as I have
said, to all persons engaged in the operation.

We also welcome the

emphasis on the need for the prompt conclusion of a
status-of-forces agreement.

It just is not acceptable any longer

that host countries should drag their feet on this matter, as has
happened in some recent cases, to the knowledge of us all.
Taking the longer-term view, however, we also wish to welcome
the initiative brought by New Zealand to the General Assembly this
autumn, which aims at the elaboration of a new international
convention which will deal with the prosecution of those who attack
persons engaged in United Nations operations.

We hope that the

General Assembly, through the Sixth Committee, will work speedily
on this subject with a view to the adoption of a convention in the
near future.
This New Zealand initiative follows the earlier initiative in
the Council, which led to a presidential statement here in March.
I end as I began.

I want to thank the delegation of

New Zealand once again for bringing this matter to our attention.
I think today’s resolution is important.

It is not the end of the

story, and I have a nasty feeling that we shall be revisiting this
subject in the months and years ahead.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
The resolution the Security Council has just adopted is of enormous
importance not only because it has a bearing on the effectiveness
of United Nations operations, but also, and above all, because of
its human dimension.

In fact, it relates to strengthening the

safety of all the men and women - civilian, military and police who are so admirably carrying out the arduous tasks involved in
United Nations operations under a variety of difficult and
unforeseeable circumstances.

S/PV.3283
18

(Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo, Spain)
The recent expansion of United Nations operational activities
and the broadening of their scope and their nature imply ever
expanding and ever more dangerous mandates that place the personnel
involved in increasingly perilous situations.

This has led to an

increased loss of life among those personnel.

To date, 949 persons

have lost their lives in United Nations peace-keeping operations,
550 of them in operations still under way.
More disturbing still is how quickly the number of victims is
increasing.

Fifty-one lives were lost in 1992, and we are informed

that over a hundred personnel have been killed so far in 1993.

In

the last year alone, my country has lost 10 of its nationals
serving in the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

They all deserve our admiration and gratitude for

having made the supreme sacrifice in the service of the
international community and in the interests of peace.
Given the current situation and that trend, it should come as
no surprise that in "An Agenda for Peace" the Secretary-General
called attention to the need to strengthen the safety and
protection of United Nations personnel.

And when, in the

presidential statement of 31 March, the Council stressed the
importance and urgency of this question, it requested the
Secretary-General to report on the existing arrangements for the
protection of personnel and on their adequacy, and to make
recommendations for enhancing security.

Those recommendations form

the basis of the resolution just adopted.
I want to stress, first of all, that the resolution encourages
the Secretary-General to ensure that security matters are a
fundamental, integral part of the planning for an operation and
that any such precautions extend to all personnel engaged in such
operations, including civilian as well as military and police
personnel, and United Nations staff as well as personnel of

S/PV.3283
19

(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
non-governmental organizations and enterprises that are playing an
integral part in the operation.
Secondly, I would highlight the Council’s firm position that
the use of force by any party to a conflict against persons engaged
in a peace-keeping operation will be considered interference with
the exercise of the responsibilities of the Council, as well as the
Council’s readiness to consider measures it deems appropriate if
the safety of such personnel is not respected.
In sum, this resolution sends the clear message that the
Security Council is ready to do everything necessary, within its
power, to ensure the safety and protection of persons engaged in a
United Nations peace-keeping operation.
But it is not enough.

All Member States must be aware of the

problem and act accordingly.

For that reason we welcome the

initiatives now being taken elsewhere in the Organization, and in
particular the proposal by New Zealand - I take this opportunity to
welcome the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Trade of that country - that the General Assembly draft a
convention on responsibility for attacks on United Nations and
associated personnel and on measures to ensure that those
responsible for such attacks are brought to justice.

We pledge our

full cooperation in the speedy adoption and entry into force of
such an international instrument.
Ultimately, guaranteeing the safety and protection of persons
involved in United Nations operations is a responsibility and a
task for all of us.

In large part, the success of this undertaking

will determine the success of future United Nations operations to
restore and maintain peace the world over.
Mr. CHEN Jian (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

In

recent years United Nations peace-keeping operations have played
their role in alleviating regional tension and promoting peaceful
solutions of regional conflicts and are therefore highly regarded

S/PV.3283
20

(Mr. Chen Jian, China)
by the international community.

The rapid expansion of United

Nations peace-keeping operations and the increasingly complex
nature of their missions have given rise to a number of questions
demanding prompt solutions.

Among them is that related to the

security and safety of United Nations peace-keeping personnel, a
question that has been the focus of much attention.
Many peace-keeping personnel, including Chinese personnel,
have given their lives for the peace-keeping cause.

The Chinese

delegation is deeply concerned by, and strongly condemns, the
violence directed against United Nations peace-keeping personnel.
The host country of a United Nations peace-keeping operation and
the various parties to the conflict should cooperate closely with
the United Nations to create conditions conducive to the successful
execution of the peace-keeping operation.

They have the

responsibility and the obligation to take effective steps to ensure
the security and the safety of peace-keeping personnel.

We

therefore favour the Security Council’s taking appropriate action,
within its mandate, to ensure the security and safety of
peace-keeping personnel in line with the actual conditions of each
operation.
On the whole, the resolution we have just adopted reflects
that spirit, and we welcome its adoption.
We also appreciate the initiative taken by New Zealand and its
efforts on this matter, and we thank the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade of New Zealand, who is
present at today’s meeting and who made an important statement.
In taking appropriate steps to ensure the security and safety
of peace-keeping personnel, the United Nations should respect the
sovereignty of the host country and refrain from interfering in its
internal affairs.
It is out of the question to ensure the security and safety of
peace-keeping personnel by force alone.

A fairly safe environment

S/PV.3283
21

(Mr. Chen Jian, China)
can be established only with the cooperation and support of the
host country and the various parties concerned.

We are not in

favour of using force indiscriminately or of resorting to excessive
force, harming innocent civilians.

It is undesirable to stop

violence by greater violence.
China, as a founding State, is dedicated to the United Nations
endeavour in peace-keeping operations.

We have participated in

many peace-keeping operations of the United Nations.

We are ready

to continue, together with other Member States, to make our
contribution to ensuring the success of United Nations
peace-keeping operations and the security and safety of their
personnel.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I should

like now to make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Venezuela.
The question of the safety of United Nations personnel
participating in operations that are being conducted in areas of
conflict has in the recent past acquired increasing importance and
undeniable urgency.

It is clear that the presence of United

Nations personnel, be they military or civilian, in areas of
conflict, incurs the risks that are part of the job being carried
out, but recently those risks and dangers have included attacks and
acts of aggression that demonstrate a lack of respect and,
sometimes, an attitude of provocation, towards the noble and
selfless mission being carried out by the United Nations in its
efforts to preserve peace or to fulfil humanitarian objectives.
Venezuela wishes to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to
the memory of all those men and women of many nationalities who
have given their lives in the service of the United Nations.

We

also wish to express, for the record, our gratitude to all staff of
the Organization who, with courage and in a spirit of sacrifice,

S/PV.3283
22

(The President)
are at the present time carrying out tasks in the various theatres
of operation in which the United Nations is taking part.
The resolution we have just adopted meets the need for a
political statement on basic criteria and principles that, it is
felt, will meet some of the immediate needs that have already been
identified as regards the adoption of measures to deal with the
situations jeopardizing the safety of United Nations personnel.
Venezuela believes that these general principles must be the
subject of thorough, specialized study in various forums so that
progress can be made towards establishing a set of rights and
obligations for all countries that are participating in or are the
objects of such operations.
For their part, both the body that carries out the political
supervision of those operations - which is the Council’s
responsibility - and the Secretary-General should have at their
disposal pre-established criteria for determining when, in which
circumstances and to what ends they are called upon to exercise
their authority if such obligations are not complied with.
Recent experience shows the physical and material risks run by
United Nations personnel, and also the need to establish parameters
for any reaction that the Council must or can undertake in order to
deal with unforeseen circumstances or in order to have the
authority of the United Nations prevail.
It is in our collective interest to strengthen the credibility
and acceptance of United Nations forces in solving the conflicts
they were created to solve, without adversely impacting on their
safety.

Venezuela understands that with this resolution, a process

of reflection and reform will begin, and is prepared to participate
actively in this exercise.
That concludes my statement as representative of Venezuela,
and I now resume my function as President of the Security Council.

S/PV.3283
23

(The President)
There are no further speakers on my list.

The Security

Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
