S/2020/95

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 February 2020
Original: English

Tenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 1 (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) and associated
individuals and groups. In paragraph 97 of the resolution, the Council requested that
I provide an initial strategic-level report on the threat, followed by updates every four
months. In its resolution 2368 (2017), the Council requested that I continue to
provide, every six months, strategic-level reports that reflect the gravity of the threat,
as well as the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.
2.
This is my tenth report on the threat posed by ISIL to international peace and
security. 2 The report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, 3 in close
collaboration with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, other United Nations entities and
international organizations.
3.
Continuing ISIL activity in parts of Iraq and increased activity in certain areas
of the Syrian Arab Republic are highlighted in the report. Outside conflict zones, ISIL
remains reliant on inspired attacks to demonstrate its relevance, while it is actively
working to re-establish its former capacity to direct complex international operations.
Owing to their high number, foreign terrorist fighters remain an acute issue and will
continue to pose short-, medium- and long-term threat.

__________________

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
See S/2016/92, S/2016/501, S/2016/830, S/2017/97, S/2017/467, S/2018/80, S/2018/770,
S/2019/103 and S/2019/612.
3
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities.
1
2

20-00723 (E)

060220

*2000723*

S/2020/95

II. Threat assessment
A.

Overview of threat/Middle East
4.
Following its loss of territorial control in the Syrian Arab Republic in March
2019, ISIL has adapted by reconstituting itself as a covert network in the country, as
it had done after the loss of territorial control in Iraq in 2017. While the overall level
of violence related to ISIL has decreased, the group remains a significant threat and
has shifted to insurgent tactics, with attacks continuing in different parts of the
country. In remote areas of Iraq, ISIL continued to mount attacks on official
checkpoints, infrastructure and officials.
5.
In 2019, the Government of Iraq launched Operation Will of Victory, aimed at
expelling ISIL fighters from remote areas. The international counter-ISIL coalition
believes that ISIL in Iraq has approximately 11,000 fighters. Figures compiled by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), on the other hand, indicate that
ISIL has 4,662 fighters. The discrepancy between the figures of UNAMI and the
international counter-ISIL coalition could be due to the difference in the classification
of active fighters, logistics enablers and sympathizers.
6.
Challenges remain in securing the border between the Syrian Arab Republic and
Iraq, and fighters are managing to cross in both directions. ISIL activity has increased
in Dayr al-Zawr and Hasakah Governorates, and a spike in attacks targeting the
international counter-ISIL coalition and local non-State armed groups in the northeast of the Syrian Arab Republic has been observed.
7.
On 27 October, the United States of America announced the death of the leader
of ISIL, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, 4 following an operation in Idlib Governorate in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The ISIL spokesman, Abu al-Hassan al-Muhajir, subsequently
died in an air strike nearby. Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi al-Qurashi was announced as the
new leader of ISIL on 31 October. Some Member States assess that Abu Ibrahim is
Amir Muhammad Said Abdal Rahman al-Mawla, previously al-Baghdadi’s deputy,
but that is yet to be confirmed.
8.
ISIL has become increasingly focused on its fighters and dependants in Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic. In September 2019, al-Baghdadi urged efforts to free them
from detention and displacement facilities. This situation adds to the challenges faced
by the international community in connection with the Hawl camp, as well as
detention facilities in the area, as emphasized in my eighth and ninth reports
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2368 (2017).
9.
The total population of all the detention and displacement facilities in the north east of the Syrian Arab Republic comprises more than 100,000 individuals. More than
70,000 of them are women and children housed in the Hawl camp. There is
considerable variation in terms of what alleged crimes, if any, female camp residents
may have committed and how ideologically committed they may be to ISIL. Some
extremist women in the annex to the Hawl camp, which houses foreign women and
their children, lead the camp’s Hisbah morality police, who reportedly murdered at
least two other women for “immoral” behaviour. The number of males of fighting age
is reported to have fallen with the recent return of some Iraqis to Iraq. One Member
State estimates that there are now 6,000 Syrians, 2,000 Iraqis and 2,000 foreign
terrorist fighters, amounting to 10,000 males of fighting age.
10. The current improvised holding arrangements for suspected ISIL fighters,
supporters and dependants are hard to secure and po lice. Some Member States find it

__________________
4

2/17

Listed as Ibrahim Awwad Ibrahim Ali al-Badri al-Samarrai (QDi.299).
20-00723

S/2020/95

challenging to liaise with local authorities and non-State armed groups in the area,
who are themselves uncertain of how long and on what basis they can continue to
administer the holding facilities. Several hundred individ uals suspected to be
affiliated with ISIL, including fighters, are reported to have escaped in October 2019. 5
11. In addition, unsuitable and overcrowded facilities can be breeding grounds for
despair and radicalization to violence, especially in the case of young people,
endangering rehabilitation attempts and leading to the possibility that many may
become hardened violent extremists. In keeping with the responsibility that they have
for their nationals, some Member States advise that the best way of addressing the
issue is to pursue the repatriation of individuals associated with ISIL, while others
remain reluctant to accept returnees. Some Member States assess that some
repatriation programmes show signs of success and will likely reduce the threat posed
by the individuals repatriated.
12. The issue of foreign terrorist fighters remains acute, with Member States
continuing to estimate that between half and two thirds of the more than 40,000 who
joined the so-called caliphate are alive. Foreign terrorist fighters and adherents of
ISIL will continue to pose short-, medium- and long-term terrorist threats on a scale
many times greater than was the case with Al-Qaida from 2002 onwards, based on the
much greater numbers involved.
13. In some conflict zones outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, ISIL is not
the strongest terrorist group. Al-Qaida affiliates are predominant, especially in the
Sahel, Somalia and Yemen. The presence of ISIL in Afghanistan is still of great
concern to Member States. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (QDe.161)
suffered major setbacks in November 2019 but has shown resilience in the past and
is still believed to pose a serious threat.
14. Islamic State’s West African Province in the Lake Chad Basin was a v ery active
ISIL affiliate during the second half of 2019. It sustained a high tempo of attacks and
reportedly seized significant war spoils of arms, materiel and other supplies during
raids on the security forces of Nigeria. 6 It also reinforced its links to Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara, which adopted the tactics, techniques and procedures of Islamic
State’s West African Province to further harass defence and security forces in Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger.
15. ISIL has still not been able to reconstitute its external operations capability and
remains reliant on inspired attacks to demonstrate relevance outside conflict zones.
These attacks are usually unreliable or have limited impact, and Member States report
that ISIL is actively working to re-establish its former capacity to direct complex
international operations. Documents have emerged in the Syrian Arab Republic
concerning a plan within ISIL to reconstitute a structure to assist operatives in Europe
with the planning and execution of attacks. Despite weaknesses in the current
command and control, the threat of such a complex attack still exists, especially from
experienced operatives able to work independently.
16. Current assessments of the financial reserves available to ISIL vary from
$100 million to $300 million. The increasing brazenness of ISIL in its activities in
both Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic also extends to fundraising activities.
Extortion of residents by ISIL in the areas of Dayr al-Zawr and Hasakah in the Syrian
Arab Republic is occurring more openly. 7 In Iraq, there are reports of ISIL cells
raising funds by establishing fake checkpoints and disguising themselves as Iraqi
military personnel or popular mobilization militia. ISIL in Iraq also continued to
__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
7
Information provided by a Member State.
5
6

20-00723

3/17

S/2020/95

extort funds from local businesses. Cash couriers and unregistered money service
businesses remain the most common means of transferring funds to and from ISIL,
which maintains a network of cash couriers with the ability to transport resources
across borders at limited transaction costs.
17. There are reports of funds reaching foreign terrorist fighters and their
dependants in holding facilities in the Syrian Arab Republic, at least in part through
traditional banking channels. These methods can involve wire transfers to acc ounts
in neighbouring countries, which are subsequently collected and couriered to
beneficiaries. There is at least one money service business operating in the Hawl camp
for internally displaced persons. 8 These transactions, even if motivated by family ties,
may violate sanctions measures that prohibit the financing of terrorism.
18. The diversion of small arms and light weapons, materiel and improvised
explosive device components and precursors continues to aggravate conflict zones.
Weapons from Libya reportedly continue to find their way into the Lake Chad Basin
and the Sahel, thereby augmenting the capabilities of terrorist organizations in those
areas. Member States remain concerned about the adaptation of unmanned aerial
systems for terrorist purposes. Front companies established by ISIL near the core zone
have also been used to move funds and procure unmanned aerial systems technology. 9

B.

Regional trends

1.

Africa
19. According to Member States, the number of ISIL fighters in the south of Libya
fell to between 100 and 200. The reduction was primarily due to a series of aerial
attacks targeting ISIL strongholds around Murzuq in late October and early
November. Some ISIL members reportedly left Libya for conflict zones in the Sahel
and the Lake Chad Basin, which further contributed to the decreased number of ISIL
fighters in the south of Libya. Although these air strikes against ISIL have led to the
death of some leadership figures, ISIL has retained the ability to mount hit-and-run
operations in the cities of Fuqaha’, Ghadduwah and Sabha in the south of Libya. ISIL
affiliates were also captured during the reporting period in the northern cities of
Ajdabiya, Darnah and Misratah. There are still ISIL cells on the Libyan coast.
20. Member States expressed fears that ISIL might attempt to carry out a publicity generating attack against oil fields in the south-west of Libya. The video released by
ISIL in Libya on 5 December, which showed the brutal murder of civil servants in
Fuqaha’, had only limited success in demonstrating relevance within the larger ISIL
network. However, the video and the apparent ability to continue to wage attacks in
the south despite recent setbacks, emphasizes the enduring resilience. With its
reduced numbers in Libya, ISIL faced a correspondingly reduced financial burden
and was able to use its reserves to pay for weapons on the illicit market. The group is
also investing in small projects in coastal cities, though likely within the informal
economic sector in order to avoid detection.
21. ISIL also became active in Algeria after a two-year hiatus, with Jund al-Khilafah
in Algeria (QDe.151) launching an attack in November 2019 against security forces
in Tamanrasset, near the border with Mali and the Niger.
22. Islamic State in the Greater Sahara faced significant attrition from counterterrorism operations but the group retains a stronghold in the tri -border area between
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger and maintains pressure on defence and security

__________________
8
9

4/17

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
20-00723

S/2020/95

forces in the Ansongo and Ménaka areas. In two major attacks, the group killed 49
soldiers at the I-n-Déliman military camp in Mali on 1 November and 71 soldiers at
the I-n-Atès camp in the Niger on 10 December. Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger
also suffered substantial losses in other significant attacks perpetrated by Jama’a
Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin, 10 Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and Ansarul
Islam. Since July 2019, 45 members of the defence and s ecurity forces of Burkina
Faso, more than 100 members of the forces of Mali and 100 members of the forces of
the Niger have been killed.
23. Member States report that the operational efficiency of terrorist groups in the
region is enhanced by deconfliction and operational collaboration between the groups
in high-profile attacks. A similar fluidity exists between organized crime and ISIL
affiliates, since both use the same smuggling routes and invest in lucrative illicit
activities such as narcotics, trafficking in weapons and migrants and small-scale
mining.
24. Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, which benefits from a closer relationship
with Islamic State’s West African Province, embraced tactics that proved efficient
against the military forces of Nigeria. During the reporting period, it mostly targeted
large military camps to seize a substantial number of weapons, ammunition, vehicles
and fuel. The presence of joint facilitators for Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and
Islamic State’s West African Province could presage an enhanced operational
connection between the Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin theatres, but the leader of
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, Adnan Abou Walid Al-Sahraoui (QDi.415), will
likely remain operationally independent from the commander of Islamic State’s West
African Province, Abu Abdullah Idris Ibn Umar Al-Barnawi (not listed).
25. Raids on security forces by Islamic State’s West African Province continued to
be successful and led to significant war spoils of materiel and oth er supplies. An
unspecified number of foreign terrorist fighters, possibly of Chadian, Libyan or other
North African origin, may have joined the group, which is now much stronger than
the Boko Haram faction led by Abubakar Mohammed Shekau’s (QDi.322) 11 in terms
of both capability and the number of fighters (up to 5,000 for Islamic State’s West
African Province compared with estimates of 500 to 2,000 for Mr. Shekau). 12
26. In the latter part of 2019, ISIL in Somalia lost personnel owing to an ongoing
military offensive. However, the group remained resilient, operating covertly and
continuing to recruit within Somalia and online. Furthermore, it gained new impetus
when the ISIL core began to restructure its affiliates in Africa. According to several
Member States, ISIL in Puntland is now operating as the command centre for ISIL
affiliates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mozambique and is in charge
of loose networks of supporters of the affiliates. The ultimate goal is to consolidate a
triad connection of the operations of ISIL affiliates in Eastern, Southern and Central
Africa. In that vein, ISIL began, through its online presence, to merge footage from
the three regions to show central coordination.
27. During the reporting period, the threat from Islamic State Central Africa
Province continued to evolve. Some Member States reported that it now comprises
about 2,000 local recruits and a large contingent of foreign terrorist fighters. Member
States also observed the improved quality and content of onl ine propaganda, pointing
to probable new resourcing and funding. However, the group’s leadership structure
remains blurry.

__________________
10

Listed as Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin (QDe.159).

11

Listed as Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad (QDE.138).
Information provided by a Member State.

12

20-00723

5/17

S/2020/95

2.

Europe
28. Regional Member States assessed that nationals and resident foreigners
radicalized online continue to pose the main threat to European countries. Such
individuals use online platforms and encrypted Internet applications for training,
information-sharing and possibly to connect with each other. They claim attacks in
the name of the ISIL core even without contact with the group or its authorization.
Member States highlighted the risk, especially for migrants, of being targeted by
propaganda aimed at inspiring attacks.
29. In November 2019, through a Referral Action Day Against Islamic State Online
Terrorist Propaganda organized by the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation, online service providers were requested to remove large quantities of
online ISIL material, including from an instant messaging platform.
30. The threat posed by terrorist or radicalized prisoners is also of continued
concern. They include returnees, “frustrated travellers” who have failed to join ISIL
abroad and perpetrators, supporters and planners of terrorist attacks, as well as other
individuals radicalized while in custody. As many as 1,000 foreign terrorist fighters
imprisoned on return to Europe prior to 2015 are expected to be released in Europe
in 2020. 13 Some are assessed by Member States as still dangerous.
31. Concerns remain among Member States over the effectiveness of r ehabilitation
programmes and the evaluation of released terrorists. On 29 November, a convicted
terrorist released on probation in 2018 killed two people in London while attending
an offender rehabilitation conference. The attacker is reported to have acte d alone,
without any direct current connection to ISIL.
32. Regional Member States reported instances of clandestine networks of women
members of terrorist organizations helping other terrorists and radicalized prisoners
to exchange information with individuals outside prisons by receiving and delivering
messages when they visit relatives in prison. The risk posed by women terrorists and
radicalized female inmates also needs to be adequately addressed. Member States
continue to highlight the threat potentially associated with the repatriation of women
from the Hawl camp in the Syrian Arab Republic, since they consider many to be
violent and determined to radicalize others. Some Member States have received
injunctions from their courts to repatriate children from the camp together with their
mothers.
33. The use of various travel routes and measures by foreign terrorist fighters to
avoid detection when returning to Europe continues to be a challenge to regional
Member States. During the third quarter of 2019, the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL) coordinated a six-week maritime border operation
involving six Member States, which led to the detection of 12 returnees using
maritime routes between North Africa and Southern Europe.

3.

Asia
34. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan came under severe military
pressure from the security forces of Afghanistan and Taliban fighters towards the end
of 2019, leading to its virtual expulsion from what had been its Afghan headquarters
in Nangarhar Province. The authorities of Afghanistan took custody of more than
1,400 people, including fighters of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan and
their dependants. Most of the male detainees are Afghan nationals but there are also
foreigners from Azerbaijan, Canada, France, India, Maldives, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkey and Uzbekistan. The impact on the number and geographic distribution of the

__________________
13

6/17

Information provided by a Member State.
20-00723

S/2020/95

group’s fighters is assessed as significant. Some 2,100 fighters are now in Kunar
Province, which has effectively become the group’s new Afghan core area, whereas
the number of fighters elsewhere in Afghanistan may now be as low as 400, giving a
total estimate of 2,500 for the whole country. Up to 25 of them constitute a covert
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan presence in Faryab Province, led by a
former Taliban member, Qari Salahuddin (not listed). 14
35. Nevertheless, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan remains active,
ambitious and threatening. It continues its online recruitment and propaganda, for
which it also conducts outreach activities in religious and academic institutions in
Afghanistan, including Kabul University. 15 It has established informal contact with
other terrorist groups, including Jamaat-ul-Ahrar (QDe.152), Tehrik-e-Taliban
Pakistan (QDe.132) and Lashkar-e-Islam, which regularly mount attacks on border
posts of Pakistan. The approach of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant -Khorasan has
the potential to exacerbate the security threat to countries neighbouring Afghanistan .
36. Several Member States reported that Central Asian fighters had travelled from
the Syrian Arab Republic to locations in Africa, including specifically the Central
African Republic, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau and the Sudan. Some Member States assess
that there could be among them individuals transiting those locations to join ISIL
affiliates in the Sahel and the wider West Africa.
37. The South-East Asia region benefits from close collaboration and information sharing among intelligence and security services, as well as targeted initiatives to
identify and thwart would-be travellers. Notwithstanding some success by counterterrorism initiatives in Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines, the threat posed by
ISIL remains persistent. Porous maritime borders and the risk of abuse of on-arrival
visa procedures have established pathways for foreign terrorist fighters, many of
whom are from South-East Asia and seek access to the southern Philippines. In late
November, forces of the Philippines killed Abu Talha, who w as affiliated with the
Abu Sayyaf Group (QDe.001). He was described as bringing sophisticated bomb making skills and acting as a key financier for the group. 16 The kidnapping for ransom
of fishers is a common means of financing some groups in the southern P hilippines.
Extortion and criminal activity, including the smuggling of arms and vehicles, are
also reported methods of fundraising.
38. The role of women in the operational planning, financing and execution of
terrorist attacks in South-East Asia continues to be cited by Member States as a
concern. ISIL has, in its propaganda, abandoned any pretence of discouraging the
involvement of women in attacks and openly calls for their involvement.

III. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
A.

Overview
39. Since my previous report, the United Nations, Member States and international,
regional and subregional organizations have continued to strengthen, refine and
promote their use of effective tools and measures to address the threat posed by ISIL,
its affiliates and supporters and by returning or relocating foreign terrorist fighters.
40. Further efforts have been made to strengthen the coherence, coordination and
effectiveness of the counter-terrorism work of the United Nations. Four new entities
signed the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, bringing

__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
16
Information provided by a Member State.
14
15

20-00723

7/17

S/2020/95

the total number of members and observers to 42. In July 2019, the Global Compact
Coordination Committee adopted its first joint programme of work, for the period
2019–2020, marking an important further step in the operationalization of the
Compact.
41. Ahead of the Counter-Terrorism Week at United Nations Headquarters, to be
held from 29 June to 2 July 2020, the Office of Counter-Terrorism has continued to
organize a series of high-level regional conferences with Member States, including a
conference on harnessing new technologies to counter terrorism, held in Minsk in
September 2019; a conference on regional policy resp onses to prevent radicalization
and terrorism, held in Budapest in November 2019; and a conference on empowering
youth and promoting tolerance to prevent terrorism, held in Abu Dhabi in December
2019. The outcomes and recommendations of the regional confer ences also inform
the programmatic response and technical assistance provided to Member States by
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and entities of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Compact.
42. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate updated the
“Technical guide to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
and other relevant resolutions”, which was issued in December 2019 after
consideration by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and is aimed at assisting Member States in
their implementation endeavours. The Executive Directorate continued to conduct
assessment visits to Member States on behalf of the Committee to monitor, promote
and facilitate their implementation of the relevant Council resolutions and to identify
strengths, shortfalls, technical assistance needs, useful experiences and good practices
in that regard.

B.

Responding to evolving challenges posed by Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant
Current situation
43. I commend Member States that have repatriated or are in the process of
repatriating from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic their nationals with suspected
links to terrorist groups listed by the United Nations. However, thousands of people,
mostly women and children, remain stranded in overcrowded camps, living in
inhumane conditions. Since my previous report, the humanitarian crisis has been
exacerbated by the absence of basic services, such as food, water, medical care and
education, and by the lack of appropriate psychosocial support. Many children and
women in the camps lack identification, which jeopardizes their rights related to their
nationality and places them at greater risk of exploitation and potential terrorist
radicalization.
44. People in the camps may include victims of sexual violence committed by ISIL,
including sexual slavery and forced marriage, and children born as a result of sexual
violence, in addition to children kidnapped, indoctrinated, recruited or exploited by
parties to the conflict. There are also significant challenges relating to ensuring
comprehensive screening and risk assessment and determining possible criminal
responsibility. The situation has profound security implications, which require urgent
attention by the international community in accordance with international law, in
particular international human rights law, international humanitarian law and
international refugee law.
45. Women can be facilitators, supporters and perpetrators of crimes, while also
being victims of violence, trafficking and other human rights violations. Therefore,

8/17

20-00723

S/2020/95

gender-responsive policies in risk assessment, interrogation, detention, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration are required. Member States should develop
appropriate prosecution strategies, and repatriation, rehabilitation and reintegration
strategies should be tailored to the needs of the individual, following international
human rights standards.
46. Reports of children deprived of their liberty and interned in pretrial and posttrial detention camps for their actual or alleged association with ISIL remain of
concern. It is stipulated in the guiding principles on foreign terrorist fighters (Madrid
Guiding Principles) (S/2018/1177, annex) and the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict that children, including those with links to terrorist groups listed by the
United Nations, should be treated primarily as victims, and any prosecution should
be conducted in accordance with internationally recognized juvenile justice
standards. Detention should be used as a last resort and for the shortest appropriate
time. Appropriate legislation and protections need to be intro duced to rehabilitate
children and reintegrate them into their communities on a priority basis.
47. Following the key principles developed by the United Nations system in March
2019 on the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegra tion of
women and children with links to terrorist groups listed by the United Nations, the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre within the Office of Counter-Terrorism is
implementing a project with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to support
requesting Member States in the repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of suspected foreign terrorist fighters and their dependants.
Repatriation efforts
48. In September 2019, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
issued two analytical briefs on the repatriation of women and children associated with
ISIL. 17 The first brief outlined gaps that remained in understanding the motives of
women who joined ISIL, including their non-binary role as victims and perpetrators
within ISIL, thereby complicating efforts to determine their criminal responsibility
and develop any subsequent prosecution and rehabilitation measures. The rate of
return for women is currently much lower than those for men and children. This
phenomenon requires urgent attention.
49. Member States have primary responsibility for the repatriation of their nationals
and therefore for taking appropriate measures to develop comprehensive repatri ation
strategies, for providing consular services, for issuing birth certificates and other
identification documents for children born to their nationals, for taking all measures
necessary to prevent arbitrary denial of citizenship rights and for protectin g their
nationals, especially children, from becoming stateless in accordance with
international law. In its dialogue with States, including in Europe, the Counter Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate continues to underline the need to ensure
procedural safeguards for individuals affected by measures relating to citizenship and
to stress that such safeguards can be particularly challenging to implement while the
affected persons are in the conflict zones.
50. In the handbook entitled Children Affected by the Foreign-Fighter Phenomenon:
Ensuring a Child Rights-based Approach, 18 issued in September 2019 by the Office
__________________

See www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/CTED-Analytical-Brief-Repatriation-ofWomen.pdf and www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/CTED-Analytical-BriefRepatriation-of-Children.pdf.
18
Available at www.un.org/counterterrorism/ctitf/sites/www.un.org.counterterrorism.ctitf/
files/ftf_handbook_web_reduced.pdf.
17

20-00723

9/17

S/2020/95

of Counter-Terrorism in collaboration with United Nations entities, Member States
and other stakeholders, it is recommended that repatriation efforts are comprehensive
and coordinated, guided by the best interests of the child, as well as by principles of
family unity, to prevent recurring cycles of violence and further victimization.
Prosecution
51. Member States continue to face challenges in bringing ISIL members and their
affiliates, including foreign terrorist fighters, to justice, in accordance with
international legal standards, including guarantees of due process and fair tria ls.
Further efforts are needed to investigate and prosecute the crimes committed by ISIL
members, in particular through mutual legal assistance.
52. Since my previous report, United Nations entities have continued to work with
Member States to strengthen their counter-terrorism policies and measures and
address gaps in national legislation. In 2019, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and UNODC launched an
initiative on comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
strategies for persons associated with terrorist groups, aimed at developing, inter alia,
guidelines for Member States. The Executive Directorate and UNODC, supported by
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, held an expert meeting in Vienna in October 2019
with Member States, United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Compact entities and
civil society to gather good and emerging practices on gender- and age-sensitive
strategies for the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegrati on of suspected terrorists,
including foreign terrorist fighters and their accompanying family members.
53. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism continued their close cooperation to address priority tec hnical
needs identified pursuant to the assessment visit to Iraq undertaken by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism, in 2015, and the subsequent high-level consultations held jointly
by the Office and the Executive Directorate in Iraq in 2018. The Government of Iraq
has taken steps to introduce legislation allowing for the prosecution of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. United Nations entities continue to support
such efforts with a view to establishing a strong domestic legal basis for the
prosecution of crimes committed by ISIL in accordance with international human
rights law and standards. The Government of Iraq is fa cilitating the repatriation of
suspected foreign terrorist fighters and their dependants from its territory to their
countries of nationality.
54. Concerns remain relating to ensuring due process in the prosecution of
individuals associated with ISIL in Iraq, including the prosecution of defendants,
among them women, for mere association with terrorist groups, reliance on
confessions allegedly obtained under duress and ineffective defence. The UNAMI is
engaged in systematic trial monitoring aimed at promoting fair trial standards and the
integrity of the judicial process, in compliance with procedural guarantees to
strengthen the rule of law, which are critical tools for efforts to prevent conflict and
counter terrorist radicalization.
Rehabilitation and reintegration
55. The development of evidence-based rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes that are guided by international human rights laws and standards is
needed, preserving the rights of returnees and in accordance with intern ational law,
including the absolute prohibition of torture and the prohibition of arbitrary detention.
56. Many Member States continue to face challenges in effectively preventing
terrorist radicalization and managing terrorist offenders within correction al systems.
10/17

20-00723

S/2020/95

A lack of resources prevents prison administrations from addressing prisoners’ needs
and assessing risks. Other infrastructural and managerial issues, such as minimal
oversight and accountability governing high-risk detainees, ill-trained prison
personnel, overcrowding and disregard for prisoners’ rights, could contribute to the
spread of violent extremism conducive to terrorism within prison populations.
57. In November 2019, Security Council members held an Arria formula meeting
focused on strategies to manage terrorist and other violent extremist prisoners, best
practices and persistent challenges in dealing with radicalization in prison and the
promotion of rehabilitation and reintegration policies for detainees. The Office of
Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
UNODC have continued to implement a joint project to assist Kazakhstan, Tunisia
and Uganda in taking a holistic best practice view of the effective management of
such challenges. The project supported increased knowledge and capacity-building
for prison and national security officials in all three countries and disseminated
specialized technical guidance materials.
58. Member States should develop tailored rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes that are aligned with national priorities and sensibilities and explore
community-based alternatives to detention, including individualized needs
assessments, vocational training, education facilities, psychosocial counselling,
social reintegration initiatives and restorative justice alternatives. I also encourage
Member States to continue to strengthen coordination between national authorities
and local governments, along with relevant civil society organizations, to support the
rehabilitation and reintegration of returnees.
59. UNODC assisted Indonesia in the development of guidelines to establish a
critical incident management system and enhance corrections intelligence to address
deficiencies in the management of violent extremist prisoners. In the Philippines, the
Lanao returnee reintegration programme has been launched, in cooperation with the
United Nations Development Programme, for ISIL returnees from the Lanao del Sur
Province. The Office of Counter-Terrorism and UNODC also collaborated on a
capacity-building workshop for Central Asia, held in Kazakhstan in October 2019,
which was focused on the effective reintegration of children repatriated from conflict
zones.
60. Progress has been achieved through national approaches to rehabilitation and
reintegration in implementing the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, with the
support of United Nations entities. During the reporting period, several dozen
individuals formerly associated with Boko Haram completed a rehabilitation
programme in the Niger. The national commission on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of Cameroon became operational, and Chad adopted a regulation to
set up a centre to host surrendered individuals previously associated with Boko
Haram.

C.

International and regional cooperation
61. The transnational nature of the terrorist threat requires continued international
judicial cooperation in extradition, investigation and prosecution efforts, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions 19 and applicable bilateral and
multilateral treaties. United Nations entities have facilitated efforts to engage
policymakers and community leaders and enhance their understanding of

__________________
19

20-00723

Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2322 (2016) and 2396 (2017).
11/17

S/2020/95

international guidelines and have also strengthened national capacity to investigate
and prosecute terrorist offences.
62. The Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNODC and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
have continued to implement a joint programme to strengthen the engag ement of
parliamentarians, as lawmakers and policymakers, and community leaders in
international efforts to prevent terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism. A regional conference for national parliaments of Asia and the Pacific, held
in Kuala Lumpur in October 2019, resulted in 15 recommendations and priority areas
for strengthening the role of parliaments in combating terrorism nationally and
globally.
63. In West Africa, the Accra Initiative, launched by Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo to address threats of terrorism and transnational organized
crime in the region, has facilitated the creation of a platform to exchange information
and intelligence between the police, the gendarmerie and the security services.
UNODC has continued to provide capacity-building and mentoring services to
specialized counter-terrorism units, based on respect for the rule of law, including
through the launch of a new module for Nigeria to train investigators and judges on
gender-sensitive investigation and adjudication of terrorism. The United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre is launching a joint project with INTERPOL for
implementation in 2020 to facilitate the exchange of information on foreign terrorist
fighters in Europe, Central Asia and the Middle East.
64. In the Lake Chad Basin, the presence of foreign terrorist fighters held by various
State authorities renders cooperation indispensable, ranging from investigations at the
individual level to the coordination of prosecution, rehabilitation a nd reintegration
policies aimed at facilitating orderly repatriation. The increasing movement of such
fighters between Central, Eastern and Southern African States has led to enhanced
judicial cooperation, encompassing formal mechanisms, including the adop tion of
regional cooperation agreements, as well as informal exchanges between prosecutors
at the local level.
Military evidence
65. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate launched the
“Guidelines to facilitate the use and admissibility as evidence in national criminal
courts of information collected, handled, preserved and shared by the military to
prosecute terrorist offences” 20 in December 2019, developed within the framework of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Compact, in collaboration with the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre. The first edition of the guidelines is
intended to serve as the basis for discussions with Member States on their
development of domestic policies and legal frameworks. Member States are
encouraged to make full use of the document and contribute to its subsequent review
in order to comprehensively cover new issues, such as the need to develop detailed
guidance for the detention, arrest and questioning of witnesses and victims. UNODC,
a close partner in the initiative, has launched a project addressing the challenges of
collecting battlefield evidence for the Niger.
Electronic evidence
66. The use of electronic data as evidence has become an essential tool to effectively
conduct criminal investigations, prevent attacks and bring terrorists to justice.
Pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2322 (2016), 2331 (2016), 2341 (2017) and
2396 (2017), and recognizing existing challenges on cross-border access to electronic
__________________
20

12/17

Available at www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Battlefield_Evidence_Final.pdf .
20-00723

S/2020/95

evidence while respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, the Counter Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and UNODC have continued to
implement a joint global initiative with the International Association of Prose cutors
on cross-border access to electronic evidence, providing capacity-building support to
national practitioners on the use of the Practical Guide for Requesting Electronic
Evidence Across Borders, which is now available in four languages. Through the
organization of multi-stakeholder expert group meetings, the initiative is aimed at
promoting public-private dialogue, thereby helping to build trust and facilitate
collaboration, and at identifying remaining challenges and ways to support the actors
concerned. At the beginning of 2020, the global initiative will present a simplified
request form that will standardize direct requests to technology companies and
communication service providers.
67. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and INTERPOL continued to
collaborate to build the capacity of several Member States to use social media to
identify and investigate foreign terrorist fighters with a series of capacity -building
workshops in Asia, using their joint handbook “Using the Internet and Social Media
for Counter-Terrorism Investigations”, published in June 2019.

D.

Supporting victims of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
ensuring accountability
68. The United Nations continued to develop comprehensive strategies to better
address the rights and needs of victims and survivors of terrorism. The recent adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 73/305 on the enhancement of international
cooperation to assist victims of terrorism and the establishment of a Group of Friends
of Victims of Terrorism demonstrate the proactive engagement of Member States on
the issue. The Office of Counter-Terrorism continued to lead efforts under the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Compact regarding victims of terrorism and
organized the second commemoration of International Day of Remembrance of and
Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism, on 21 August 2019, as well as an exhibit featuring
testimonies of victims of terrorism.
Investigative efforts of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant
69. One year after its arrival in Iraq, the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) is fully operational and has made substantial progress,
collecting key documentary, digital, forensic and testim onial material in support of
domestic proceedings to hold ISIL accountable for its crimes. The team has expanded
its strategy to include additional investigative priorities, ensuring that its key
objectives reflect the breadth of communities affected by th e crimes committed by
ISIL in Iraq. UNITAD is collecting victims’ testimonies and conducting targeted
evidence collection activities in several locations across Iraq, including through
excavations of mass grave sites and the exhumation of victims’ remains, along with
the digitalization of evidence, to build case files on ISIL members with alleged
responsibility for acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide.
70. UNITAD, acting in cooperation with the judiciary of Iraq and adhe ring to the
right of victims to have access to justice and participate in criminal proceedings
against perpetrators, has provided support for ongoing proceedings in a third State to
prosecute members of ISIL for atrocity crimes committed in Iraq. The testi mony of

20-00723

13/17

S/2020/95

eight witnesses was presented via video link in ongoing national proceedings in an
appeals court in Finland relating to two Iraqi nationals facing charges of aggravated
war crimes in connection with mass killings perpetrated by ISIL in June 2014.
Ensuring the representation of victims’ voices in judicial processes relating to ISIL
crimes, through the systematic collection and presentation of witness testimony, is
essential to build credible cases against ISIL perpetrators and promote accountability.
Conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant
71. On 30 October, at an event held in New York to mark the tenth anniversary of
the establishment of the Security Council mandate to prevent and address conflictrelated sexual violence, participants took stock of progress and discussed ways to
approach challenges and implement existing commitments to a survivor-centric and
rights-based approach. Survivors of sexual violence around the world provided their
testimonies and called for tangible actions in judicial remedies and reparation efforts.
72. There remains a lack of progress in addressing sexual violence in conflict and
bringing perpetrators to justice. The Office of my Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict supported the launch of a Global Survivors Fund for conflict related sexual violence, to complement existing efforts to ensure justice and holistic
care. In 2020, pilot projects will be launched in Iraq for victims of sexual violence
committed by ISIL. However, there is a need for States to enhance their efforts to
tackle the culture of impunity and address structural gender-based inequalities and
other drivers of sexual violence.

E.

Counter-financing of terrorism
73. Security Council resolution 2462 (2019) on preventing and suppressing the
financing of terrorism reflects the Council’s continued determination to assist
Member States in depriving terrorists of funds and the need to fully integrate financial
intelligence into counter-terrorism efforts. An increasing number of States has
subsequently introduced regulations to mitigate the vulnerability of virtual assets and
crowdfunding sites to terrorism financing, by extending anti-money-laundering
mechanisms.
74. In October 2019, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team disseminated a questionnaire
to all Member States on measures taken to disrupt terrorist fina ncing. The responses
will feed into a report to be presented at a special meeting on terrorism financing to
be held in March 2020 jointly by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, in cooperation with the Financial
Action Task Force.
75. A focus on enhancing national capacities and building institutional mechanisms
for identifying and disrupting terrorism-financing activities is recommended.
Strengthened regional collaboration would also be beneficial. Two Financial Action
Task Force-style regional bodies in Africa – the Eastern and Southern Africa
Anti-Money Laundering Group and the Inter-Governmental Action Group against
Money Laundering in West Africa – are in the process of developing and
implementing dedicated operational plans on countering the financing of terrorism.
For the former, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre collaborated in the
organization of two subregional dialogues, in Turkey in October 2019 and in South
Africa in December 2019.

14/17

20-00723

S/2020/95

76. During its recent visits to West Africa, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate noted a general lack of understanding of terrorism -financing
risks, challenges in coordination between financial intelligence units and other
counter-terrorism stakeholders, a lack of asset-freezing mechanisms and limited
monitoring of money transfers involving mobile phones, cash and other bearer
negotiable instruments across borders (a widespread practice throughout Africa).
77. In response to Security Council resolution 2462 (2019), the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre has developed a multi-year global programme on
countering the financing of terrorism, in consultation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and other entities of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Compact, which builds on good practices developed under a
previous project completed in January 2020. The thematic priorities include targeted
financial sanctions, protecting the non-profit sector, financial inclusion, partnerships
with the private sector, national risk assessments and international cooperation.
UNODC has also been supporting Member States in Africa, South-Eastern Europe,
the Middle East and South-East and Central Asia through operational mentoring
programmes on countering terrorism financing.
78. As noted by the Security Council in its resolution 2482 (2019), Member States
remain concerned at the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, including
trafficking in arms and narcotics and the illicit trade in natural resources, such as gold,
and precious metals and stones. In December 2019, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, in collaboration with the World Customs
Organization, enhanced the work of its informal network of law enforcement officials
on mineral-related crimes, promoting information-sharing, building capacity and
enhancing knowledge of supply chains and related crimes with law enforcement and
customs officers, financial intelligence units and recipient States. The United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has continued to
promote international regional cooperation in preventing and countering illicit
trafficking in cultural property as a source of terrorism financing.

F.

Border management and law enforcement
79. In accordance with Security Council resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017),
United Nations entities have continued to support Member States in Central Asia,
North Africa and South Asia in strengthening capacities to detect, intercept and
investigate foreign terrorist fighters in border areas and implement effective border
control.
80. The implementation of the multi-agency United Nations Countering Terrorist
Travel Programme launched in May 2019 has begun in several pilot States. A total of
31 Member States worldwide have formally asked to benefit from the programme. In
September 2019, the Office of Counter-Terrorism established a programme support
office in Budapest to facilitate programme delivery.
81. Through its Border Security Management Programme, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, together with partners such as UNODC, the World
Customs Organization, the International Organization for Migration and the
International Air Transport Association, conducted six training activities during the
reporting period in West Africa, the wider Sahel, East Africa, the Caribbean and
South-East and Central Asia to strengthen the capacity of front-line officers at
selected international airports to counter the threat of foreign terrorist fighters.
82. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
and UNODC continued to support the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat Terrorism
and Transnational Organized Crime of Mali and its Specialized Investigation Brigade,

20-00723

15/17

S/2020/95

through training and technical and logistical support for its investigations, including
into the attack against the country’s armed forces in Boulikessi in September 2019.
During the reporting period, 16 terrorism-related trials were completed; 13 defendants
were found guilty, with sentences ranging from two years to life imprisonment, and 6
were acquitted. UNODC provided technical assistance to support the development of
the Eastern Africa Police Chiefs Cooperation Organization Regional CounterTerrorism Centre of Excellence.
83. Effective protection of so-called soft targets and critical infrastructure against
terrorist attacks requires the implementation of physical protection measures, t he
development of strong and resilient communities and close engagement with civil
society and the private sector. Within the framework of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Compact, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and INTERPOL held
regional expert workshops on the issue, using The Protection of Critical
Infrastructures against Terrorist Attacks: Compendium of Good Practices 21 to
enhance the implementation of Security Council resolution 2341 (2017) on the
protection of critical infrastructure and its resolution 2396 (2017) regarding soft
targets.

G.

Countering terrorist narratives and engaging communities to
prevent and counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism
84. ISIL and its affiliates have continued to adapt and diversify their use of the
Internet and social media, including by migrating to smaller platforms, in resp onse to
the efforts of larger platforms, in collaboration with Member States and civil society,
to identify and remove terrorist and violent extremist content.
85. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate continued its efforts
to counter terrorist narratives, including by leading jointly with the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre a project within the counter-terrorism framework that will
deliver recommendations for effective monitoring and evaluation and a toolkit for
Member States and other key stakeholders, encompassing both online and offline
spaces. Through its programme on strategic communications, the Centre assisted
Member States in South-East Asia in building better knowledge of terrorist narratives
and communications skills and expertise to counter the threat, and assisted the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in developing a regional approach to
crisis communications in East Africa.
86. United Nations entities continued to support Member States in their
development of national or regional action plans for preventing and countering
violent extremism conducive to terrorism through a whole-of-government and wholeof-society approach. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre coordinated
support from entities of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Compact for
the development by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations of the work plan to
implement its 2018–2025 plan of action to prevent and counter the rise of
radicalization and violent extremism.
87. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
published a report in September 2019 in which it analysed the actions of grass -roots
community organizations in nine countries of the Maghreb and the Sahel. It identified
practical, innovative and sustainable measures that could help to strengthen the
resilience of local communities to terrorist narratives and recruitment.

__________________
21

16/17

See www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Compendium_of_Good_
Practices_Compressed.pdf.
20-00723

S/2020/95

88. UNESCO continued to promote the recovery of cultural heritage, preventing
violent extremism and strengthening community resilience through programmes such
as “Revive the Spirit of Mosul”, which is aimed at addressing violent extremism
through educational interventions in Iraq. In the Sahel region, UNESCO guides for
teachers promote transformational education that strengthens lear ners’ resilience
capacities and encourages them to promote non-violence in their communities.

IV. Observations
89. The transnational threat of terrorism remains acute, with ISIL at its centre. Since
the loss of its last stronghold in the Syrian Arab Republic in March 2019, the ISIL
core has continued its rapid reconstitution into a covert network. It has continued to
seek resurgence and global relevance online and offline, including the capacity to
carry out external operations. Its regional affiliate s pursue their strategy of
entrenchment in conflict zones by exploiting local grievances, with alarming
advances in Western Africa. Evolving links among terrorist groups and with organized
criminals, as well as the large number of remaining foreign terrori st fighters, highlight
the imperative for Member States to remain vigilant and united to tackle the threat.
90. It is paramount for Member States to work together to collect, secure and share
admissible evidence to ensure accountability, in accordance with international law
and international standards, for the crimes committed by ISIL, to uphold the rights
and needs of victims, to stabilize affected areas and to earnestly tackle the conditions
that were conducive to the rise of ISIL. Concerted efforts remai n necessary for the
rehabilitation and reintegration of men, women and children who are stranded,
especially in conflict zones, including in camps and detention facilities in Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic. Member States have primary responsibility for the
repatriation of their nationals. All measures taken by Member States for the
protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of women and
children with links to terrorist groups listed by the United Nations should be in
compliance with their obligations under international law, including international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and international refugee law, as
well as international standards and relevant Security Council resolutions. Relevant
General Assembly resolutions should also be taken into consideration.
91. The United Nations system will continue with resolve to encourage and support
Member States in their efforts to implement the United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy, relevant Security Council resolutions and applicable international
law provisions. I am hopeful that Member States will seize the opportunity of the
Counter-Terrorism Week at the United Nations, to be held from 29 June to 2 July
2020, including the seventh biennial review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
the first ever Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism and the second United Nations
High-Level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States,
to come together and reaffirm the international consensus against terrorism as the
United Nations commemorates its seventy-fifth anniversary.

20-00723

17/17
