14 decembre 1946

1309

Sobtante-troisieme seance pleniere

Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.
President, the question covered by document
A/203 deserves s:e.ecial attention.

. M. M?,L?TOV (Union des Republiques sociahstes SOVletlques) (traduit du, russe): La question qui fait l'objet du document A/203 merite
une attention particuliere, Monsieur le President.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In those circumstances we shall have to adjourn
the meeting.

Le PRESIDENT: Dans ces conditions, il est
necessaire de lever la seance.

The meeting rose at J .30 a.m.

La seance est levee a I h. 30.

SIXTY·'rHIRD PLENARY MEETING

SOIXANTE·TROISIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Held on Saturday, 14 December 1946,
at 11 a.m.

Tenue le samedi 14 decembre 1946;,
a 11 heures.

CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Page

Pages

176. Budgets of the United Nations for the
financial years 1946 and 1947: report of
the Fifth Committee: resolutions
1310

176. Budgets de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies pour les exercices 1946 et 1947.
Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission.
Resolutions
1310
177. Bareme des contributions aux budgets de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour
les exercices 1946 et 1947, et au fonds de
roulement. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission. Resolution
1310
178. Principes regissant la reglementation et
la repartition generales des armements.
Rapport de la Premiere Commission. Re1310
solution (suite de la discussion)
179. Informations relatives aux forces armees
a fournir par les Membres des Nations
Unies. Rapport de la Premiere Commission. Resolution
1316
180. Election de deux Membres du Conseil de
tutelle. Resolution
1320

177. Scale of contributions to the budgets of
the United Nations for the financial years
1946 and 1947 and to the working
capital fund: report of the Fifth Committee: resolution
1310
178. Principles governing the general regulation and reduction of mmaments: report
of the First Committee: resolution (continuation of the discussion)
1310
179. Information on armed farces to be supplied by Members of the United Nations:
report of the First Committee: resolution
1316
180. Election of two members of the Trusteeship Council: resolution
1320
President: Mr. P.-H. SPAAI< (Belgium).

. President: M. P.-R. SPAAK (Belgique).

Agenda of the meeting

Ordre du jour de la seance

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The first item on the agenda is the continuation
of the discussion on the disarmament question.

Le PRl1SIDENT: L'ordre du jour appdle la
suite de la discussion sur le desarmement.

Mr. VANDENBERG (United States of America): Mr. President, a point of order.

M. VANDENBERG (Etats-Unis d'Amerique)
(t1'aduit de l'anglais): Monsieur le President, je
voudrais presenter une motion d'ordre.
Puis-je faire observer que les points 2 et 3 de
l'ordre du jour de ce matin, relatifs aux premier
et second budgets annuels et au bareme des
contributions, ont ete adoptes par la Commission,' a l'unanimite? Ce sont des questions que
nous devons obligatoirement examiner et dont
nous. devons achever la discussion avant la fin
des travaux de la presente session. ]'ai pris a la
discussion de ces points une part personnelle que
-je ne le cache pas-j'aimerais garder jusqu'au
bout, or je ne pourrai ctre id cet apres-midi.
J'estime que ces deux points, qui ont reuni
l'unanimite a la Commission, peuvent ctre
adoptes sans debat.
]e demande done a l'Assemblee de consentir
unanimement a modifier l'ordre des questions
et de prendre en premier lieu les points 2 et 3,
etant entendu que si ma proposition donne lieu
a la moindre discussion, je la retire immediatement.

May I point out that items 2 and 3 on the
printed agenda this morning covering the first
and second annual budgets and the scale of contributions passed the Committee unanimously?
They are mandatory items which, of course, we
must conclude before we finish the work of this
session. I have had some personal responsibility
in connexion with them which-I frankly say to
my colleagues-I should like to see through to the
finish, and I cannot be here this afternoon. In
my opinion, both of these items can pass without
any debate because there was complete unanimity
in the Committee.
I ask unanimous consent that we therefore
take up items 2 and 3, interrupting the present
order with the understanding that the request
will be immediately withdrawn if there is any
debate.

1310

Sixty-third Plenary Meeting

14 Decem ber 1946

Le PRESIDENT: Il n'y a pas d'objection a la
proposition de M. Vandenberg?

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Are there any objections to Mr. Vandenberg's
proposal?
.
I therefore propose that we should consider
document A/272.

Je vous propose donc d'examiner le document A/272.

176. Budgets of the United Nations for the
financial years 1946 and 1947: report of the Finh Committee: resolutions (document A/272)

176. Budgets de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour les exercices 1946
et 1947. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission. Resolutions (document
A/272)
Le PRESIDENT: S'il n'y a pas d'opposition, je
considererai que les resolutions presentees dans le
rapport de la Cinquieme Commission (annexe
74) relatif aux budgets de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies pour les exercices 1946 et 1947,
sont adoptees.

Decision: The
unanimously.

Decision: Les resolutions sont adoptees
l'unanimite.

was

adopted

171. Scale of contributions to the budgets
of the United Nations for the financial
years 1946 and 1947 and to the
working capital fund: report of the
Fifth Committee: resolution (document
A/274)

a

177. Bareme des contributions a u x
budgets de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies pour les exercices 1946
et 1947, et au fonds de roulemont.
Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission. Resolution (document A/274)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Does anybody wish to speak on this point?
The resolution in the report of the Fifth Committee (annex 75) concerning the scale of contributions to the budgets of the United Nations
for the financial years 1946 and 1947 and to
the working capital fund is therefore adopted.

Le PRESIDENT: Quelqu'un demande-t-il la
parole?
La resolution presentee dans le rapport de la
Cinquieme Commission (annexe 75) relatif au
bareme des contributions aux budgets de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour les exercices
1946 et 1947, et all fonds de roulement, est
adoptee.

Decision: The
unanimously.

adopted

Decision: La resolution est adoptee al'unaniI
mite.

178. Principles governing the general
regulation and reduction of armaments: report of the First Committee:
resolution (document A/267) (continuation of the discussion)

178. Principes regissant la reglementation
et la reduction generales des armements. Rapport de la Premiere Commission. Resolution (document A/2671
(suite de la discussion)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall continue the discussion on the disarmament problem.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous reprenons la discussion
sur la desarmement.

I call upon Mr. Martin, representative of
Canada.
.

Je donne la parole a M. Martin, representant
du Canada.

Mr. MARTIN (Canada) : At the San Francisco
Conference, we signed a Charter which began
with an affirmation of the faith of the peoples
of the United Nations in those standards of civilized life which were attacked by our enemies
in the war: the worth and dignity of the individual, the rule of law and justice among
nations, and respect for the pledged word. The
peoples of the United Nations declared in the
Preamble of this Charter that they were persuaded t1~at men and ?ations could by their joint
and sustamed efforts lIve together as good neighbours, free from fear and want, and with liberty
of thought and worship. The text reads: "We
. . . determined to save succeeding generations

M. MARTIN (Canada) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Lots de la Conference de San-Francisco, nous
avons signe une Charte qui commence par une
proclamation par laquelle les peuples des Nations Unics expriment leur attachement aux
principes de la vie civilisee que nos ennemis ont
attaques pendant la guerre: la valeur et la
dignite de la personne humaine, le regne du
droit et de la justice entre nations et le respect
de la parole donnee. Les peuples des Nations
Unies ont declare, dans le Preambule de la
Charte, leur conviction que les hommes et les
nations peuvent, par des efforts communs et
constants, vivre en paix, les uns avec les autres,
dans un esprit de bon voisinage, afl'ranchis de la

resolution

was

ti

t
t
t

f

1

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
If there is no opposition, I shall consider adopted
the resolutions presented in the report of the
Fifth Committee (annex 74) concerning the
budgets of the United Nations for the financial
years 1946 and 1947.

resolution

fl

14 decembre 1946

1311

from the scourge of war which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind."

Saixanfe-froisieme seance plenfere

peuf et du besoin et jouissant de la liberte de
la pensee et du culte. Le texte dit "Nous . . .
resolus a preserver les generations futures du
fleau de la guerre qui, deux fois en l'espace
d'une vie humaine, a inflige a l'humanitt d'indicibles souffrances."
Lorsque l'Assemblee a commence ses travaux,
When this Assembly opened seven weeks ago,
there were few, perhaps none of us, who felt il y a sept semaines, peu de ses Membres - a
that we could do much in this second part of supposeI' meme qu'il s'en trouvat un seulthe first session of the Assembly to save ourselves avaient le sentiment que I' Assemblee pourrait,
from the scourge of war. Our hopes for this au cours de cette seconde partie de sa premiere
Assembly were limited. We were, all of us, session, faire grand'chose pour preserver l'huconscious of the shortcomings and failures of the manite du fleau de la guerre. Nos espoirs etaicnt
United Nations. My colleague, the Chairman of limites. Nous etions taus conseients des insufthe Canadian delegation, said in his speech in the fisances et des echecs de l'Organisation des
opening debate of the Assembly on 29 October: Nations Unies. Le chef de la delegation canadienne avait declare le 29 octobre, lors du debat
d'ouverture de l'AssembIee:
"Seize mois apres la signature de la Charte,
"The United Nations, sixteen months after
1'Organisation des Nations Unies est encore
the signature of the Charter, is still, and is
a l'epreuve et il est probable qu'eHe y restera
apt to continue for many months to be on
pendant de nombreux mois. Ce ne serait pas
trial. Its interests will not be served by conagir dans son interet que de dissimuler les
cealing any disappointment caused by its
deceptions que son activjte a causees."
operations."
Le chef de notre delegation avait poursuivi
He went on to say that we of the Canadian
delegation were particularly concerned that the en clisant que nous etions surtout preoccupes du
'Security Council and the Military Staff Com- fait que le Conseil de stcurite et le Comite
mittee had so far failed to make substantial d'etat-major n'avaient pas, jusqu'alors, rcussi a
progress towards the conclusion of the special accomplir des progres notables vel'S la concluagreements with Members required to make sion, avec les Etats Membres, des accords spearmed forces and other facilities available to the ciaux necessaires pour que le Conseil de securite
Security Council. He urged that it would be puisse disposer de forces armces et autres moyens
in the interests of all Members of the United d'action. Il avait fait valoir que les Membres
Nations to see the Security Council equipped and des Nations Unies auraient interet a ce que le
ready, in fact, to enforce proper decisions for the Conseil de sccuritc fnt effectivement rnis en
maintenance of world peace, and also to see mesure de faire respecter les decisions qu'il pourserious consideration given to the reduction of rait juger utile de prendre pour le maintien de
national armaments so that the productive la paix mondiale, et aussi a cc que 1'on examinat
capacity of the world, thus conserved, might be avec beaucoup d'attention la reduction des
used to improve the living conditions of all the armements nationaux, afin que la capacite de
peoples.
production du monde puisse etre ainsi entierement employee a ameliorer les conditions de vie
de tous les peuples.
Plus tard, au cours de la meme journce,
Later in the day on which we made this statement, Mr. Molotov put the Soviet Union pro- M. Molotov avait saisi l'Assemblee d.e la proposiposal for disarmament before this Assembly. This tion de l'Union sovietique relative au desarmeproposal coming, as it did, from one of the three ment. Du fait que cette proposition emanait de
most heavily armed Powers in the world, made l'une des trois nations les plus puissammeqt
immediate .progress towards disarmament a armees du rnonde, il devcnait politiquement possible de realiser des progres immediats dans la
political possibility.
solution du probleme du desarmement.
Toutefois, naus avons estime que la resolution
We felt, however, that the resolution proposed
by the Soviet delegation did not go far enough. proposee par If). delegation de l'Union sovietique
It stated the objectives in general terms, but it n'allait pas assez loin. Elle definissait en termes
did not sufficiently point the way to the speedy generaux les objectifs auxquels elle tendait, mais
attainment of those objectives. We believe that ne donnait pas d'indications assez precises sur la
substantial progress could be made- towards maniere de les atteindre rapidement. Nous
disarmament only if all 'the Members of the crayons qu'il ne sera possible d'accomplir des
United Nations were to agree to practical mea- progres notables dans la voie du desarmement
sures which' would convince their peoples that que si tous les Membres des Nations Unies se
their nations could be secure through reliance mettent d'accord sur des mesures pratiques de
upon means other than large national arma- nature a convaincre leurs peuples qu'ils pourments.
raient assurer la securite de !eur pays en faisant fond sur des moyens autres que de puissants armements nationaux.
In our opinion, these practical measures were
A notre avis, ces mesures d'ordre pratique
of two kinds. First, it was necessary to work sont de deux sortes. D'une part, il faut travailler

Sixty-third Plenary Meeting

14 December 1946

14

a l'etablissement d'un systeme de securite mon-

an
in

1312

towards a system of world security which would
afford protection at least as effective to the
Members of the United Nations as their own
national forces. Secondly, it was necessary to
develop such international safeguards as would
give assurance to any nation which did disarm
that it would not be attacked and struck down
by another nation that had evaded or violated
its promises to disarm. For, as Mr. Bevin said
last night, we have learned only too well the hollow mockery of unilateral disarmament.

We were also well aware that over the peoples
of the world hangs the menace of an armament
race in atomic and other weapons adaptable to
mass destruction, unless the means are found
for the swift implementation of the terms of
reference of the Atomic Energy Commission.
Deliberations of that Commission have clearly
shown that the processes involved in the development of atomic energy for peaceful uses are
the same up to the final stages as those invoJved
in its use for military purposes.
In our opinion, it was not therefore enough,
as the Soviet Union proposal had suggested, to
prohibit the production and use of atomic energy
for military purposes. Unless we are prepared to
agree to the total prohibition of the use of atomic
energy, we have to provide means to control
atomic energy for peaceful purposes only. Prohibition of the production and use of atomic
energy for war should not result in its prohibition for peace. We were therefore, prepared,
when the resolution by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics came up for debate in the First
Committee, to bring forward these considerations. We did not, however, consider it appropriate that a nation with a comparatively small
population, which had, even before this Assem.bly met, reduced its armed forces to a peace
footing, should take the lead in putting forward
amendments to the Soviet Union resolution on
disarmament.

We expected that lead to be taken by one of
the other heavily armed powers of the world. A
few days after we introduced our resolution, the
United States introduced theirs. That resolution, like the Soviet Union resolution, did not in
our view go far enough. We therefore continued,
in Committee, in Sub-Committee, in Drafting
Committee, to try to gain acceptance of the
principles contained in our resolution. At one
time, I must frankly admit, towards the beginning of this week, we feared that we would not
succeed. We were unable to persuade the other
eight members of the Drafting Committee that
the amendments which we were proposing to the
draft resolution then beipg considered were more
than merely drafting amendments. We therefore
had to reserve the position of the Canadian delegation on the essential paragraphs of the disarm-

diale qui assure la protection des Membres des
Nations Unies, d'une rnaniere au moins aussi
efficace que leurs forces armees nationales.
D'autre part, il est necessaire d'instituer des
garanties internationales qui donnent a toute
nation qui desarmera, l'assurance qu'elle ne
pourra pas etre attaquee et abattue par une
nation qui eJuderait ou violerait ses propres
engagements en matiere de desarmement.
Comme l'a dit M. Bevin hier soir, l'experience
ne nous a que trop enseigneque le desarmement
unilateral est un leurre.
Nous savons bien aussi que, sur les peuples
du monde, planera la menace d'une course aux
armements - arme atomique et autres armes
adaptables a la destruction massive - tant que
l'on n'aura pas trouv,e le moyen de mettre rapidement a execution le mandat de la Commission de l'energie atomique. Les travaux de cette
Commission ont clairement montre que les operations de production de l'energie atomique sont,
jusqu'aux phases finales, identiques, que l'on
travaille a des fins pacifiques ou a des fins militaires.
Nous estimons done qu'il ne suffit pas, comme
l'a propose l'Union sovietique, d'interdire la
proc;l.uction et l'emploi a des fins militaires
de l'energie atomique. Si nous ne sommes
pas disposes a accepter l'interdiction totale de
l'emploi de l'energie atomique, il faut que nous
trouvions les moyens de garantir que cette
ene~gie ne sera utilisee qu'a des fins pacifiques.
L'interdiction de la production et de l'emploi de
l'energie atomique en vue de la guerre ne devrait pas avoir pour resultat de supprimer la
production et l'emploi de cette energie en vue
d'ceuvres pacifiques. Nous nous appretions a
presenter ces remarques devant la Premiere
Commission lorsque vint en discussion la resohition de la delegation de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques. Npus avons alors estime
qu'il n'appartenait pas a une nation dont la
population est relativement faible et qui, avant
meme la reunion de la presente Assemblee, a
ramene ses forces armees aux effectifs du temps
de paix, d'ctre la premiere a presenter des
amendements a la resolution de l'Union sovietique relative au desarmement.
Nous comptions que ce role serait assume par
l'une des autres nations qui possedent de puissants armements. Que1ques jours apres le depot
de notre propre resolution, les Etats-Dnis ont
presente la leur. De meme que I'Dnion sovietique, les Etats-Dnis ne nous semblaient pas aller
assez loin; c'est pourquoi nous avons poursuivi
a la Commission, a la Sous-Commission et au
Comite de redaction, nos efforts en vue d'obtenir
des adhesions aux principes enonces en notre
resolution. Je dois reconnaitre sincerement qu'il
y a eu un moment, vel'S le debut de cette semaine, Oll nous avons craint de n'y point parvenir. Il nous a ete impossible de convaincre Ies
huit autres membres du Comite de red action
que les amendements que nous proposions au
projet de resolution en discussion comportaient
plus que des modifications de redaction. Nous

wl
fo
dr
te
in
dl
bl
oJ

'-,

a
t]
d
t1
t]
c

0

d

I

1

1

14 decembre 1946

1313

Soixante-troisieme seance pleniere

avons du, en consequence, reserver la position
de la'delegation du Canada quant aux paragraphes essentiels de la resolution sur les desarmements et presenter nos amendements a la
Sous-Commission elle-meme.
The purpose of the Canadian amendments
L'objet des amendements canadiens que la
which the Sub-Committee accepted the day be- Sous-Commission a adoptes avant·hier etait de
fore yesterday was to ensure that the text of the garantir que le texte du projet de resolution tradraft resolution reflected clearly our common in- dllisait bien notre intention commune. Nous retent. Our fear was that the essential paragraphs doutions que les paragraphes essentie1s du projet
in the draft resolution had been framed by acci- de resolution n'aient ete, par hasard, rediges
dent in such a way that they were capable of de telle sorte qu'on aurait pu les interpreter
being construed to mean the precise opposite comme signifiant exactement l'inverse de ce que
of what we all intended them to mean.
nous voulions tous leur faire dire.
La resolution qui est actuellement soumise a
The resolution now before the Assembly for
approval incorporates a:ll the amendments of l'approbation de l'Assemblee contient taus les
the Canadian delegation. It incorporates, in ad- amendements de la delegation canadienne. Elle
dition, in paragraph 8, the useful amendment of contient en outre, au paragraphe 8, l'utile amen~
the United States delegation which reinforces dement presente par la delegation des Etats-Unis,
the amendments we had moved in order to make lequel vient renforcer les amendements que nous
certain that nothing contained in this resolution avions proposes nous-memes pour donner la ceron disarmament should limit the powers and titude qu'aucune des dispositions de la resolution
duties of the Atomic Energy Commission.
sur le desaITIlement ne viendrait limiter les pouvoirs et la tache de la Commission de l'energie
atomique.
La delegation du Canada appuie, donc,
The Canadian delegation therefore wholeheartedly supports this resolutio~ on disaITIla- chaleureusement la resolution sur le desarmement. By adopting this resolution, framed in ment. Par l'adoption de cette l1esolution, rt3digee
precise and careful language, the General en termes precis et prudents, l'Assemblee geneAssembly will have taken a' historic first step rale aura fait un premier pas, un pas historique,
towards general disarmament and the prohibition vel'S le desarmement general et l'interdiction des
of weapons of mass destruction. We will have armes pouvant servir a des destructions massives.
done no more, however, than have taken the Nous n'aurons fait rien de plus, toutefois, qu'un
premier pas en avant.
first step.
Il y a, a notre avis, quatre etapes a franchir
There are four stages, it seems to us, in the
process of disarmament. The first stage is that pour aboutir au desarmement. C'est a la
on which we are now engaged - the adoption premiere etape que nous en sommes a l'heure
of a resolution by the General Assembly of actuelIe, celle de l'adoption par l'Assemblee
the United Nations on the principles which g,enerale des Nations Unies d'une resolution sur
should govern the general regulation and reduc- les principes qui devraient regir la reglementation of armaments. The second stage is the tion et la reduction generales des armements. La
formation of plans by the Security Council. seconde etape sera celle de l'elaboration de plans
During this stage the Security Council will be par le Conseil de securite; au cours de cette
doing the work of a preparatory commission . etape, le Conseil de securite jouera le role d'une
on disarmament. The third stage is the con- commission preparatoire du desarmement. A la
sideration by all the Members of the United troisieme, tous les Membres des Nations Unies,
Nations at a special session of this General As- reunis en. une session speciale de l'Assemblee
sembly of the plans formulated by the Security generale, examineront les plans elabores par le
Council. The fourth stage in the process of Conseil de securite. Quant a la quatrieme etape,
disarmament is the ratification and the coming elle consistera en la ratification et l' entree en
into force of the disarmament treaties or con- vigueur des traites et conventions de desarmeventions approved by the General Assembly in ment approuves par l'AssembIee generale reunie
special session.
en session speciale.
Mais ne nous ber~ons pas d'illusions; n'en
Now, let us not mislead ourselves and our
peoples about the difficulties of the task which faisons pas naitre chez nos peuples quant
lies ahead of us. We will today only have laid aux difficultes de la tache que nous alIons avoira
an essential stone in the foundation of a. just affronter. Nous n'aurons fait rien d'autre, cette.
and stable world order, in which it may be fois, que de poser une pierre essentielle des
possible for men and nations by their joint and fondations d'un ordre mondial juste et stable ou
sustained efforts to live together as good neigh- il sera possible aux hommes et aux nations, par
bours, free from fear and want and with liberty leurs efforts conjugues et constants, de vivre les
uns avec les autres dans un esprit de bon voisiof thought and worship.
nage, affranchis de la peur et du besoin, 'et jouissant de la liberte de pensee et de culte.
Ce seia line lourde tache que de completeI'
The task of completing the edific~ of peace
will be heavy. It will. be long and dreary. l'edifice de la paix, une longw:: et morne tache
It will be full of set-backs and heart-breaks. au cours de laquelle ne manqueront ni les inament resolution and to move our amendments
in full Sub-Committee.

Sixty-third Plenary Meeting

1314

There will be brief moments of elation, such
as that of last night and of today, but there
will also be periods of despair. If we, the peoples
of the United Nations, are to succeed in our
task, we must be willing to experiment and to run
great risks to attain great objectives. We must
be resolute and display in our just cause a holy
obstinacy.
We must have faith in ourselves and in each
other. Above all, we must remember that all
men are brothers and that upon the dignity, the
liberty, the inviolability of the individual men,
women, and children of the world depend the
welfare of the people, the safety of the States
and the peace of the world.

14 December 1946

sucd:s ni les deceptions graves. 11 y aura de
brefs moments d'exaltation, comme ceux d'hier
soir et d'aujourd'hui, mais il y aura aussi des
periodes de desespoir. Si nous, peuples des
Nations Unies, devons reussir dans notre mission, il nous faut la volonte de tenter des experiences et de courir de grands risques pour
atteindre des buts eleves. Il faut ctre resolus, il
faut mettre au service de notre juste cause, une
sainte obstination.
Il nous faut avoir foi en nous-mcmes, et les
uns dans les autres. Par-dessus tout, il faut nous
souvenir que tous les hommes sont freres, que
c'est du respect de la dignite, de la liberte, de
l'inviolabilite de la personne de tout individu,
homme, femme, enfant, partout dans le monde
que dependent le bien-ctre de l'humanite, la
securite des Etats et la paix generale.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Parodi, representative of France.

Le PRESIDENT: J e donne la parole
M. Parodi, representant de la France.
,

Mr. PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): My country, like all the countries of
the world, will rejoice at the adoption, which
I hope will be unanimous, of the resolution relating to disarmament submitted to the General
Assembly by the First Committee. The proposed
plan seems to us a good one. It is neither for
the First Committee nor for the General Assembly to prepare a complete and detailed plan
of disarmament; they have neither the time nor
the competence. We know that the preparation
of a real disarmament plan is a long and difficult
task which will require weeks or months of
work by the Security Council and its subordinate
bodies.
The resolution before us gives the necessary
impulse to this work, and it does so in an atmosphere of unanimity which gives it the authority which it must possess from the beginning.
The resolution goes further: it defines the reasonable principles of a disarmament. plan; in
particular, it establishes a close connexion from
the very beginning between the ideas of security,
disarmament and control.
Thus, at the very beginning of our work,
an end is put to the old theoretical controversy,
finally condemned by excessively harsh· experience. For many years this controversy had
complicated the work of disarmament at Geneva.
The reasonable and realistic solution is the
foundation of this resolution; to tell the truth,
it was no longer seriously questioned by anyone.
Security must be collective and must progressively include, if not a true international force,
at least the system of international guarantees
provided for by Article 43 of the Charter. Disarmament must be general; it must be simultaneous; it must apply not only to numbers of
troops, but also to armaments as a whole and
to everything that constitutes war potential.
Finally, with regard to control, the resolution
proves to be even more substantial; from the
very beginning it solves one of the great difficulties which confronted the Atomic Energy Commission during its recent work and which
threatened to cause the failure of the disarma-

M. PARODI (France): Comme tous les pays
dans le monde, man pays se rejouira de l'adoption, que je souhaite unanime, de la resolution
proposee a l'AssembIee generale par la Premiere
Commission au sujet du desarmement. A nos
yeux, le projet presente est bono I1 n'appartenait
ni a la Premiere Commission ni a l'Assemblce
generale de dresser eUes-memes un plan complet
et detaille de desarmement; eUes n'en ont ni le
temps, ni la competence. Nous savons que
1'elaboration d'un plan veritable de desarmement
est un travail long et difficile qui exigera de la
part du Conseil de securite, et des organismes
qui en dependent, des semaines ou des mois de
travail.
La resolution qui nous est soumise donne
1'impulsion necessaire a ce travail et cela dans
une atmosphere d'unanimite qui lui confere
1'autorite qu'elle doit avail' au depart. La resolution va plus loin: elle degage les principes
raisonnables d'un plan de desarmement; en
particulier, elle lie etroitement, des le debut, les
notions de securite, de desarmement et de
controle.
Ainsi prend fin, au depart mcme de notre travail, et definitivement condamne par de trap
cruelles experiences, le vieux debat theorique
qui, durant des annees, avait complique Et
Geneve l'reuvre du desarmement. La solution
raisonnable et realiste est a la base de la resolution; a vrai dire, elle n'a plus ete discutee
serieusement par personne: la securite doit ctre
collective et devra comprendre progressivement,
sinon une veritable force internationale, en tout
cas le systeme de garanties internationales prevu
par l' Article 43 de la Charte. Le desarmement
doit ctre general; il doit ctre simultane; il doit
porter non seulement sur les effectifs, mais encore sur 1'ensemble des annements et de tout
ce qui constitue le potentiel de guerre.
Enfin, en ce qui concerne le controle, la resolution s'avere plus substantielle encore; elle resout au depart 1'une des grandes difficultes devant lesquelles 6tait placee la Commission de
l'energie atomique pendant ses recents travaux
et devant lesquelles le projet de desarmement ris-

Et

14 decl

ment I
the uri
the Cl
which,
been a
rule of
merely
securit
conver
unanir
organs
Securi1
these (
and pl
DUI
Frend
in adc
would
know
perfec
of thl
Powel
shouk

Thi
graph
sidera
its inc
out v
disarr
the r(
situat
If
parisc
atmo!
in thl
may.
atmo:
Leag1
fail.
cult :
ties.
past'
in w
esseri·

In

cussic
place
at lel
atten
with
reali!
good
SiJ
of at
be ::1
task
have
whic
as w
of b
mad
in t]
cold
anc(
mou

14 decembre 1946

1315

ment plan, namely the difficulty arising out of
the unanimity rule contained in Article 27 of
the Charter. The obstacle of the "veto" to
which} in our opinion, excessive importance' has
been attached, has been overcome without any
rule of the Charter being infringed or amended,
merely by providing that once the system of
security and control has been established by
conventions adopted in accordance with the
unanimity rule, this system should be ensured by
organs functioning under the control of the
Security Council and possessing by virtue of
these conventions special powers, defined exactly
and precisely.
During the work of the Committee the
French delegation strove to defend the idea that
in addition to general disarmament plans which
would be drawn up and implemented-and we
know that they will be long and difficult to
perfect-a progressive and balanced withdrawal
of the forces now maintained by the great·
Powers of the world outside their own territory
should be recommended as a first step.
This recommendation is contained in paragraph 7. It undoubtedly gave rise to a considerable number of discussions. N evertheIess,
its inclusion in the text allows us to hope, with~
out waiting for the end of the long work of
disarmament, for a first substantial step along
the road towards an improvement in the world
situation.
If we look back, we cannot but make comparisons with the enthusiastic and generous
atmosphere which prevailed, for years at least,
in the League of Nations, and which some of us
may perhaps regret. If this unduly enthusiastic
atmosphere was the cause of the failure of the
League of Nations, it is no reason why we should
fail. We are working in a different, more difficult atmosphere, in contact with harsher realities. This contact with the harsh realities of the
past war, the harsh realities of the difficult world
in which we are living, can and must be the
essential reason for our success.
In the text you have before you, in the discussion of our Committee, there is indeed no
place for Utopia. This text has been discussed
at length. We have studied it, paying the closest
attention to realities and, I might almost say,
with the most manifest distrust. It is a sensible,
realistic text which will allow us to do really
good work.
Since, as I hope, we have reached the end
of our debate on disarmament, we may perhaps
be allowed to show some satisfaction at the
task whose end is now in sight. Perhaps we now
have the right to say to the world, the world
which is still so sorrowful, where in many places,
as we know, women and children are still dying
of hunger, where, in my country, which has
made such a great effort towards rehabilitation
in the last two years, people are shivering with
cold from want of coal, a world where disturbance and fear of war are still so evident, where
mourning and suffering are still so terrible, per-

Soixante-troisieme seance pleniere

quait d'echouer, a savoir la difficulte provenant
de la regIe d'unanimite de vote inscrite dans
l'Article 27 de la Charte. L'obstacle du "veto"
auque~ etait att~chee une importance a nos yeux
exceSSIve, a pu etre tourne sans qu'aucune regIe
~e la Ch~~; ait ete violee, sans qu'aucune ait dil
et:e ~odl.flee, en prevoyant simplement qu'une
fOlS etabli par des conventions acceptees conforrr~em:nt a la regIe de l'unanimite, le regime
de s;cunte et ~e controle serait assure par des orgamsmes fonctl0nnant sous le controledu Conseil
de securite et dotes, en vertu meme des conventions, de pouvoirs particuliers determines d'une
maniere exacte et precise.
Durant les travaux de la Commission, la delegation fran~aise s'est attachee a defendre l'idce
qu'en dehors des plans generaux de desarmement
a etablir et a mettre en pratique, et qui, nous le
savons, seront longs et difficiles a mettre au point,
un retrait progressif et equilibre des forces entretenues actuellement encore par les grandes
Puissances du monde hors de leur propre tcrritoire devait etre recommande comme une premiere etape.
Cette recommandation figure au para.graphe 7. Sans doute a-t-elle souleve un certain
nombre de discussions. Cependant, son insertion dans le texte nous permet d'esperer, sans
attendre la fin du long travail du desarmement,
un premier pas substantiel dans la voie d'une
amelioration de la situation du monde.
Si nous regardons en arriere, nous ne pouvans nous ernpecher de faire des comparaisons
avec l'atmosphere enthousiaste et genereuse qui
a ete, pendant des annees au moins, celle !le la
Societe des Nations, et que certains d'entre
nous regretteront peut-etre. Si cette atmosphere
trap enthousiaste a ete la cause de l'echec de la
Societe des Nations, ce n'est pas par la que nous
echouerons. Nous travaillons dans une atmosphere differente, plus difficile, au contact de
plus dures realites. Ce contact des dures realites
de la guerre d'hier, des dures realites du monde
difficile dans lequel ilOUS vivons, peut et doit
etre l'element meme denotre succes.
Dans le texte qui VOllS est soumis, dans les
discussions de notre Commission, il n'y a, a vrai
dire, aucune place pour l'utopie. Ce texte a
ete longuement discute. Nous l'avons etudie
avec le plus exigeant soud des realites et je
dirai presque avec la plus evidente me£iance.
C'est un bon texte realiste qui nous permettra.
de faire reellement du bon travail.
Puisque, comme je l'espere, nous en sommes
arrives au terme du debat sur le desarmement,
il n'est peut-etre pas interdit maintenant de
montrer quelque satisfaction de la tache ;J.ui
s'acheve actuellement devant nous. Peut-ctrc
avons-nous maintenant le droit de dire au
mande, un monde si douloureux encore, DU en
beaucoup de points, nous le savons, des femmes
et des enfants meurent encore de faim, au dans
man pays qui a fait depuis deux ans un si grand
effort de ;edressement, on grelotte de froid faute
de charbon, un monde ou les excitations
et la
.."
peur de la guerre sont encore SI presentes, ou

14 December 1946

1316

Sixty-third Plenary Meeting

haps we can say to the wo~ld that this Assemb~y,
which, I hope, will appear.m ~he eyes of postenty
as having marked the begmnmg of a great work
for peace, will give it grounds for hope.

les deuils et les souffrances sont encore si terribles, que cette Assemble~, .qu~ apparaitra, je le
souhaite, aux yeux de 1 histOlre, comme aY3;nt
marque le debut d'une grande reuvre de palX,
lui donne un motif d'esperer.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The discussion on document A/267 is closed.
You all have before you the English text and
the French text of this resolution. It has been
discussed at length; I think, therefore, that there
is no need to re-read it.· We are dealing with a
resolution which was adopted unanimously by
acclamation in the First Committee. I hope
that I shall be able to consider in a moment that
the General Assembly has also voted unanimously by acclamation in favour of this resolu~
tion, which is really important.
Are there any objections?
I declare the resolution on the principles
governing the general regulation and reduction
of armaments adopted.

Le PRESIDENT: ,La discussion du document
A/267 est terminee. VOllS avez tollS sous les
yeux le texte anglais et Je texte fran~ais de. cette
resolution. On en a longuement parle; il me
semble done inutile de la relire. 11 s'agit de la
resolution qui a ete votee a l'unanimite, par
acclamation, a la Premiere Commission. J'espere que je pourrai considerer dans un instant
que l'Assemblee generale e.galement a vote a
l'unanimite et par acclamatIOn en faveur de ce
texte qui est vraiment important.

Decision: The
unanimously.

Decision: La resolution est adoptee
nimite.
i

resolution

was

adopted

179. Information on armed forces to be
supplied by Members of the United
Nations: report of the First Committee: resolution (documents A/203,
A/203 / Add.1, A/254 and A/269)

• • 14

So
ha

m:

th
br
ti<
th
al

n<

ra

11 n'y a pas d'opposition?
Je declare que la resolution sur les principes
regissant la reglementation et la reduction generale des armements est adoptee.

al'una-

179. Informations relatives DUX forces
armees Cl fournir par les Membres
des Nations Unies. Rapport de 10
Premiere Commission. Resolution
(documents A/203, A/203/Add.1,
A/254 et A/269l

'J;'he PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Nous avons maintenant a
We have now to discuss the report of the First discuter le rapport de la Premiere Commission
Committee on information relating to armed sur les informations relatives aux forces armees
forces of the United Nations stationed on foreign des Nations Unies se trouvant sur territoire
territory. The document concerned is A/203 etranger. 11 s'agit du document A/203 (annexe
(annex 49) , supplemented yesterday by a 49) complete depuis hier par un document
document which we have also received from qui nous est venu egalement de la Premiere
the First Committee, namely, document A/269 Commission, et qui est le document A!269
(annex 49b). In connexion with document (annexe 49b). Au document A/203 est
A/203, we have document A/203 / Add.l lie le .document A!203/Add.1 (annexe 49a),
(annex 49a) and also document A/254 (an- ainsi que le document A/254 (annexe 49c), qui
nex 49c), which represents the original amend- comprend l'amendement primitif depose par la
ment submitted by the United Kingdom delegation britannique.
.
delegation.
I can upon Mr. Gromyko, representative cif
La parole est a M. Gromyko, representant de
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union p.es RepubliCJ.ues sociapublics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet listes sovietiques) (traduit du msse): La deledelegation has, as is known, submitted for the gation sovietique a soumis, comme on le sait,
consideration of the General Assembly a proposal a l'examen de l'Assemb1ee generale une prothat all States Members of the United Nations position tendant a inviter taus les Etats Membres
should submit to the Secretary-General and to de l'Organisation des Nations Unies a presenter
the Security Cotmcil, within a month, the follo~­ au Secretaire general et au Conseilde securite,
ing information:
dans un delai d'un mois, les informations
suivantes:
1. At what points in the territory of Mem1. Sur quels points du territoire des Etats
bers of the United Nations or other States
Membres des Nations Unies ou d'autres Etats,
with the exception of former enemy territories'
exception faite des territoires des Etats exand in what number, there are armed force~
ennemis, sont stationnees des forces armees
of other Members of the United Nations, ind'autres Membres des Nations Unies, et quels
cluding military type organizations.
sont leurs effectifs, y compris les organisations
de type militair'e.
.
2. At w~at points in the former enemy
2. Sur que1s points des Etats ex-ennemis
States and m what number there are armed
sont stationnees des forces annees des Puisforces of· the Allied Powers and other Memsances alliees et d'autres Membres des Nations

1!
5t

tl
d
cc
it

q

a
S
t1

n

14 decembre 1946

1317

Solxante-troish\me seance phSnlere

bers of the United Nations, including military
type organizations.

Unies, et quels sont leurs effectifs, y compris
les organisations de type militaire.

3. At what points in the above-mentioned
territories there are air and naval bases, and
what is the size of their garrisons, belonging
to the armed forces of State Members of the
United Nations.

3. Sur quels points des territoires sus-mentionnes sont situees des bases navales et
aeriennes, et quels sont les effectifs de leurs
garnisons appartenant aux forces armees des
Etats Membres des Nations Vnies.
On peut dire que la proposition sovietique
a suscite un vif interet et qu'elle a ete examinee
avec soin par la Commission. Au coUrs de la
discussion de cette proposition, la delegation des
Etats-Unis a soumis une proposition demandant
que des informations soient fournies egalement
sur les forces armees stationnees sur le territoire
national des Etats Membres des Nations Unies.
Toutefois, ainsi que 1'a clairement explique
M. Molotov, Miilistre des Affaires etrangeres de
I'Union sovietique, une telle proposition n'etait
pas directement liee a la question soulevee par
la delegation sovietique. La question des troupes
stationnees sur le territoire national est d'une
tout autre nature. On peut et on doit 1'etudier
egalement. Mais cet examen ne doit avoir lieu
que dans le cadre de l'etude portant sur l'ensemble des questions relatives a la reduction
generale des armements, et lorsque le Conseil
de securite prendra les mesures necessaires pour
donner efIet a la resolution de l'Assemblee gene..
rale sur la reduction des armements.

It may be said now that the proposal of the
Soviet delegation has aroused much interest and
has received careful consideration in the Committee. During the discussion on this proposal,
the delegation of the United States of America
brought forward a proposal to submit information on troops stationed in the home territories of
the States Members of the United Nations also,
although the submission- of such a proposal did
not arise from the substance of the question
raised by the Soviet delegation, as the Foreign
Minister of the Soviet Union, Mr. Molotov,
stated in his explanation. The question of
troops in home territories is of a completely
different nature. It can and must also be
considered. But, it must be considered only
in connexion with the examination of all
questions relating to the general reduction of
armaments and measures to be taken by the
Security Council to implement the decision of
the General Assembly on the reduction of armaments.
The submission of information on troops in
home territories might be justified if at the same
time information was also requested concerning
armaments, since the submission of information
only on troops and not on- armaments would be
of little value. Whatever interest information on
troops at home might present for the General
Assembly or the Security Council, such information would be of little value before the question
of the general reduction of armaments has been
considered, because if no information is supplied
on armaments, that is to say all types of armaments including new types of weapons for mass
destruction, the value of such incomplete information will be limited.

La demande de fournir des informations sur
les troupes stationnees sur le territoire national
pourrait etre justifiee si 1'on demandait en meme
temps des renseignements sur les armements, car
des informations portant uniquement sur les
troupes et laissant de cote ,les annements n'au~
raient que peu de valeur. Quel que soit 1'interet
que les renseignements relatifs aux troupes stationnees sur le sol national puissent presenter
pour l' Assemblee generale ou pour le Conseil de
securite, ils n'auront que peu de valeur tant que
le probleme de la reduction generale des armements n'aura pas ete examine. En effet, si 1'on
ne fournit pas de renseignements sur les armements, c'est-a-dire sur toutes les categories
d'armes, y compris les nouveIles ar;nes de ?es. truction massive, la valeur de ces mformatlons
incompletes sera limitee.
Comment peut-on done mettre en doute le
There would seem to be no doubt that the
proposal concerning the submission of informa- bien-fondc d'une proposition qui tend a demantion not only on troops but also on armaments der des renseignements non seulement sur les
is well founded because armed forces represent forces annees, mais aussi sur les armements,
not only a mas; of men, but men provided w.ith etant donne que les forces armees ne sont pas
technical equipment which has rea~hed a high seulement une masse d'hommes, mais comprenlevel of development at the present tl~e~ Neyer- nent des hommes munis· d'un materiel militaire
theless, the delegations of some States, ID partIcu- technique qui atteint maintenant un degre de
lar the delegation of the United States of Amer- perfection remarquable. Cependant, les delegaica on whose initiative the original proposal to tions de certains pa~s - r;totamme?t ~~ d.elegasubmit information concerning troops and mili- tion des Etats-Unis d Amenque sur 1mItlatlve de
tary bases on foreign territory ,,:as ~idened. by laquelle la proposition originale qui demand.~t
the submission of a proposal to glVe mformatlOn des informations sur les troupes et les bases millon troops at home, have r~f~sed t~ adopt ~he taires maintenues en territoire etranger, avait ete
Soviet proposal on the submISSIon of mformatlon etendue pour comprendre la dema~de de renseignements portant sur les forc~s Sltuees sur le
concerning armaments.
territoire national- ont refuse d adopter la proposition de 1'Union sovietique relative aux renseignements portant sur les armements.

Sixty-third Plenary Meeting

1318

14 December 1946

Consequently, the Committee adopted by a
majority vote the four-point resolution known to
us aU, which provides for the submission of information not only concerning troops and military bases on foreign territory, but also of information concerning troops in the home territories
of the United Nations. We already discussed
this resolution at the plenary meeting of the
Assembly on 10 December. Since amendments
to this resolution were introduced by the
United Kingdom and the Soviet delegations in
the course of its discussion at the Assembly, the
resolution together with the amendments was
referred to a Sub-Committee, which, unfortunately, was unable to reach a decision.

En consequence, la Commission a adopte, a
la majorite, la resolution en quatre points que
nous connaissons et qui prevoit que des intB,mations doivent etre fournies non seulement au
sujet des troupes et des bases militaires a l'etrangel', mais aussi au sujet des forces aimees stationnees sur le territoire national des Nation~.
Unies.
Nous avons deja discute cette rcsolu in en
seance pleniere de l'Assemblee, le 10 dec·· bre.
Au cours de cette discussion les delegations du
Royaume-Uni et de l'Union sovietique ont
apporte des amendements, puis la resolution et
les amendements ont ete renvoyes au souscomite, lequel n'a malheureusement pas reussi
a prendre une decision concertee.

The work of the Sub-Committee (subsequently approved by a majority in the Committee yesterday) resulted not only in failure to
reach a decision, but also, instead of the
previously adopted resolution regarding the
submission of information concerning troops and
military bases both in foreign territories and in
the home territories of States Members of the
United Nations, in the submission of a draft
resolution calling upon the Security Council to
define as soon as possible what information
States Members of the United Nations should
submit to the Council in order to carry out the
resolution on the general reduction of armaments.

Le resultat des travaux du Sous-Comite, que
la Commission a approuve hier a la majorite,
consiste non seulement en ce que le Sous-Comite
n'a pu parvenir a une decision concertce, mais
encore en ced: au lieu de la resolution adoptee
precedemment et seIon laqueUe les informations
a fournir devaient porter sur les forces armces
et sur les bases militaires non seulemcnt a l'etran!Yer mais aussi sur le territoire national des Etats
Membres des Nations Unies, le Sous-Comite a
presente un projet de resolution invitant le
Conseil de securite a definir, dans le plus bref
delai, la nature des infOlmations que les Etats
Membres devraient fournir au Conseil pour donner effet a la resolution sur la reduction generale
des armements.

The result is rather strange. The resolution
which was adopted earlier by the Committee
and which has already been discussed once by
the General Assembly, seems to have disappeared. The Sub-Committee recommends a new
resolution to replace the one adopted earlier.
This new resolution is as different as night from
day, not only from the Soviet proposal, but also
from the decision taken earlier by the Committee, which also provided for the submission
of information concerning troops at home. The
new resolution does not mention the necessity
for supplying information either concerning
troops in foreign territory or concerning troops
at home which were mentioned in the previous
decision of the Committee.

Le resultat est fort etrange. La resolution qui
avait ete adoptee par la Commission, et qui avait
deja fait I'objet d'une discussion a l'Assemblee
generale, a pour ainsi dire disparu. Le souscomite propose une nouveUe resolution qu'il
substitue a ceUe qui avait ete adoptee precedemment. Cette nouveUe resolution difIere du tout
a~ tout non seulement de la proposition sovietique, mais aussi de la decision qui avait cte
adoptee par la Commission, et qui prevoyait que
les renseignements a fournir porteraient egalement sur les troupes stationnees en territoire
national. La nouveUe resolution ne parle pas
de la necessite de fournir des renseignements
d'une part sur les troupes stationnees a l'etranger
et d'autre part sur les forces armees maintenues
en territoire national, renseignements dont il
etait question dans la decision que le Comite
avait prise anterieurement.
Voila done ~a resolution qui nous est soumisc
aujourd'hui, en seance pIeniere; Dne question
se posc: Commcnt expliquer le fait que l'Assemblee generale n'a pas voulu prendre de decision
sur les renseignements a ~ournir au sujet des
troupes et des bases miIitaires; comment expliquer a quiconque le fait que l'AssembIee, n'a
pas vouln demander des informations sur les
forces armees ni prendre la decision qui avait
ete soumise a son examen le 10 decembre
dernier?
Comment accepter la resolution qu'on nous
propose maintenant, ,et dans laquelIe la question
des renseignements a fournir est completement
estompee et diluee? La delegation sovietique ne
peut accepter la nouvelle resolution qu'on nous

This is the resolution submitted for our consideration at today's plenary meeting of the
Assembly. We may well ask how it will be possible to explain why the General Assembly did
not wish to take a decision on the submission
of information concerning troops and military
bases. How can we explain to anyone that the
General Assembly did not wish to demand information concerning troops or to adopt the
resolution which was submitted for consideration
on 10 December?
How can we agree with the resolution submitted to us now, in which the question of
submitting information is completely toned
down and diluted? The Soviet delegation cannot agree with the new resolution submitted,

,

.'

14 decembre 1946

1319

Soixante·troisieme seance pleniere

and suggests that we should consider the first
resolution, and take a decision on it. The Soviet
delegation regards as acceptable the first three
paragraphs of this original resolution, namely:

soumet; dIe propose d'examiner la premiere
resolution de la Commission et de prendre une
decision a~e sujet. La delegation sovietique
considere comme acceptables les trois premiers
paragraphes de cette resolution, a savoir:
1. At what uoints in the territory of Mem1. Sur quels points du territoire les Membres des Nations Unies au d'autres Etats,
bers of the Umted Nations or other States,
with the exception of former enemy terriexception faite des territoires des Etats exennemis, sont stationnees des forces armecs
tories, and in what number, there are armed
d'autres Membres des Nations Unies et que1s
forces of other Members of the United Nasont leurs effeetifs, y compris les organisations
tions, including military type organizations.
de type militaire.
2. Sur quels points des Etats ex-ennemis
2. At what points in the former enemy
sont stationnees des forces annees des PuisStates and in what number, there are armed.
sances alliees et d'autres Membres des Nations
forces of the Allied Powers and other MemUnies et quels sont leurs effectifs, y compris
bers of the United Nations, including military
les organisations de type militaire.
type organizations.
3. Sur quels points des territoires susmen3. At what points in the above-mentioned
tionnes sont situces des bases navales et
territories there are air and naval bases, ana
aeriennes et que1s sont les efI'ectifs de !curs
what is the size of their garrisons, belonging
garnisons appartenant aux forces amlces des
to the armed forces of States Members of the
Etats Membres des Nations Unies.
United Nations.
Quant au paragraphe 4, qui prevoit que des
As regar~s the fourth paragraph, which provides for the submission of information both renseignements seront fournis tant sur les troupes
concerning troops on foreign territories and stationnees a 1'etranger que sur les forces armees
troops at home, for the above-mentioned reasons stationnees sur le territoire national, la delegathe Soviet delegation is unable to agree to ap- tion sovietique ne peut pas l'accepter pour les
proving this paragraph, and will vote against raisons que je viens d'indiquer; elle votera donc
it. The acceptance of this paragraph would contre. Si ce paragraphe etait adopte, cela signifierait que l'AssembIee generale aborde d'une
indicat~ a unilateral approach on the part of the
General Assembly to the settlement of the ques- fa~on partiale la question des renseignements a
tion of submitting information. This informa- fournir. Ces renseignements auront de l'interet
tion will be of interest to the United Nations, pour 1'Organisation des Nations Unies, pour
to the General Assembly and to the Security l'Assemblee generale et pour le Conseil de secuCouncil, if it includes not only information on rite, s'ils portent non seulement sur les cffectifs,
military personnel but also on armaments. How- mais aussi sur les armements. Neanmoins, la
ever, the Soviet delegation will vote in favour delegation sovictique votera pour 1'ensemble de
of this resolution as a whole, 'because we are cette resolution, car eUe desire apporter de la
anxious to ~lucidate the question under discus- clarte dans la question que nous sommes en train
sion, particularly the question of troops on d'etudier, et plus particum~rement dans la quesforeign territories; we shall vote for this resolu- tion des troupes stationnees sur des territoires
tion as a whole, even if paragraph 4 of which etrangers; dIe votera pour l'ensemble de cette
I spoke is adopted.
resolution, meme au cas ou le paragraphe 4: que
je viens de mentionner allrait ete adopte.
It is not difficult to deduce, as a result of the
A la suite de la discussion de cette question,
discussion on this question, who is really pre- il n'est pas difficile de distinguer: d'une part,
pared to submit information 011 the numerical ceux qui sont vraiment pr~ts a fournir des renstrength of his troops and who merely professes seignements sur les effectifs de leurs forces
readiness to do so, while procrastinating and 1I0t armces, et d'autre part, ceux qui ne sont prets
suiting his actions to his words.
qu'en paroles a foumir ces renseignements, qui
atermoient et qui ne confirment pas leurs declarations par des actes.
The Soviet delegation expresses the hope that
La delegation sovietique exprime l' espoir
the General Assembly will take a decision on the qu'en ce qui concerne les renseignements a foursubmission of information concerning troops nil' sur les forces arrnees et les bases militaires,
and military bases, as recommended to us liAssembIee generale prendra la decision que la
by the Committee in the document discussed at Commission nous a recommandee dans le docuthe meeting of the General Assembly on ment examine par l'Assemblce generale a la
10 December.
seance du 10 decembre.

: (1!'JUOJ,:I w.oJ,! p01'Dlsuv.t1) ~NKOIS'1nleI ~q.L
This is the position from the point of view of
procedure:
We have before us a first document, A/203,
which represents the original report of the First
Committee.
A second document, A/269, contains a new

Le PRESIDENT: Voici comment se presente
la situation du point de vue de la procedure:
Nous sornmes en presence d'un premier document A/203, qui est le rapport initial de la
Premiere Commission.
Un second document A/269 contient une

Sixty-third Plenary Meeting

proposal of the First Committee, aiming at the
elimination of the resolution contained in document A/203 and its replacement by that of
document A/269.
I suggest that the General Assembly vote first
on document A/269. If the proposal contained
therein is not adopted, then we shall vote on
the proposal contained in document A/203, beginning with paragraph 4, which has been
amended by the delegation of the Soviet Union,
and finally voting on the resolution as a whole.
If there is no objection to this procedure, I
shall put to the vote the text of the resolution
contained in document A/269, which reads as
follows:
"The General Assembly)
«Desirous of implementing, as soon as possible, the resolution of 14 December 1946 on
the principles governing the regulation and
reduction of armaments,
"Calls upon the Security Council to determine, as soon as possible, the information
which the States Members of the United Nations should be calle~ upon to furnish, in
order to give effect to this resolution."
It is understood· that, by our adopting this
resolution, the recommendation in document
A/203 will be superseded.
A vote was then taken by show of hands.

i:

,!

.

,

"

I

14 December 1946

1320

nouvelle proposition de la Premiere Commission,
ayant pour objet d'eliminer la r~solution figurant au document A/203 et de la remplacer
par celle du document A/269.
Je suggere que l'Assemblee generale vote tout
d'abord su"r le document A/269. Si la proposition y contenue n'est pas adoptee, nous voterons
alors sur la proposition figurant au document
A/203, en commen~ant par le paragraphe 4qui est amende par la delegation de rUnion
sovietique, et eventuellement, en votant sur
l'ensemble.
S'il n'y a pas d'objection a cette procedure,
je vais mettre aux voix la resolution contenue
dans le document A/269, dont voici le texte:
aL' AssembUe generale,
"D"eszrant donner sUIte,'
.
dans 1e plus
bref delai, a la resolution du 14 decembre
1946 sur les principes regissant la reglementation et la reduction des armements,
"Prie le Conseil de securite de detenniner
aussitot que po~sible les informations que
les Etats Membres des Nations Unies devraient
etre invites a fournir en vue de donner effet
aladite res?lution."
, Il est bien entendu que l'adoption de cette
resolution aurait pour effet d'eliminer la resolution contenue dans le document A/203.
Le vote a lieu main levee.

a

Decision: The resolution was adopted by
_ thirty-six votes to six with four abstentions.

Decision: La resolution est adoptee par
trente-six voix contre six, et quatre abstentions.

180. Election of two members of the
Trusteeship Council: resolution (document A/258)

180. Election de deux membres du ConseiJ
de tutelle. Resolution (document
A/258)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The General Assembly will now proceed to elect
two members to the Trusteeship Council. The
situation is clearly explained in document A/258
(annex 72).
In pursuance of Article 86a of the Charter,
AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, FRANCE, NEW ZEALAND
and the UNITED KINGDOM are members of the
Trusteeship Council.
In accordance with paragraph b of the same
article, CIIINA, the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST:
REPUBLICS, and the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
are also members of the Council.
In accordance with Article 86c, in order that
the total membership of the Trusteeship Council
shall be 'equally divided between Members of the
United Nations which administer trust territories
and those which do not, two members must be
elected by the General Assembly.
The General Assembly must therefore elect
two members to the Trusteeship Council, and I
would remind you that the following States are
not eligible: Australia, Belgium, China, France,
New Zealand, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom and United States of
America, because these States are already members. 'The ballot papers must not bear more than
two names. A two-thirds majority is required.

Le PRESIDENT: L'AssembIee generale est apa proceder a l'election de deux membres'
du Conseil de tutelle. Le document A/258
(annexe 72) expose clairement la situation.

pel~e

En application de l'Article 86 a de la Charte,
l'AUSTRALIE, la BELGIQUE, la FRANCE, la
NOUVELLE-Z:ELANDE et le ROYAUME-UNI sent
membres du Conseil de tutelle.
Conformement au paragraphe b du meme
article, la CHINE, l'UNION DES REPUDLIQUES
SOCIALISTES SOVIETIQUES et Ies ETATS-UNIS
D'AMERIQUE en sont membres egalement.
En vertu de l'Article 86 c, pour que le nombre total des membres du Conseil de tutelle se
repartisse de fa~on egale entre Ies Membres des
Nations Unies qui administrent des territoires
sous tutelle et ceux ql}i n'en adminjstrent pas,
il est "necessaire que deux membres soient eIus
par l'AssembIee generale.
L'Assemblee generale doit, par consequent,
elire deux membres du Conseil de tutelle qui,
je le rappelle, ne peuvent etre l'un des pays
suivants: Australie, Belgique, Chine, France,
Nouvelle-Z61ande, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, ces derniers pays etant deja mem.bres. Les bulletins ne peuvent contenir plus de
deux noms. La majorite des deux tiers est

14 decembre 1946

1321

I hope that the Assembly will reach a speedy
agreement regarding the candidates.

requise. J'espere que 1'Assemblee se mettra rapidementd'accord sur les candidats.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re~
publics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet
delegation considers that the Trusteeship Agree~
ments confirmed by the General Assembly for
the former mandated territories of Togoland
(British and French mandates), the Cameroons
(British and French mandates), Tanganyika
(British mandate), Ruanda-Urundi (Belgian
mandate), New Guinea (Australian mandate)
and Western Samoa (New Zealand mandate),
are contrary to the United Nations Charter and
therefore cannot serve as a basis for the establishment of the Trusteeship Council.
The Soviet delegation therefore declares that
it is unable to participate in the election of mem~
bers to the Trusteeship Council.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): La delegation sovietique estime que les Accords de tutelle
approuves par l' Assemblee generale pour les anciens territoires sous mandat, a savoir: le Togo._
(mandats britannique et fran~ais), le Cameroun
(mandats britannique et franc;ais), le Tanganyika (mandat britannique ), le RuandaUrundi (mandat belge) , la Nouvelle-Guinee
(mandat australien) et le Samoa occidental
(mandat neo-zelandais), sont en contradiction
avec la Charte de 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies, et par consequent, ne peuvent pas servir
de base a la constitution du Conseil de tutelle.
C'est pourquoi la delegation sovietique declare
qu'elle ne peut pas prendre part a l'election des
membres du Conseil de tutelle.

Mr. KISELEV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The
Byelorussian delegation feels obliged to make the
following statement. The draft agreements submitted for the consideration of the Fourth Committee and the General Assembly are contrary
to the letter and spirit of the Charter; they have
been drawn up in contravention of the Charter.
Therefore the Byelorussian delegation does not
feel able to participate in the election of Members to the Trusteeship Council, and considers
that these elections will be irregular.

M. K!SSELEV (Republique socialiste sovietique de Bielorussie) ( traduit du russe): La
delegation bielorusse estime qu'il est de son
devoir de faire la declaration suivante: les projets d'accords qui ont ete soumis a l'examen de
la Quatrieme Commission et de l' Assemb1ee
generale sont contraires a. 1'esprit et a 'la lettre
de la Charte; ils ont ete etablis en violation de
la Charte. La delegation bielorusse estime dont
qu'il ne lui est pas possible de prendre part a
1'6lection des membres du Conseil de tuteIle et
que cette election ne sera pas reguliere.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
As President, I cannot let pass the last sentence.

Le PRESIDENT: En tant que President, je ne
puis laisser passer la derniere phrase. Que le
representant de la Republique sociaIiste sovietique de Bielorussie estime que les Accords de
tutelle ne sont pas bons, c'est son droit absolu;
mais l'AssembMe a declare par quarante voix
contre trois ou quatre que ces Accords etaient
acceptes. L'election a laqueIle nous allons proceder est faite en vertu d'une decision de l' Assemblee, par conseqtJeTIt eIle est tout a fait
reguliere.

The representative of the Bye10russian Soviet
Socialist Republic has a perfect right to disapprove of the Trusteeship Agreements, but the
Assembly has declared these Agreements adopted
by forty votes to three or four. The vote to
which we are about to proceed is being taken in
accordance with a decision of the Assembly, and
is therefore perfectly regular.

\

( .

i-

Soixante-ti'oisiE!me seance pteniere

Mr. BEBLER (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): The Yugoslav delegation considers
that this Assembly has proved that unanimity
can be reached on a number of important points.
-This is one of its characteristics, if we compare
it with the meetings held in London at the time
of the first part of the first session of the same
Assembly and particularly with the Paris Conference. We therefore consider it deplorable
that We have been unable to reach an agreement
on the trusteeship question.
We consider that the Agreements submitted to
the Assembly are contrary to the Charter. The
President has just said that they were adopted
yesterday by a large majority. In our opinion
this does not alter the fact that they are contrary to the Charter.
Even yesterday we could not have voted on
items which were contrary to the Charter. There
is a definite procedure for amending the Charter. If the provisions relating to trusteeship had
been amended, then we could have voted on
agreements which are contrary to the Charter in

M. BEBLER (Yougoslavie): La delegation
yougoslave estime que cette Assemblee a donne
la preuve qu'il etait possible de realiser I'unanimite sur un certain nombre de points importants. C'est 1'une de ses caracteristiques, si ori
la compare aux reunions de Londres, lors de
la premiere pame c!e la premiere session de la
meme AssembIee, et surtout a la Conference de
Paris. Nous estimons done deplorable que nouS
n'ayons pas pu, sur la question de la tutelle,
arriver a un accord.
Nous considerons que les Accords soiImis a
l'Assetnblee sont contraires a la' Charte. Le
President vient de dire qq'ils ont ete adoptes
hier a une grande majorite. A notre avis, ceci ne
change rien au fait qu'ils sont contraires a la
Charte.
Nous n'aurions pas pu, meine hier, voter sur
des points qui sont contraires a la Charte. II y
a une procedure determinee pour modifier la
Charte. Si l'on avait modifie les dispositions
relatives a la tutelle, on aurait pu ensuite, par
une majorite de 1'Assemblee, voter des Accords

Sixty-third Plenary Meeting

1322

14 December 1946

its unamended fonn, by a majority of the Assembly. For these reasons, we consider that our
delegation cannot take part in a vote on this
question.

qui sont contraires a la Charte tant qu'elle n'est
pas modifi~e. Pour ces raisons, nous considerons
que notre delegation ne peut pas prendre part
au vote sur cette question.

Dr. MEDVED (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Re~
public) (translated from R u s s i an): The
Ukrainian delegation has voted against these
Agreements, because they are not in accordance
with the principles of the United Nations
Charter.
Yesterday, one of the representatives of the
mandatory countries asked me this question:
"How is it that you voted against our Agreement, against my country, when you are on such
good terms with us?" I feel obliged to give him
an answer to this question from this august rostrum. My delegation and I did not vote yesterday
against any State-not against France, not
against Australia and not against any other
country. We voted against the Agreements. This
means that we voted against the exploitation of
colonial peoples i we voted for the happiness,
welfare, prosperity and real freedom of colonial
peoples, and not against any country.

Dr MEDVED (Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): La delegation
ukrainienne a vote contre les Accords, car ceuxci ne sont pas conformes aux principes de la
Charte des Nations Unies.

Since the Agreements which have been
adopted cannot, as the represe~tative o~ the
Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko, so rIghtly pomted
out serve as a basis for the work of the Trusteeship Council, the delegation of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic will not take part in
the election. .

Hier, l'un deS representants des Puissances
mandataires m'a pose la question suivante:
"comment se fait-il que vous, qui etes si bien
dispose a l'egard de notre pays, vous ayez vote
contre notre traite, contre notre pays?" Je voudrais lui repondre du haut de cette tribune: ma
delegation et moi, nous n'avons vote hier contre
aucun pays, ni contre la France, ni contre I' Australie, ni contre quelque pays que cc soit. Nous
aVOilS vote contre les Accords. Cela signifie que
nous avons vote contre l'exploitation des peuples
coloniaux. Nous avons vote pour le bonheur,
le bien-etre, la prosperite et la liberte reelle de
ces peuples, et non pas contre un pays quelconque.
Etant donne que les Accords qui ont ete adoptes ne peuvent pas servir de base aux travaux du
Conseil de tuteIle, ainsi que l'a indique avec
raison le representant de l'Union sovietique,
M. Gromyko, la delegation de la Republique
socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine ne participera pas
au vote.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now proceed to the vote. I would
remind you that you may only include the
names of two candidates on your ballot papers.
I propose that Mr. Papanek (Czechoslovakia)
and Mr. Corominas (Argentina) should act as
tellers.

Le PRESIDENT:" Nous allons proceder au vote.
Je rappelle que vous ne pouvez porter sur lc:s
bulletins de vote que les noms de deux candidats. Je propose que M. Papanek (Tchecoslovaquie) et M. Corominas (Argentine) remplissent les fonctions de scrutateurs.

A secret ballot by roll-call was then taken.

It est procede au scrutin secret par appel
nominal.
Le PRESIDENT: Lorsque ce point sera termine, je propose, avec votre assentiment, que
IlOUS revenions au rapport de la Quatrieme
Commission et que nous examinions d'abord la
declaration de l'Union Sud-Africaine sur les
resultats des conversations poursuivies avec les
penples du Sud-Quest Africain relativement au
futur statut du territoire sous mandat.
Nous pourrions examiner ensuite la transmission de renseignements par les Membres des
Nations Unies conformement a l'Article 73 de
la Charte, et passeI' enfin au rapport de la
Quatrieme Commission concernant la resolution
sur les conferences regionales de representants
des territoires non autonomes.
Voici le resultat du vote:
Quarante-sept Memhres ont pris part au vote,
sept Membres n'etaient pas presents ou se sont
abstenus de voter. Quarante-sept bulletins sont
valables. La majorite des deux tiers est trentedeux.
Le M exique a obtenu trente-six voix.
L'lrak a obtenu trente-quatre voix.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
When we have settled this point, I propose, if
you agree, that we return to the report of the
Fourth Committee and that we consider first
the statement of the Union of South Africa on
the outcome of their consultations with the
peoples of South-West Africa relating to the
future status of that mandated territory.
We might then consider the transmission of
information by Members of the United Nations
under Article 73 of the Charter, and finally take
"the report of the Fourth Committee concerning
the resolution on regional conferences of representatives of non-self-governing territories.
Here is the result of the vote:
Forty-seven Members took part in the vote,
seven Members were not present or abstained
from voting. Forty-seven ballot papers are valid.
The two-thirds majority is thirty-two.

Mexico obtained thirty-six votes.
Iraq obtained thirty-four votes.

I~·, ·'i,

;:1,
;l~

.

.

.,

Sohc:ante-quatrieme seance pleniere

1323

14 decembre 194~

These two States, therefore, having obtained
the two-thirds majority, are elected members of
the Trusteeship Council.
The resolution on which we are to vote, therefore, reads as follows:
"The General Assembly elects two members
of the Trusteeship Council:

Par consequent, ces deux pays, lyant obtcnu
la majorite des deux tiers, sont nommes membres
du Conseil de tute1le.
Des lors, la resolution sur laquelle nous devons
voter est libellee de la fal;on suivante:
"L'AssemblCe generale nomme membres du
Conseil de tutelle les deux Etats suivants:

IRAQ and MEXICO."
We shall take a vote on this resolution by
show of hands.
Decision: The resolution was adopted unanimously.

IRAK et Ml!.XIQUE."
Nous alions voter a main levee sur le texte de
cette resolution.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

La seance est levee d 13 h. 15.

SIXTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING

SOIXANTE.. QUATRIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Held on Saturday, 14 December 1946,
at 2.30 p.m.

Tenue le samedi 14 decembre 1946,
a 14 h. 30.

\

Decision: La resolution est adopt~e a ['nna-

nimite.

TABLE DES

CONTENTS

Page

MATIERES
Pages

181. Future Status of South West Africa:
report of the Fourth Committee: resolution
1323
182. Regional Conferences of Representatives
of Non-Belf-Governing Territories: report of the Fourth Committee; resolution
1327
183. Transmission of Information by Members under Article 7Se of the Charter:
report of the Fourth Committee: resolution ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . . . . . . . 1357

181. Statut futur du Sud-Guest Africain.
Rapport de la Quatrieme Commission.
Resolution
1323
182. Conferences regionales de representants
des territoircs non autonomes. Rapport
de la Quatl·ieme Commission. Resolution
1327
183. Transmission des renseignemcnts communiques par les Membres en application de l' Article 73e de la. Charte.
Rapport de la Quatrieme Commission.
Resolution
1357

President: Mr. P.-R. SPAAR (Belgimn).

President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

181. Future Status of South West Africa:
report of the Fourth Committee; resolution (documents A/250; A/250/
Add.1, A/250/ Add.l /Rev.1 and
A/250j Add.2)

181. Statut futur clu Sud-Op;est Africail1.
Rapport de la Quatrieme Commission. Resolution (documents A/250,
A/250/Add.l, A/250/Add.l /Rev.l,
Aj250/Add.2)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We can now come to the debate on the report
of the Fourth Committee concerning the statement by the Union of South Africa on the outcome of its consultations with the peoples of
South West Africa as to the future status of the
territory under mandate and the iInplementation of the wishes thus expressed (annex 76).
You have all received copies of the report.
If the Rapporteur has any comment to offer, I
will gladly give him the floor, but I do not
think there is any need to read the report aloud.
We can dispense with that formality.

Le PR.ESIDENT: Nous commen~ons la discussion du rapport de la Quatrieme Commission
concernant la declaration de l"Union Sud-Africaine snr le rcsultat de ses conversations poursuivies avec le peuple du Sud-Quest Africain
relativement au statut futur du territoire Imus
mandat et a la suite a. dOlmer aux desiderata exprimes (annexe 76).
Vous ctes en possession de ce document.
Si le Rapporteur d~ire presenter des observations, je lui donnerai volontiers la parole,
mais je n'estime pas qu'il sait utile de donner
lecture du document; nous pouvons nous dispenser de cette formttlite.

Mr. LISICKY (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur
(translated from French): The report has been
circulated to all the delegations and I think it
is unnecessary to read it from the platform.

M. LISICKY (Tchccoslovaquie), Rapporteur:
Le rapport est entre les mains des representants
et j'estime qu'il est inutile de venir en donner
lecture a. la tribune.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
1 call upon Mr. Lannung, representative of
Denmark.

Le PRESnJENT: Je donne la parole
M. Lannung, representant du Danemark.

Mr. LANNUNG (Denmark): The question
of the suggested incorporation of South West
Africa in the Union of South Mrica has

M. LANNUNG (Danemark) (traduit de lJ an glais): La question de l"incorporation envisagee
du Sud-Quest Africain a l'Union Sud-Africaine

a
