40

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Calculating Indicative Planning Figures and the amendments thereto, 27
Noting also the discussions in the Governing Council
during its fourteenth session on the review of criteria
to be followed in calculating indicative planning figures,
Recognizing the difficulty of devising a new general
scheme designed to secure equity in the allocation of
United Nations Development Programme resources to
all recipient countries, as a result of which there is
need for further study of the matter,
Convinced that it is imperative to devise a most fair
and equitable new general scheme, envisaged to have
a reasonable degree of stability and a long-term
applicability, considering particularly the anticipated
increase in United Nations Development Programme
resources, and that would be without prejudice to the
relevant special measures in favour of the least developed countries contained in the various resolutions
and decisions of organizations in the United Nations
system,
Noting further the general view expressed by the
Governing Council at its fourteenth session that during
the first development cycle, that is, 1972-1976, there
will be no decrease in the level of the indicative planning figures of recipient countries as presently allocated, 28
l. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to undertake a special technical study and review in depth of the criteria for
calculating indicative planning figures, taking into
account the relevant decisions and resolutions of the
Governing Council of the Programme, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
third session, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly, the report of the Governing
Council on its fourteenth session concerning the review
of those criteria, and the views expressed on this matter
at the twenty-seventh session of the Assembly;
2. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to submit his study, as envisaged in paragraph 1 above, to the Governing Council
at its sixteenth session for detailed consideration with
a view to finalizing the new criteria for calculating
indicative planning figures at the seventeenth session
of the Council.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2973 (XXVII). Financial resources of the United
Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Reiterating that, unless the resources available for
programme purposes are substantially enlarged and
doubled by 1975, it will not be possible to ensure the
most effective operation of the country programming
system, nor to utilize fully the programme delivery
capacity of the system,
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 1615 (LI) of 26 July 1971, requested 'the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
21 Ibid.,

28 Ibid.,

paras. 96 and 97.
chap. II, sect. D.

Programme to review its planning estimates in order
to attain the goal of doubling the resources of the
Programme by 1975 and urged Governments to increase their contributions to the Programme for this
purpose,
Invites Governments, in particular those donor Governments whose contributions have lagged behind in
recent years, to increase their cont11ibutions to the
United Nations Development Programme by at least
15 per cent annually in order to promote the objective
of doubling the total resources available to the Programme by 1975.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2974 (XXVII).
Co-operation among develop•
ing t'Ountries in the United Nations technical
co-operation programmes and increased efficiency of the capacity of the United Nations
development system

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the dynamic nature of the development process in the developing countries,
Conscious of the need to ensure maximum consistency
and coherence in the activities of the United Nations
Development Programme,
Noting the measures adopted by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
to implement the consensus 29 which resulted from the
study of the capacity of the United Nations development system and the provisions of which also appear
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 2688
(XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Prompted by the desire to strengthen those efforts
by an in-depth study of the different options facing
the international community in the field of development assistance and to evaluate them with a view to
selecting those which will ensure the maximum effectiveness of the activities of the United Nations Development Programme in pursuit of its objectives,
Concerned about the need to implement its resolution 2811 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 on financial
contributions to the United Nations Development Programme, as well as the need for further resources in
order to increase the likelihood that the Programme's
assistance to developing countries, especially to the
relatively less developed among them, will be successful,
Concerned also at the impact of the growing administrative costs of the United Nations Development
Programme on existing resources, and the adverse
effect of this on the net amounts channelled into
assistance,
Reaffirming that the effectiveness of the development
process of developing countries depends primarily on
the developing countries themselves and that the contribution of the international community to this development is essential,
Convinced of the need to make the fullest use of
the capacity and experience of all Member States, independent of their degree of development, in united
action designed to accelerate the development of the
2 9 Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6A (E/4884/
Rev. l ), para. 94.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

developing countries, and especially the relatively less
developed among them,
Convinced also of the importance of ensuring the
optimum impact of the multiplier effect of assistance
provided to the developing countries, and in particular
the assistance provided by the United Nations Development Programme,
Recalling paragraph 4 of its resolution 2814 (XXVI)
of 14 December 1971 on the capacity of the United
Nations development system,
1. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to convene, through
the Administrator of the Programme and in consulta!ion with the interested Member States, a working group
m order to:
(a) Examine and make recommendations on the
best way for developing countries to share their capacities and experience with one another with a v,iew
to increasing and improving development assistance;
(b) Examine the relative possibilities and advantages of regional and interregional technical co-operation among developing countries;
2. Calls upon the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme also to give priority
to the improvement of procedures for the elaboration
and implementation of inteI1regional, regional and subregional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme in accordance with paragraphs 21,
22 and 23 of the annex to General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV);
3. Also invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Develop,I1ent Programme to consider at an
early session measures that are needed to reduce the
administrative costs of the Programme;
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report and recommendations on the matters indicated in paragraph 1
above.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2975 (XXVII). Measures to strengthen the executing agencies of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
development system for attaining the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade30
and the responsibility of the United Nations Development Programme, as well as of the participating and
executing agencies, effectively to assist Member States
in their efforts to achieve economic development and
social justice as weU as qualitative and structural
changes in society,
Recalling the consensus adopted by the Governing
Co_uncil of the ~nit~d Nations Development Programme
at its tenth sessmn, m June 1970,31 designed to increase
3 0 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
31 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council

Forty-ninth Session, Supplemem No. 6A (E/4884/Rev.1)'.
para. 94. See also General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV),
annex.

41

the capacity of the United Nations development system
to respond effectively and rapidly to the needs of
developing countries in accordance with their own
development objectives and priorities,
Further recalling the decision adopted by the Economic and Social Council on 22 July 1970 to recommend to all executing agencies of the United Nations
Development Programme that they take the necessary
administrative and organizational steps for the common
endeavour of implementing the consensus and improving the delivery capacity of the United Nations
development system,32
Bearing in mind its resolution 2688 (XXV) of
11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United
Nations development system,
Aware of the fact that operational activities financed
by the United Nations Development Programme represent a very large and growing share of the total
activities of the agencies,
l. Emphasizes the need for effective and t,imely
preparation as well as implementation of the country
programmes and other activities financed by the United
Nations Development Programme;
2. Stresses that administrative overhead costs involved in the execution of projects of the United
Nations Development Programme should be minimized
in order to secure increased resources for direct assistance to recipient countries;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to take all necessary measures
at the headquarters and in the field offices of the
Programme to ensure the timely approval and execution
of projects;
4. Invites the governing bodies of the participating
and execut,ing agencies to strengthen the executing
capacity of their respective agencies in accordance with
the above-mentioned, as well as other relevant, resolutions and decisions of the United Nations;
5. Further invites the governing bodies of the participating and executing agencies, on the basis of
problem-oriented documentation prepared by the secret-ar~ats concerned, to discuss periodically and keep under
review the problems encountered by their respective
organizations in the planning and implementation of
the country programmes, taking into account the
desirability of achieving a high rate of project implementation and the need to promote high quality programmes and projects;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to gather all relevant information on difficulties encountered and measures taken bv
the agencies to strengthen their operational structure
and their delivery capacity and to submit periodic
reports thereon, together with his comments. tll the
Governing Council of the Programme.
:! ! 09th ple11arv meeting
14 Deccmher 797.?

2976 (XXVII). Unitf'd Nation;, Capital Developuu'nt Fund

The General AS'sembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of l 3 December 1966, 2321 (XXH) of 15 December I %7. 2-t 1(1
32 /bid., Supplement No. l (E/4904 and Corr.I), Other
deci~ions, p. I 7.
