Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and the need to review the progress achieved during
the Decade,
1. Takes note of the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its sixth s-:ssion;
2. Decides to convene a Second General Conference
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in Vienna, at the highest possible level of governmental representation, for a period of two weeks in
the early months of 1975, in accordance with the
provisions outlined by the Industrial Development
Board in its ,resolution 33 (VI);
3. Requests the Industrial Development Board and
its Permanent Committee to carry out the functions of
an intergovernmental preparatory committee for the
~econd General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and to discharge
these functions as appropriate during their sessions
scheduled before the convening of the Conference;
4. Directs the Industrial Development Board ancf
its Permanent Committee to undertake, in connexion
with the functions entrusted to them in paragraph 3
above, the following tasks:
( u) Preparation of the provisional agenda for the
Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and its submission
to the General Assembly for approval;
( b) Review and approval of the preparatory arrangements for the holding of the Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization. including the preparation of adequate
documentation which should cover in a concise and
comprehensive way the major subjects to be discussed
at the Conference;
( c) Discussion and formulation of draft proposals
and recommendations for consideration by the Conference in connexion with the various items on its
agenda;
5. Requests the Industrial Development Board and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress of the
preparatory work for the Second General Conference
~f the United Nations Industrial Development Organizatmn.

2106th plenary meetinR
I I Decemher 1972

2953 (XXVII). Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Pro~ramme and the
United Nations Industrial Development Or~anization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2823 (XXVI) of 16 December 19_71, in which it decided to set up an Ad Hoe
Committee on Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
_Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Co-operation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, 10
10 A/8646.

Taking note of Industrial Development Board resolution 35 (VI) of 2 June 1972 11 and of the decisions of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme :,t its fourteenth session, 1 ~
Bearing in mind the central role of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization with respect to
the activities of the United Nations system in the field
of industrial development,
Aware of the importance of industrialization for the
successful achievement of the goals of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, 1:1
I. Approves with appreciation the report of the
Ad !foe Committee on Co-operation between the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nati~ms Industrial Development Organization and, in
particular, the stress laid therein on the need for
devising special forms of assistance to industry and
new techniques suitable to the more complex nature
of this field;
2. Endorses the decisions taken on the basis of the
recom11;endations of the Ad Hoe' Committee, by the
Industnal Development Board at its sixth session, as
expressed in its resolution 34 (VI) of 2 June 1972, 14
and by the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme at its fourteenth session;
3. Reaffirms the central role of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization in co-ordinating
the activities of the United Nations system in 1he field
of industrial development and welcomes the readiness
of the United Nations Development Programme to assist
t~e United Nations Industrial Development Organiza110n fu_lly !n implc~1cnting its co-ordinating role by
consultmg 1t on projects in the field of industry;
4. Reaffirms further the importance of the programme of Special Industrial Services and the need to
maintain its separate identity as a programme specifically devoted to serving most effectively short-term,
urgent and unforeseen requirements in the field of
industry;
5. Approves the guidelines for the operation of the
programme of Special Industrial Services proposed by
the Industrial Development Board in its resolution 35
(VI) and endorsed by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme at its fourteenth session, as follows:
(a) The programme of Special Industrial Services is
established to meet special needs in the field of industry,
as desoribed in the report of the Secretary-General of
23 October 1965, 15 especially paragraph 10; the provisions contained in that report will be interpreted
flexibly from time to time by the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in order to take account of
the changing needs of the industrial sector in the
developing countries;
( b) In the operations of the programme of Special
Industrial Services, full consideration will be given to
11 See Official Records of the General Assem!,/y
Twentysevlf,nth S~ssion, Supplement No. 16 (A/8716), ann~x JI.
1 - Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5185/Rev.1)'.
para. 199.
i:i Resolution 2626 (XXV).
14 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty.
seventh_ Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/8716), an~ex IT. ·
111 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 40, document A/6070/Rev.t.

38

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

the central responsibilities of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for co-ordinating
action in the field of industry, as entrusted to it by
the General Assembly;
( c) Requests for Special Industrial Services project
approvals will be forwarded simultaneously by the
resident representatives of the United Nations Development Programme to the headquarters of the Programme
and to the headquarters of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization;
(d) Most projects, including plans for their implementation and level of financing, will be approved
jointly by the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization; in the remaining small number of cases, especially
when another agency is proposed as an executing
agency, the system of joint approval of the Special
Industrial Services projects will be followed with appropriate flexibility by agreement between the Administrator
and the Executive Director;
( e) The executing agency will be authorized to
commence project operations upon the issuance of
financial authorization by the Administrator;
(f) The programme of Special Industrial Services
will be financed on a continuing basis from the resources
of the United Nations Development Programme; the
level of maximum annual expenditures will be fixed
from time to time by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme, taking into
account current programme requirements as well as
desirable growth in the light of demonstrated needs;
(g) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will report regularly to thdr respective governing bodies
on the activities carried out under the programme;
(h) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will jointly establish detailed working arrangements and
procedures designed to give effect to the principles
herein established;
6. Welcomes the system of consultation machinery
and periodic meetings between the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization referred to in paragraphs 20
to 24 of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Cooperation between the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;16
1. Invites the Industrial Development Board and
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to take the necessary measures on the
basis of the progress reports and consultations' by the
Administrator and the Executive Director, as provided
in paragraph 22 of the ,report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Co-operation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to ensure the most
harmonious and effective co-operation in their common
objectives of assisting the developing countries in their
industrialization;
8. Stresses the need to strengthen the links of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
with the developing countries through the programme
of industrial field advisers, whose increasing importance
for the development of operational programmes has
been fully recognized, particularly in connexion with
16 A/8646.

the formulation and implementation of the long-term
country programmes and the development of special
measures of assistance to the least developed among
the developing countries, as envisaged in Indust,rial
Development Board resolution 31 (VI) of 2 June
1972;17
9. Urges the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to provide at its next
session additional financing necessary to increase the
number of industrial field advisers of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization serving the developing countries, in order to achieve in 1973 the
level envisaged by the Goveming Council at its
thirteenth session. 18
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972

2969 (XXVII). Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its thirteenth 19 and fourtccnth 20
sessions.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2970 (XXVII).

United Nations Volunteers
programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December
1970, by which it established the United Nations
Volunteers programme within the United Nations
system, and its resolution 2810 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Expressing its satisfaction with the efforts directed
towards the implementation of its resolution 2659
(XXV),

Taking note of the decision adopted by the Economic
and Social Council at its fifty-third session, 21
Noting with appreciation the statement of the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme,22
Convinced that the United Nations Volunteers programme has the potential to render valuable service
to the d~velopment needs of the developing countries,
and particularly of the least developed among them,
Reaffirming that the involvement of youth in the
collective efforts of the United Nations system will
enhance international understanding and co-operation
between nations,
17 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentvseventh Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/8716), an~ex II. ·
18 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5092).
'
19 Ibid.
2 0 Ibid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5185/Rev.1).
21 Ibid., Supplement No. 1 (E/5209), Other decisions, p. 12.
22 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyseventh Session, Second Committee, 1478th meeti~g paras
68-78.
'
.
