United Nations

S/PV.6264

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6264th meeting
Friday, 22 January 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2010/5)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-21617 (E)

*1021617*

S/PV.6264

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2010/5)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia in which he requests that
the President of the Republic of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic
of Serbia, to a seat at the Council table.
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic
of Serbia. In accordance with the understanding
reached in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the

2

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/5, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier. I now give the floor
to Mr. Zannier.
Mr. Zannier: I would like to begin with a
thought for the victims of the catastrophic earthquake
that has devastated Haiti and so cruelly struck down so
many, including our colleagues and friends, some of
whom had previously served with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We are sorely diminished by their loss.
The report before the Council today (S/2010/5)
contains details of UNMIK’s activities from
16 September to 15 December 2009. During this period,
UNMIK continued to perform its functions under
resolution 1244 (1999). Our overriding objective
remains to ensure lasting security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. We are
pursuing our objective by supporting Kosovo’s
communities, encouraging reconciliation, and facilitating
dialogue and regional cooperation.
As was the case during the previous reporting
period, Kosovo has remained largely peaceful and
stable, although tensions and the possibility of flareups remain in northern Kosovo. The past three months
have been politically eventful, with both the Kosovo
authorities and the Government of Serbia conducting
municipal elections. While UNMIK was not involved
in the organization or calling of any of these elections,
their peaceful and mostly orderly conduct was an
encouraging sign.
While Kosovo Serbs living in the northern
municipalities of Zveçan/Zvečan, Leposaviq/Leposavić

10-21617

S/PV.6264

and Zubin Potok did not participate in the elections
conducted by the Kosovo authorities, participation by
Kosovo Serbs living south of the Ibar River, although
relatively low in absolute numbers, was substantially
higher than in recent elections and resulted in the
establishment of three new Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities. In all three, as well as in the existing
Kosovo Serb-majority municipality of Shtërpce/Štrpce,
the balloting resulted in the election of Kosovo Serb
mayors and Kosovo Serb-majority municipal
administrations. Leaving status considerations aside,
these developments allow communities to play a
meaningful role in their local administration, which
increases confidence levels among the population and
creates a climate more conducive to increased returns
and a more multi-ethnic Kosovo.
Northern Kosovo however, remains a flashpoint.
Relations between the Kosovo Serb and Kosovo
Albanian communities there remain tense, although a
greater understanding now appears to prevail in the
matter of the reconstruction of houses by the
communities. During this reporting period, eight
Kosovo Albanian families moved into their newly
reconstructed houses in the Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani area
without incident.
However, even this peace remains tenuous. For
instance, earlier this month a group of Kosovo Serbs,
suspecting that Kosovo Albanians were engaging in
construction beyond what had been agreed upon in
UNMIK-facilitated negotiations, threw rocks at
construction workers and set a truck ablaze. It is clear
that UNMIK must continue to shepherd the
reconstruction process and monitor the situation
closely to ensure that all communities respect existing
arrangements to preserve stability, and that effective
communication is maintained at all times. The UNMIK
administration in northern Mitrovica has proven to be a
useful tool in this regard.
A recent, particularly worrying development in
northern Kosovo is related to the provision of
electricity. The issue is very complex and involves
technical, commercial, legal and political aspects. At
the end of October, tensions over the supply of
electricity to northern Kosovo arose between the
Kosovo Energy Corporation and the Electric Power
Industry of Serbia, which has taken over the
distribution of electricity in the area. This situation has
the potential to precipitate a crisis. I hope that
agreement between the sides can be reached

10-21617

expeditiously in order to avoid destabilizing the
security situation in northern Kosovo.
Over the years, we have learned that dealing with
the situation in northern Kosovo requires sustained
effort, constant engagement with the communities on
the ground, and continuing consultation and
coordination with all relevant actors.
A stable security situation is, of course, one of the
key elements needed to encourage returns of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. While rising
significantly in comparison to previous quarters,
returns nevertheless continue to be low in absolute
numbers due to a variety of factors, including the
absence of economic prospects and concerns about
freedom of movement, which have been raised by
Serbia following a recent incident involving the
Serbian Minister for Kosovo. UNMIK has been
working closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and stays in contact
with the authorities in Belgrade and Pristina to
encourage returns. Kosovo’s leadership states that it is
committed to a multi-ethnic Kosovo and open to
returns. Nevertheless, more needs to be done to make
this objective a reality. In this context, I would also
emphasize the need to reopen the Kosovo Property
Agency offices in Serbia, which are key to the efficient
processing of property claims filed by IDPs and are
therefore important for creating the conditions needed
to encourage returns.
I am pleased, however, to be able report some
positive news relating to a particularly vulnerable
group of Kosovo IDPs. There has been encouraging
progress in the matter of the relocation of the Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian residents of the Osterode and
Çesmin Llug/Česmin Lug camps in northern Mitrovica
to more suitable residential accommodation. The
European Commission Liaison Office in Pristina has
launched a project to facilitate the sustainable
resettlement and reintegration of 90 families, and the
United States Agency for International Development is
funding the building of housing units for 50 more
families. Both projects are to begin this year.
On the issue of missing persons, I would have
wished for something more positive to report today.
Over the past 12 months, 33 sets of bodily remains
have been identified and returned to the deceased’s
families. Clearly, more needs to be done to persuade
those with information on the fates and locations of the

3

S/PV.6264

missing to come forward and share their knowledge
with the ICRC, the European Union (EU) Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and the PristinaBelgrade Working Group on Missing Persons. Once
again, I appeal to all of those who have any pertinent
information to come forward.

Kosovo’s participation in regional and international
coordination mechanisms is in the interests of the
development and stability of Kosovo, as well as of the
entire region, and I therefore hope that Belgrade and
Pristina will find a way to put status considerations
aside in furtherance of this goal.

The implementation of the Secretary-General’s
report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692) has also
seen less progress than we would have hoped for. The
finalization of the terms of reference for the Kosovo
Serb deputy director general of the Kosovo Police,
which include functions related to the coordination and
integration of police personnel from the communities,
is a positive sign and I welcome it.

The longer-term stability and development of
Kosovo lies in a successful process of reconciliation
between the communities. I therefore welcome
President Tadić’s message, on the occasion of his visit
to the Visoki Dečani monastery to celebrate Orthodox
Christmas, that all people, regardless of their identity,
should reconcile their differences. I have heard similar
statements from the Kosovo authorities. I hope that
Belgrade and Pristina demonstrate by their actions that
the well-being of the population of Kosovo will not be
sacrificed on the altar of political agendas.

Regrettably, however, there has been little
progress in setting up multi-ethnic courts in northern
Kosovo. The Government of Serbia’s recent
appointment of judges for Kosovo has prompted the
Kosovo authorities to renew their calls for the
dismantling of Serbian judicial structures. In the
meantime, detainees remain in prison, civil cases
remain unresolved, and the population is denied
effective access to justice. I hope that a constructive
approach will be adopted by both sides in the
re-establishment of multi-ethnic courts, which is in the
interest of all, regardless of ethnicity. Equally, an
agreement on re-establishing a fully-functioning
customs regime in northern Kosovo has proven elusive.
In the area of cultural heritage, there has been
progress since my last presentation to the Council. I
expect an early agreement on the long-awaited
appointment of a European Union envoy, who will
provide the parties with a mechanism for cooperation
in matters related to the protection of the cultural
heritage of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo.
UNMIK stands ready to assist and work with the EU
envoy in order to bring about progress in an important
area of common interest.
In another area of common interest, regional
development, UNMIK has continued to facilitate
Kosovo’s participation in regional and international
forums. This reporting period has seen a particularly
active schedule of meetings of international and
regional mechanisms, and UNMIK has made possible
the participation of Kosovo’s institutions whenever it
would otherwise not have been possible due to the
non-recognition of Kosovo by some Member States
involved in the mechanisms. I firmly believe that

4

In my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.6202), I said I detected that the Kosovo
authorities tacitly acknowledge some areas where
UNMIK can complement and supplement their efforts
in the context of Kosovo’s economic development and
stability, and I am pleased to report that the Kosovo
authorities now appear to show a greater understanding
of our role.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and EULEX continue to perform
important functions that complement those of UNMIK,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). The
OSCE continues to effectively monitor communityrelated issues through its network of field offices. The
contributions of EULEX in mentoring, monitoring and
advising the Kosovo authorities in the area of the rule
of law, and of EULEX and the Kosovo Force in
providing security and stability in Kosovo, remain of
critical importance.
UNMIK is also working in close coordination
with the United Nations Kosovo team to promote a
shared vision of United Nations strategic objectives for
peace consolidation in Kosovo. In this regard, we are
focusing on enhancing our collaboration for the benefit
of Kosovo and the entire region.
As always, my staff and I are grateful for the
support of the Security Council and hope to be able to
count on its continuation. The Council can count on
our full commitment to the implementation of the tasks
with which it has entrusted us.

10-21617

S/PV.6264

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing.

status through law and diplomacy. Their solidarity will
never be forgotten.

I now give the floor to the President of the
Republic of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić.

As the report (S/2010/5) before the Council
reminds us, the General Assembly tasked the
International Court of Justice with determining
whether the UDI conforms to international law. This
has turned out to be a landmark case. It is the first time
that the Court has been asked to consider the legality of
a unilateral attempt by an ethnic minority to secede
from a United Nations Member State in peacetime, in
defiance of its Constitution and against the will of the
Security Council. It is also the first time that all five
permanent members of this Council have participated
in a proceeding before the Court. During the reporting
period, a crucial stage in the judicial process, the oral
hearings, came to an end. A record number of countries
presented their views. This made it the largest case in
the Court’s history, and it demonstrated that Kosovo’s
future status remains an open, unresolved question.

President Tadić: Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
Before turning to the issue that has brought us
together, I would like to express my deepest
condolences to the friendly Government and people of
the Republic of Haiti — as well as to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations
Secretariat — in the wake of the tragic earthquake that
has claimed countless human lives and resulted in
unimaginable destruction. Our thoughts and prayers are
with the families of the victims. As a contributor to the
police component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, the Republic of Serbia will continue
to work with the survivors and with the international
community. We will help in the effort to rebuild the
country through the material assistance our
Government has pledged to provide, and by greatly
increasing our presence in Haiti.
Once again we are gathered to discuss the
situation in the Serbian province of Kosovo and
Metohija. Almost two years ago, its ethnic Albanian
authorities attempted to secede from my country
through a unilateral declaration of independence, or
UDI. Our principled position regarding our province’s
future status is set in stone. Serbia will never, under
any circumstances, implicitly or explicitly, recognize
the UDI. This is a constitutional imperative, as well as
our moral, historical and, above all, democratic duty.
On this fundamental point, our nation is united as one.
The UDI has divided the world and the Balkans. It has
brought into question the fundamental tenets of the
contemporary international system, while setting back
efforts to consolidate the region’s democratic gains.
A substantial majority of United Nations Member
States and of Security Council members have not
supported the attempt to impose the forcible partition
of a United Nations Member State. They have
continued to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country. On behalf of the Republic of
Serbia, I would like to reiterate our deep gratitude to
the friendly Governments and peoples of those
countries, for their dedication to upholding
international law as we seek to resolve Kosovo’s future

10-21617

The International Court of Justice will deliver its
conclusions this year, with overarching consequences
for the international legal order. It is therefore
particularly important for all to respect the fact that the
Court has begun its deliberations. The judges’ work
should be allowed to run its course, without political
pressures such as further recognition of Kosovo’s UDI.
Once the Court hands down its opinion, an opportunity
will be created to find a way forward.
We believe that dialogue is the most effective
means to achieve the only sustainable outcome: a
mutually acceptable, viable solution that will not
recklessly sacrifice the geostrategic priorities of all on
the altar of the communal aspirations of a single party.
Serbia seeks to resolve all outstanding political
differences through negotiations. We are fundamentally
committed to making 2010 the year of peaceful
solutions, as the next logical development following
the Court’s decision. And we are carefully examining
all the possibilities.
This will not be easy. The psychological barriers
are high, and trust needs to be restored. A first step is
to realize that the 1990s are gone for good.
Contemporary Serbia is a democratic, forward-looking
society that will soon join the European Union. We
should all work together on achieving a common
future, with all deliberate speed. As I made clear
during my remarks over Christmas from Kosovo in the
monastery of Visoki Dečani, my message is one of

5

S/PV.6264

peace, and one of reconciliation — between individuals
as well as peoples.
I would like to welcome the new members of the
Security Council, as well as Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier. The United Nations remains an
indispensable actor in Kosovo. It is therefore critical
that the Council continue to support the fully
reconfigured presence of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) as a
crucial pillar of peace and stability.
The constructive approach adopted by the United
Nations and organizations that operate under its overall
authority has set the stage for responsible stakeholders
to act together on improving the lives of all residents in
the province. That has been done by putting aside
status considerations on a growing number of practical
issues. My country has continued to embrace such an
approach, in line with the provisions of the November
2008 report (S/2008/692). That has been recognized by
the Secretary-General, who has written that: “UNMIK
engagement with Belgrade continued to create
opportunities for good-faith dialogue and for the
development of solutions on a range of issues”
(S/2010/5, para. 48).
That has produced tangible results. For instance,
the protocol on police cooperation between the Serbian
Ministry of the Interior and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), signed a few
months ago, has begun to be implemented. An annex to
the protocol was signed in late November, a fact that
the report did not mention. That has produced a
welcome increase in the exchange of information on
organized crime and terrorist activities in the province,
an area that continues to be the hub of a sinister
international network of traffickers in arms, drugs and
human beings.
On a number of other fronts, a shared dedication
to status-neutrality by responsible stakeholders has
ensured that: “The overall security situation in Kosovo
remained relatively calm, but potentially fragile”
(S/2010/5, para. 22). One example is UNMIK’s
external representation function. When it is honoured
by Pristina, its voice in regional forums continues to be
heard, with our support and encouragement. That will
remain the only legitimate way for the province to
participate in multilateral meetings. Unfortunately,
Kosovo’s ethnic Albanian authorities refuse to
participate with UNMIK in the Central European Free

6

Trade Agreement and other regional organizations, as
the report makes clear. Such a policy by Pristina can
only lead to self-isolation. We deeply regret Pristina’s
unwillingness to abide by the provisions of the region’s
free trade accord and, more generally, the binding
procedures on external representation. We call on the
province’s authorities to reverse that counterproductive
policy.
In sum, on the issue of external representation,
Kosovo can and should participate in multilateral and
regional forums, with the presence of UNMIK
officials, who speak first and with either the UNMIKKosovo nameplate or a personalized one. No other
arrangement will work, despite all the pressure to the
contrary.
Working within the framework of statusneutrality has also ensured that issues related to the
supply of electricity to Serbian communities do not
spiral out of control. As the report highlights, the
Pristina-based Kosovo Energy Corporation (KEK)
unilaterally cut off the supply of power to north
Kosovo. Thanks to the timely response of the Electric
Power Industry of Serbia (EPS), a humanitarian
catastrophe that would have affected up to 100,000
residents was averted. We gratefully acknowledge the
positive role played by UNMIK and the European
Union (EU) in preventing further unilateral action by
the ethnic Albanian authorities. Serbia looks forward to
the successful completion of technical talks between
KEK and EPS, which ought to produce a satisfactory
long-term solution, including a second provider.
I come to the matter of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). Its unique ability to bridge existing
communal divides and to maintain peace and stability
on the ground, thanks to its status-neutral approach,
remains acknowledged by all. The Republic of Serbia
will continue to engage with all responsible
stakeholders to ensure KFOR’s role is not diminished,
especially in the context of safeguarding Serbian
patrimony.
Since the March 2004 pogrom, in which 35 holy
sites were destroyed over a tragic three-day period,
KFOR’s direct responsibility for providing security to
the Serbian Orthodox Church has been a success. We
believe that proposals to hand over responsibility for
guarding a number of these sites to local police units,
as reported, would not contribute to improving the
fragile security situation. That is especially important

10-21617

S/PV.6264

given the opposition to such plans clearly expressed by
the monastic communities most affected.
We would like to salute UNMIK’s “efforts to find
durable solutions aimed at the protection of Serbian
cultural heritage in Kosovo” (S/2010/5, para. 10),
especially its engagement with the EU and the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, chaired
by the Council of Europe. We concur with the
assessment that considerable progress was achieved on
this sensitive matter during the reporting period. At the
same time, we share the Secretary-General’s
disappointment that an agreement has not yet been
reached. In that context, we welcome his readiness to
“support any constructive initiatives by the European
Union ..., including the appointment of an envoy”
(S/2010/5, para. 49).
We believe that an EU facilitator will be able to
take appropriate measures to strictly enforce
compliance by the authorities in Pristina on all matters
related to the protection, conservation and restoration
of our holy sites in the province. Regrettably, the
precarious state of Serbian patrimony remains a deeply
troubling part of the reality on the ground in Kosovo.
The report brings to our attention a number of
ongoing problems that have not yet been justly
resolved. That includes the repeated refusal of local
officials to restore the cadastral record of the Dečani
monastery — a UNESCO World Heritage Site in
Danger. It also includes an incomplete list of
desecrated graveyards — hate crimes meant to
compound the physical destruction with an attempt to
erase our every trace throughout Kosovo.
Unfortunately, the report passes over in silence
the fact that the ethnic Albanian authorities continue to
defend the outrageous decision to pave over with
concrete the remains of the Serbian church in the
centre of Djakovica that has been destroyed twice. This
is the fourth time that Serbia has raised the issue in this
Chamber. Is it possible that the international
community is powerless to get that awful deed
reversed? Does the will exist to undo that and other
acts of cultural cleansing? Once again, we ask for the
Council’s help.
Commitments made in this Chamber must be
honoured in full. What is agreed in the Security
Council and welcomed by it must be implemented in
its entirety, from resolution 1244 (1999) to the
Secretary-General’s six-point plan. Unfortunately, real

10-21617

steps still have not been taken on the political
implementation of the provisions related to, for
example, the judiciary and customs, despite the clear
readiness that we have expressed, time and again, to
work out ways of putting into practice what has been
mandated by this body.
I start with the judiciary. There have been some
constructive preliminary discussions with UNMIK and
EULEX. Yet, we have regrettably not been able to
move forward on issues such as determining the
territorial jurisdiction of the court in Mitrovica, the
appointment of judges and prosecutors designed to
reflect the ethnic communities that they would serve,
and the applicability of UNMIK law. It is high time for
talks to intensify. Consensual solutions must be found,
in accordance with the provisions of the November
2008 report.
With respect to the delicate matter of customs,
technical cooperation between Belgrade and EULEX
has proceeded smoothly. Information is exchanged
regularly on topics of mutual concern, such as
smuggling. Unfortunately, we have not achieved
progress on the much more fundamental issue of
revenue collection and how it will benefit relevant
communities. We hope that, in the months ahead, we
can come to workable arrangements with our UNMIK
and EULEX partners within the framework endorsed
by this Council in November 2008.
The Secretary-General’s report discusses at
length local elections held in Kosovo called by the
province’s ethnic Albanian authorities. Much is made
of the participation of a minority of Kosovo Serbs and
of the unverifiable claims about the elections made by
a non-governmental organization called the European
Network of Election Monitoring Organizations. We are
greatly disappointed that the report is entirely silent on
the fact that the election itself was entirely illegitimate,
since it was not held in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).
The facts speak for themselves. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General did not call it,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) did not monitor it and the United
Nations did not certify it. Under such circumstances, it
was simply impossible for Serbia to support the
election because it was clear that conditions did not
exist for a vast majority of Kosovo Serbs to participate
in it.

7

S/PV.6264

I also underline that the report paints an
incomplete picture of a highly flawed exercise. It
greatly underplays the level of fraud in Serbian areas
and fails to account for credible evidence pointing to
intense ballot-stuffing, voter intimidation and other
grave violations of campaign and election-day
procedures, such as disinformation tactics. All this is
highly regrettable. An opportunity was missed to
depoliticize this vitally important issue. Instead of
working with the international community, Pristina
chose a unilateralist approach consistent with the socalled Ahtisaari Proposal (S/2007/168/Add.1) — a
document that the November 2008 report rightly
asserted was “not endorsed by the Security Council”
(S/2008/692, para. 5).
It is now imperative that we focus our energies on
finding a way forward. As has always been the case,
we remain in favour of establishing functional
decentralization acceptable to all stakeholders.
Pristina’s election was a false start that will not lead
anywhere. We need to work in concert through a statusneutral organization, such as the OSCE, to create a
legitimate decentralization package designed to
succeed.
The report before us today is entirely silent on the
critically important issue of facilitating the entry and
transport of Serbian officials within the province. From
the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999) to the present
day, Serbia has followed a well-established procedure
designed to address the security concerns of senior
officials moving about the province. We have often
asked for escorts due to the heightened degree of risk
associated with travelling in that unstable portion of
our country. Regrettably, the issue has been
increasingly politicized for more than a year. The
number of positive replies to our requests for escorts
has dramatically plummeted.
It is difficult to imagine how we can contribute
positively to developments on the ground if our ability
to work closely with the Kosovo Serb community
throughout the province is hindered. Encouraged by
claims made in previous reports that freedom of
movement for Serbs was no longer a problem, Goran
Bogdanović, our Minister for Kosovo and Metohija,
decided to travel to the Serbian enclave of Štrpce
without an escort. He was detained at gunpoint in a
village near Štrpce by over 40 ethnic-Albanian special
operations police officers. This was a clear violation of
resolution 1244 (1999). Heavily armed men told him

8

that they were under instructions to escort him back to
the administrative boundary line. Minister Bogdanović
asked why he was being forcibly deported, and no
answer was given. Later, we were told that Minister
Bogdanović’s very presence in southern Kosovo was
somehow considered to be a threat to public order,
despite the fact that he resides legally in the province.
This is an absurd and dangerous claim for anyone
to make in twenty-first century Europe. The statusneutral international institutions enabled by this
Council to control the province’s police structures have
an obligation to prevent such abuses to the system for
blatantly partisan, illegitimate purposes from taking
place. Political disagreements on status should not
result in provocative denials of basic human rights to
anyone. Such a climate of zealous intolerance cannot
but adversely affect what the report qualifies as an
already very low number of internally displaced
persons who have returned to the province. More than
200,000 Serb victims of ethnic cleansing continue to be
denied the right of return. Regrettably, Kosovo’s ethnic
Albanian authorities seem to want to send the message
that accepting the unilateral declaration of
independence is a precondition to being beyond the
arbitrary reach of the police.
Despite such deplorable conduct, the Republic of
Serbia remains dedicated to finding a way to overcome
these and many other issues in status-neutral ways,
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999) and the values
and principles it presupposes.
The Secretary-General’s report draws particular
attention to the situation in northern Kosovo, which it
characterizes as “fragile.” Serbia concurs with this
assessment. We feel that harsh rhetoric emanating from
Pristina regarding legitimate Serbian institutions in
northern Kosovo does not contribute to maintaining
stability in that part of Serbia. By referring to them as
“parallel”, EULEX representatives, for instance, have
not respected the explicitly status-neutral terms of their
own mandate. And they have violated resolution 1244
(1999), the very basis of their legitimacy and presence
in Kosovo under the overall authority of the United
Nations. Such regrettable outbursts are unacceptable to
the Republic of Serbia.
The truly parallel institutions that operate in
Kosovo are those created on the basis of the unilateral
declaration of independence. Their existence is a
violation of resolution 1244 (1999). Should EULEX,

10-21617

S/PV.6264

KFOR or anyone else wish to condemn any authority
in Kosovo, let them begin with those created
unilaterally by the ethnic Albanian authorities in
Pristina without the approval of this Council and in
clear breach of the principles of international order.
In addition, I must draw attention to alarming
news reports that have circulated about what has been
termed a “final solution” for northern Kosovo.
Sponsored by the so-called International Civilian
Office, this plan outlines a number of coordinated
policies and actions designed to impose acceptance of
the unilateral declaration of independence on the
Serbian majority in northern Kosovo. These unilateral
schemes, intended to forcibly implement the so-called
Ahtisaari Proposal, blatantly violate resolution 1244
(1999). That strategy can be advanced only by the
enforcement of a draconian and undemocratic set of
measures on the Serbian community in northern
Kosovo. Those who announced it — they and they
alone — should bear responsibility for the destabilizing
atmosphere that such conflict-inciting designs can only
be meant to produce.
The Republic of Serbia harshly condemns
Pristina’s unnecessary and hazardous provocations.
That is not the way to constructively engage in
overcoming challenges, especially given the enormous
efforts of Serbia and other responsible stakeholders to
maintain the fragile climate of stability throughout the
province in the wake of the unilateral declaration of
independence.
I want to underline that it is clear that all parties
have their constraints. It is all part of the reality on the
ground. But that must not harm those who matter the
most, namely, the residents of the province. Pristina’s
final solution for North Kosovo would not benefit
those who live there. It would only satisfy the
extremists who want everything that happens in
Kosovo to be seen through the distorted lens of the
unilateral declaration of independence. Should a choice
be made to act on that proposal, we would justifiably
expect KFOR and EULEX to protect the Serbian
community in North Kosovo from that aggressive
intent. We sincerely hope that it will not come to that.
From the right of return to external
representation, and from the six points to the future
status, our collective experience in the nearly two years
since the unilateral declaration of independence
teaches us that denying the basic principles of

10-21617

European concord — such as compromise, concession
and consensus-building — serves the genuine interest
of no responsible party. There is no legitimate
alternative to finding a way forward together. The
unilateral declaration of independence was just another
failed attempt to impose a one-sided outcome. Instead
of bringing us closer to one another, it has driven us
further apart. That is why it is unsustainable, and why
we must now find the courage to harness the forces of
moderation and rebuild bridges.
We will have to overcome our prejudices and
tame our passions. That will necessitate reconciliation
and learning to live with difference. Some will be
tempted by the comfort and seductiveness of the old
ways. Yet nothing is more certainly doomed to failure,
for that time has passed. It must never be allowed to
return to the Balkans.
I believe that 2010 can become the year of
solutions. It can turn out to be the year when we
resolve the status issue in a way that contributes to
advancing regional priorities, such as membership in
the European Union, within the framework set forth by
international law. It can be the year of our success, our
year of peacemaking. It is up to us — to this generation
of leaders — to find the necessary strength to do the
right thing. For the extremists who will want to reject
the opportunity that we shall have this year will in
truth be rejecting the future we all must share.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
President Tadić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Mr. Hyseni: I wish first to extend Kosovo’s
profound condolences to the Haitian Government on
the tragic loss of human life as a result of the
catastrophic earthquake that struck that country. At the
same time, our condolences go to the Member States
that lost citizens who were serving with the United
Nations missions in that country. Of course, we wish to
extend our condolences to the Secretary-General on the
loss of life among United Nations personnel in Haiti.
As always, I wish first to thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief it on the situation
in Kosovo, namely, on the continued accomplishments
and steady progress that the Republic of Kosovo has
continued to make since my last address to the
Council, on 15 October 2009.

9

S/PV.6264

Before I continue, I also wish to congratulate the
five new members — Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon, Nigeria
and Bosnia and Herzegovina — on their election to the
Security Council.
Kosovo has continued to build its State
institutions on the basis of our new democratic
Constitution, as well as on the basis of the provisions
contained in the Ahtisaari comprehensive plan. The
year 2009 was a successful one for Kosovo on many
fronts. We completed the process of membership with
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Recognition of the independence of our country has
continued uninterrupted. The Government of Kosovo
has been very successful in addressing and resolving
many economy, security and justice issues throughout
Kosovo.
The well-being of minority communities and the
return of Kosovo refugees to their homes and
properties have been a priority. The progress achieved
during 2009 is obvious. The improvement of
conditions in the minority community areas, especially
in the Serb-majority municipalities, will remain an
issue of high priority for the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo during this year as well. We will
continue to make special efforts in order to intensify
the return of Kosovo Serb refugees and to protect and
restore religious and cultural heritage.
As for Kosovo’s relations with other States,
65 nations around the world have so far recognized
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State. The
most recent recognitions came from New Zealand, the
Republic of Malawi and the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania. We wish to extend our deepest appreciation
to those three countries for their recognition of our
country’s independence.
On the other hand, Kosovo has entered into
diplomatic relations with over 25 States around the
world. Following the very successful conclusion of the
process of the physical demarcation of the border with
the Republic of Macedonia, we signed an agreement on
diplomatic relations with that country. The
establishment of embassies is under way. On
15 January 2010, diplomatic relations were established
with Montenegro as well; ambassadors will be
exchanged in due course.
Kosovo stands ready to improve its relations with
the Republic of Serbia too. Dialogue between our
countries can take place on many issues of mutual

10

concern and interest; this can happen only on an equal
footing, as dialogue between two independent and
sovereign States.
We reject any calls for renewed negotiations on
status. Furthermore, we consider that calls for renewed
negotiations on the status of Kosovo come from people
who either are unaware of the situation and the great
efforts to achieve consensus or, worse, from those who
actively seek to create disorder in the region. New
negotiations would be highly disruptive and could even
spark new conflict in the region. Kosovo’s
independence is irreversible, and that will remain the
case not only for the sake of Kosovo but also for the
sake of sustainable regional peace and security, to
which Kosovo’s independence has so greatly
contributed.
We have also entered into numerous bilateral
treaties and agreements with many countries around
the world — such as those on investment incentives,
law enforcement, cooperation in the field of health,
mutual travel of citizens, readmission of persons,
economic cooperation, police cooperation, mutual
assistance
in
customs
matters,
development
cooperation, mutual abolition of visas, et cetera —
including with Albania, Austria, Denmark, France,
Luxembourg, Macedonia, Slovenia, Turkey and the
United States. We recently concluded our first treatysuccession agreement, with Belgium.
November and December 2009 saw two events
that were very important for Kosovo. One was
elections. On the basis of the Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo and consistent with a number of
laws that govern the conduct of elections in Kosovo —
that is, the law on general elections and the law on
municipal elections, both adopted in June 2008 — we
held elections for members of assemblies and mayors
of 36 municipalities across Kosovo. The Kosovo
Central Election Commission was fully charged with
the organization and conduct of these elections. The
elections were very orderly and peaceful. Participation
of non-majority communities in the election was
sizable. Out of 74 entities certified to contest the
elections, 40 represent various minority communities.
Twenty-two were Kosovo Serb political entities. That
is clear evidence that, despite Serbia’s assertions to the
contrary and indeed despite the Serbian Government’s
pressure and calls for a boycott, Kosovo Serbs are
increasingly taking part in institution-building in
Kosovo.

10-21617

S/PV.6264

The good participation of Kosovo Serbs in these
elections was widely welcomed. In a resolution
adopted shortly after the elections, the European
Parliament welcomed what it called the unprecedented
good participation of Kosovo Serbs, and it regarded
this as encouraging indication that the Kosovo Serb
community is willing to take up its responsibilities in
the Kosovo institutions.
We believe that the November elections created
new momentum in building up a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
In their statements, observer missions also described
the 15 November elections as free, fair and democratic.
The European Parliament ad hoc delegation welcomed,
in its statement, the ongoing decentralization process
and what it called a peaceful election day in Kosovo.
The
European
Union
presidency’s
statement
“welcomed the orderly conduct of municipal elections”
as well as broad participation of different ethnic
groups. Very positive reactions to the elections came
from the NATO Secretary-General, the European
Union Special Representative in Kosovo, ambassadors
from various States accredited to Pristina and various
national
and
international
non-governmental
organizations. And the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General also “considered the trend towards
more active participation by the Kosovo Serb
community as an encouraging step towards longer term
reconciliation and integration with the local
community”.
The turnout of voters in Serb majority
municipalities was as high as 54 per cent, in Shtërpce,
a municipality in southern Kosovo, whereas in the
three new municipalities of Graçanicë, Kllokot and
Ranillug, the turnout was around 22 per cent. As a
result, today we have four elected Serb mayors from
the Independent Liberal Party (SLS) in four
municipalities.
The second development I wish to underscore is
the oral statements to the International Court of Justice,
on 1 to 11 December 2009. The delegation of the
Republic of Kosovo, headed by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, addressed the Court on 1 December,
offering substantive information for the proceedings.
As all statements to the Court are now available to the
public, let me just emphasize that the Republic of
Kosovo has asked the International Court of Justice if it
deems it appropriate to respond to the request for an
advisory opinion, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 63/3, finding that the declaration

10-21617

of independence of Kosovo of 17 February 2008 did
not contravene any applicable rule of international law.
We place full trust in the International Court of Justice.
As I said in my address to the Court, we cannot and
should not forget the crimes against humanity and
other horrors that the Republic of Serbia inflicted upon
the people of Kosovo; such things must never happen
again.
Yet we in Kosovo are determined to look towards
the future. We are determined to preserve peace and
security in Kosovo and in the region. Now it is more
certain than ever before that the common future of both
Kosovo and Serbia — and indeed, of all Western
Balkan countries — lies in eventual membership in the
European Union, as contemplated in the European
Commission’s recent report of October 2009.
We also look forward to the day when we will be
able to take our place as a Member of the United
Nations. The commitments expressed in our
declaration of independence and in our constitution
demonstrate our willingness to assume the
responsibility of such membership. In line with that,
my Government has recently agreed on a draft law to
enable Kosovo to implement the Security Council
sanctions, and the Parliament of the Republic of
Kosovo is expected to adopt that draft law shortly.
The overall security situation in the Republic of
Kosovo is calm and stable, although the situation in the
north remains an issue of concern. Continued and
additional effort is needed to see further improvement
of the situation and progress in that part of Kosovo.
The institutions and the Government of the Republic of
Kosovo have been working and cooperating closely
with European Union Rule of Law Mission to combat
crime and corruption, as well as to prevent further
destructive action of parallel and criminal structures in
the north.
Unfortunately, extremely disruptive interference
on the part of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia in the Republic of Kosovo and support for
parallel structures has continued. The recent so-called
nomination of prosecutors and judges for the courts in
Kosovo by authorities of Serbia was another severe
attack on the court system of Kosovo, apparently with
a clear aim of undermining the ongoing
decentralization process and establishing Serb majority
municipalities. It is also an attempt to obstruct and
undermine joint efforts of the EULEX and Kosovo

11

S/PV.6264

authorities to restore law and order across Kosovo
through the establishment of multi-ethnic institutions.
The continued destabilizing interference of Serbia in
my country is unacceptable, and it must end.
Kosovo, for its part, will continue to seek ways to
further strengthen and improve relations with its
neighbours, including Serbia. That remains one of my
Government’s key priorities.
In conclusion, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council for the opportunity to
present the views of Kosovo. We look forward to
working with all the members of the Council and,
indeed, with all Members of the United Nations as we
promote the shared goals of international peace and
regional stability and cooperation in the Western
Balkans.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
I now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Zannier for his very helpful briefing. I
also wish to extend a warm welcome to President Tadić
of Serbia and to Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo,
and to thank them for their statements.
At the outset I wish to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General and to Mr. Zannier for their
leadership role of the United Nations on the ground.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and + partner organizations such as
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) are all supporting a multi-ethnic, democratic
Kosovo in the Western Balkans region. Japan pays
tribute to the contributions of all those organizations.
We are encouraged by Mr. Zannier’s report that
the situation in Kosovo has generally been developing
in a positive direction. We highly value the mediation
role that UNMIK has been playing between northern
Kosovo and Pristina, and also between Pristina and
Belgrade. We have yet to see agreement in the areas of
justice, customs and the protection of cultural heritage.
We very much hope that the collaboration between
UNMIK and the European Union will assist the
countries in creating an agreement between Pristina
and Belgrade in those areas.

12

We congratulate EULEX, whose contribution is
bearing fruit in the rule of law, security and
reconciliation. We welcome the recent increased
presence of EULEX in northern Kosovo and the
positive role of the European Union in stabilizing
Kosovo’s entire Western Balkans region.
The municipal and mayoral elections were
conducted in a peaceful manner, with the participation
of multiple ethnicities. That was a significant step for
Kosovo, an effort to consolidate multi-ethnic
democracy and a decentralization process. At the same
time, we look forward to greater progress on
outstanding issues, in particular protection of
minorities and the return of internally displaced
persons. We hope all parties will intensify their
cooperation on those issues.
Japan has supported the efforts of United Nations
programmes for peaceful inter-ethnic coexistence and
development in Kosovo from a human security
perspective. A human-centred approach is particularly
relevant in the northern provinces in order to reduce a
sense of vulnerability in the population, irrespective of
ethnicity.
As part of the follow-up in recent consultations
on bilateral support for a capacity-building
environment, Japan will start a new programme to
invite trainees from Kosovo to Japan. We are
committed to supporting Kosovo’s development as a
vibrant, multi-ethnic and truly democratic country. We
are also committed to support the stabilization of the
Western Balkans region as a whole. We will do so in
close cooperation with international partners, but
particularly Serbia and countries in the region.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
welcome the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadić, and
the Foreign Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni,
and to thank them for the statements. I also wish to
welcome Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić. Moreover, let
me express our deep appreciation for the work and
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, and the important
contribution of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to peace
and stability in Kosovo. Austria fully supports
UNMIK’s continuing efforts to facilitate dialogue
among all parties in the search for practical solutions,
and we are pleased to hear about the intensification in
relations between UNMIK and the Kosovo authorities

10-21617

S/PV.6264

during the last reporting period, including through the
meetings of the Special Representative with President
Sejdiu and Prime Minister Thaçi.
The successful organization of municipal and
mayoral elections in a relatively calm atmosphere and
without major incidents constitutes a significant step
forward in the consolidation of a democratic society.
We congratulate the Kosovo electoral authorities for
having taken ownership of the process and for the
assessment that effort has received. Austria would also
like to commend the mission in Kosovo of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for working intensively and in coordination
with other international stakeholders in supporting and
assisting the Central Election Commission and the
Election Complaints and Appeals Subcommission.
We welcome the growing participation by
Kosovo Serbs in the newly established municipalities
in the centre and the south of Kosovo as an important
step for the integration of Kosovo Serbs in the
institutional structures of Kosovo. The low level of
participation in the elections by Kosovo Serbs in
northern Kosovo, on the other hand, is disappointing.
We call on Kosovo authorities to increase their efforts
to engage the Kosovo Serb population in continuing
the process of decentralization.
At the same time, we also believe that increased
efforts by all sides are necessary, in particular with a
view to the establishment of a fully functioning and
multi-ethnic judiciary in northern Mitrovica. Only by
renouncing parallel structures can legal certainty for
the local population be guaranteed.
A little more than a year after the deployment of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), by far the European Union’s largest civilian
mission, Austria commends the progress achieved in
promoting the rule of law. We also appreciate the close
collaboration between the international actors in
Kosovo.
Austria fully supports the efforts of EULEX to
consolidate its presence and to exercise its mandate in
northern Kosovo. The continued monitoring of the
reintegration of over 300 Kosovo Serb police officers,
the prosecution and adjudication of war crimes and
organized crime cases and the fight against corruption
contribute to strengthening rule of law institutions in
the police and justice sector.

10-21617

On 12 January, EULEX Supreme Court judges
completed the last of the 20 trial cases inherited from
UNMIK at this level, and the completion of inherited
general trial cases at the district court level is expected
in March. Moreover, the establishment of the human
rights review panel will constitute an important step
towards strengthening the accountability of EULEX.
Although violent incidents have not broken off,
we are encouraged by the relatively calm security
situation and the decrease in tensions between
communities. In this context, Austria supports NATO’s
decision to restructure the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
reduce troop numbers in Kosovo, which will also
enhance local responsibility. Austria, which is currently
the biggest non-NATO contributor to KFOR, is
determined to keep up its strong commitment to the
operation. Moreover, Austria will continue to provide
up to 30 experts for EULEX.
Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the OSCE mission, under
Ambassador Almhofer, in supporting the development
of democratic institutions as well as in the monitoring,
protection and promotion of human rights. As pointed
out in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/5)
and the recently published OSCE report assessing the
implementation of communities’ rights by Kosovo
institutions, more efforts need to be made, inter alia, in
the following fields: the protection of cultural rights,
the protection of cultural and religious heritage sites,
and the creation of improved conditions conducive to
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Let me say that I have listened very carefully to
President Tadić’s comments on the protection of holy
sites in Kosovo. The authorities in Belgrade and
Pristina know how strongly Austria has been
committed and is committed to the protection of
religious communities and holy sites in Kosovo. As
many know, in the past we were able to facilitate
Kosovo legislation on this subject, and members of the
delegations of Serbia and Kosovo and UNMIK
representatives present at this table today were in fact
actively involved in these efforts. It is therefore evident
that we support any international involvement that
would help to improve the protection of cultural
heritage and, more particularly, of the holy sites of the
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo, including
through increased efforts by the European Union.

13

S/PV.6264

We endorse the Secretary-General’s call for
pragmatism and flexibility on all sides in order to find
solutions for outstanding practical issues, such as
Kosovo’s participation in international forums and
mechanisms.
Finally, let me say once again that Austria
welcomes Serbia’s application for membership in the
European Union, made last month. As we have
emphasized on many occasions, we clearly see the
future of Serbia and all other countries of the western
Balkans in the European Union.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his remarks. We
appreciate the briefing given by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, and commend him for the important role that
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is playing in Kosovo.
Brazil has a firm and long-standing commitment
to the peaceful settlement of disputes. In 1999, Brazil
was an elected member of the Security Council and
voted in favour of resolution 1244 (1999). It was
intended to provide a legal framework for a negotiated
solution to the dispute on the status of Kosovo. The
need to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was also
expressly recognized. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains
in force and therefore continues to be the key
parameter guiding the United Nations presence in
Kosovo.
That position was expressed by Brazil in the
public hearings conducted at the International Court of
Justice in December 2009 as part of the proceedings
related to the advisory opinion on the unilateral
declaration of independence by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.
As the Security Council continues to be seized of
the matter, the opinion of the Court, coming possibly
later this year, will be a crucial element to bear in
mind. Until that time, UNMIK should continue to play
its constructive role in promoting engagement between
Pristina and Belgrade. We expect both parties to
cooperate fully with the Mission. Success in this area
will benefit all.

14

As stressed by the Secretary-General, the overall
security situation in Kosovo remains relatively calm.
This is due to the restraint shown by the parties and the
population, which is to be commended. Stability has
also been further sustained by the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. It
should continue to operate under the overall authority
and within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations, thereby preserving the integrity of resolution
1244 (1999).
Also positive are the signs of a possible
improvement in the cooperation between UNMIK and
Kosovo authorities. It is, however, worrisome that
municipal elections not called for by UNMIK were
held in Kosovo on 15 November. Under resolution
1244 (1999), the holding of elections is one the main
responsibilities of the international civil presence in
Kosovo. In the same vein, by-elections were held by
Serbia in the northernmost municipality of Kosovo on
29 November. UNMIK did not participate in the
preparation for these elections, which were not called
for by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
We share the Secretary-General’s disappointment
at the lack of concrete progress in the implementation
of practical arrangements regarding the protection of
cultural heritage. Progress on this issue would be
relevant as a much-needed gesture of goodwill, which,
in turn, could set a positive example to follow in more
politically sensitive negotiations.
We note the concern express by President Tadić at
possible unilateral action in northern Kosovo.
There is no acceptable alternative to dialogue and
negotiation when differences arise. We urge the parties
to resume efforts to reach an agreed solution.
Meanwhile, it is their duty to ensure that the political
and security situation on the ground remains stable and
that every minority community is fully protected from
threats or acts of intimidation and harassment.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to warmly welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President
of the Republic of Serbia, a country with which my
country has excellent relations. I also welcome
Mr. Skender Hyseni and thank him for his kind words
on my country’s election to the Security Council. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for

10-21617

S/PV.6264

presenting the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/5) of
5 January 2010 on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The
report has been submitted to us in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

all parties understand that the inhabitants of Kosovo,
regardless of what communities they belong to, want
above all to live in peace and their children to have a
future that is prosperous as possible. That is their main
and perfectly natural concern.

My delegation has very carefully read the
Secretary-General’s report on the activities carried out
in Kosovo by UNMIK and by international
organizations working on the ground, as well as on
developments in the overall situation in the region. We
duly recognize UNMIK’s important contribution to
promoting cooperation and reconciliation and to
maintaining security and stability in the region.

I welcome the engagement of the European
Union, whose Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) is doing
outstanding work to consolidate Kosovo’s institutions
and to ensure the full implementation of their
commitments to the rule of law. As the European
Mission is consolidated, it would seem desirable to
pursue the drawdown of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo in response to the
presence and actions of EULEX.

We therefore endorse keeping UNMIK in Kosovo
until the issue is resolved peacefully through dialogue
and negotiation. My delegation supports the SecretaryGeneral’s six-point plan for Kosovo because we
believe that its constructive approach will be
invaluable to both parties. We also welcome the
involvement of the European Union in this process
through its Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, NATO, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Kosovo Force.
As to Kosovo’s status, Gabon values respect for
international rules in any process leading to selfdetermination and therefore rejects any unilateral
declaration of independence. In that respect, my
country eagerly awaits the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice requested by the General
Assembly in its resolution 63/3 on whether the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo is in
accordance with international law.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Kosovo, for their presence and their
statements. I welcome the actions of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto
Zannier, who has effectively and pragmatically
implemented the reconfiguration of the international
presence decided by the Secretary-General with the
support of the Security Council.
In his most recent report (S/2010/5), the
Secretary-General notes the progress made in recent
months in Kosovo, and in particular the decrease in
acts of violence. Nearly two years since the Republic
of Kosovo declared independence, the situation there
today is encouraging. Tensions have been defused and

10-21617

EULEX is working to the benefit of the entire
population and all communities of Kosovo. In that
respect, we welcome the Mission’s technical
cooperation with the authorities of Kosovo’s
neighbours, including police cooperation with Serbia.
We count on the Republic of Serbia to pursue its
cooperation with EULEX and, in particular, to allow
justice to prevail in northern Kosovo.
France invites Serb and Kosovo authorities to live
up to the great expectations of their citizens by
devoting their energies and abilities to the real
problems of economic development, infrastructure,
dialogue and peace. We are convinced that Serbia will
maintain its responsible attitude and adopt a
constructive position vis-à-vis Kosovo. In that regard,
France welcomes a new factor that has arisen since our
last meeting on this issue. Serbia submitted its
candidacy for membership of the European Union on
22 December, confirming a strategic orientation that
we welcome and that it will have to translate into
deeds.
For its part, Kosovo must focus on its central
priorities and continue to move ahead in its
commitment to the rule of law, good governance and
human rights. Decentralization is an essential priority
of Kosovo and a key to its success in creating a
multi-ethnic society. To that end, we believe that the
local elections of last November, organized by the
Kosovar authorities, illustrate the encouraging progress
that has been achieved. No one can object to such a
democratic exercise.
Differences will long persist between Serbia and
Kosovo. The essential thing is for both countries to
share the same concern to maintain regional stability,

15

S/PV.6264

which will require restraint so as not to fuel passions at
a time when the people aspire to peace. The contrast
between the impassioned rhetoric of some and the calm
of the voters is testimony to that. The European Union
will maintain its commitment to ensuring a stable and
prosperous future for the entire West Balkans and to
offering a common future to the Serbs, the Kosovars
and the entire region.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm welcome to the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris
Tadić; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Jeremić; and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni. We are happy to see
them with us today.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/5) and Mr. Zannier for his
informative briefing and his leadership of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Let me emphasize once again that we
commend the work of UNMIK. We are confident that,
in its reconfigured phase, UNMIK will continue to
provide valuable assistance.
We also welcome and support the expansion in
the role and functions of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). We remain
committed to continuing our contributions both to
EULEX and to the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
accordance with the needs and requirements on the
ground. We are pleased to see that the positive
relationship between UNMIK and EULEX is further
strengthening. More effective cooperation and
coordination between the two and also with KFOR will
consolidate their efforts to achieve the desired ends,
while at the same time enabling each mission to
concentrate on its respective mandate.
The Secretary-General’s report shows that
Kosovo has made considerable progress in a number of
areas, such as decentralization and the rule of law, and
that it is taking steps to make further progress in
others, such as returns and cultural and religious
heritage, where certain problems seem to persist. We
call on all relevant sides to do their best to achieve
satisfactory results. It is also encouraging to note that
both Belgrade and Pristina are pragmatically
cooperating in resolving the outstanding issues as
regards some practical arrangements. We hope that the
sides will make further efforts to reach agreements.

16

We are also pleased that the Kosovo authorities
have been carrying out their commitments to
solidifying
their
democratic
institutions
and
capabilities. In this connection and also with a view to
decentralization endeavours, the municipal elections
held on 15 November were an important milestone.
Therefore, we welcome the fact that the elections took
place in a calm and peaceful environment and in
accordance with international standards.
It is encouraging that there was greater
participation by Kosovo Serbs in the elections as
compared to 2004 and 2007, and particularly that the
mayors elected in some of the newly formed
municipalities were Kosovo Serbs. It is important that
all the communities of Kosovo actively exercise their
democratic rights and fulfil their duties to ensure their
effective and legitimate representation in State and
municipal structures. In this vein, the fact that the Serb
participation was very low in the northern part of
Kosovo and that the overall situation there remains
fragile is a cause for concern. We should all proceed
from the understanding that the future of the Serbs in
the north is tied to that of Kosovo, and refrain from
actions that will cause unnecessary burdens in their
lives.
Next month it will be two years since Kosovo
declared independence. We recognized Kosovo because
we believe that the situation was no longer sustainable
and that Kosovo’s independence would ultimately
contribute to lasting peace, stability and prosperity of
the region. The fact that Kosovo has been recognized
by 65 countries has, we believe, contributed to regional
peace and stability.
Indeed, since Kosovo declared independence the
situation in the region has been largely calm and
peaceful, allowing all parties involved to concentrate
on important issues on their agendas, to the benefit of
all their peoples and communities. Kosovo has joined
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
and has shown its determination to become a fullfledged and responsible member of the international
community. Kosovo’s participation, particularly in
regional cooperation mechanisms, is important. We
therefore
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
observation that by putting aside status considerations,
Belgrade and Pristina show flexibility in order to
enable Kosovo’s representation in regional and
international mechanisms and forums that are essential

10-21617

S/PV.6264

to the economic and democratic development and longterm stability of the region.
At the same time, a democratic and prosperous
Serbia is vital in the Balkans. The international
community should continue to encourage and support
Serbia in its efforts to integrate with European and
Euro-Atlantic structures. In that vein, we welcome and
support the developing relations between Serbia and
the European Union. For our part, Turkey is pleased to
enjoy close and cooperative relations with Serbia, and
we are determined to take them even further, to the
benefit of both of our countries and that of the entire
region.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadić,
and the Foreign Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Skender
Hyseni, to the Council Chamber today, together with
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier. I would like to express our
thanks to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on recent developments in Kosovo (S/2010/5)
and to commend the important work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in promoting stability and reconciliation in
Kosovo. I would also like to thank Mr. Zannier
personally for his continued leadership and hard work.
The Secretary-General’s latest report illustrates
that despite continuing challenges, important progress
is being made in Kosovo. We particularly welcome the
fact that in the Secretary-General’s assessment,
violence against minorities and inter-ethnic conflict
have decreased throughout the reporting period.
Kosovo’s recently agreed border demarcation with
Macedonia bodes well for regional relations and
stability.
We welcome the continued cooperation that
exists between the United Nations and the European
Union (EU) on Kosovo. This period has seen the EU
successfully consolidate its role as the principal
international organization supporting the development
of the rule of law and governance standards in Kosovo.
Kosovo’s future, like that of the wider region, lies in
closer European integration.
We welcome the improved relations between
UNMIK and the Kosovo Government. That
cooperation benefits all Kosovo’s citizens and is not
connected to the issue of Kosovo’s status.

10-21617

Nevertheless, it is important to keep UNMIK’s
resources under close review and ensure that they are
commensurate with the size of its responsibilities.
The success of November’s local elections across
Kosovo’s communities has demonstrated the
importance of decentralization to the people of
Kosovo, a desire to take more direct control of their
future. We commend the Kosovo Government for its
commitment to decentralization, which is essential to
delivering effective local governance and a more
stable, multi-ethnic society.
We call on the Kosovo Government and local
authorities to take the necessary steps to further deliver
minority rights throughout Kosovo, particularly in
those municipalities that have still to hold elections.
Kosovo Serbs, and their friends in the international
community, should recognize the practical benefits of
decentralization, in particular the local representation,
which brings funding and facilities for the benefit of all
communities.
To consolidate recent progress, Kosovo must now
work to improve standards in governance and the rule
of law. Serious challenges in the areas of human rights
and judicial independence — which were highlighted
in both the latest Secretary-General’s report and the
European Commission progress report — must be
addressed. Kosovo’s European perspective, in line with
that of its neighbours, offers clear incentives for further
reform. Kosovo, with the support of the international
community, must strive to match the progress towards
European integration being made by its neighbours.
That is the key to regional stability.
Equally, we welcome Serbia’s application for
European Union membership. We encourage Serbia to
devote its full resources to making progress along that
path. Continued disagreement over status issues will
only serve as a distraction from achieving that
important strategic objective.
We strongly support the Secretary-General’s call
for both Kosovo and Serbia to put status issues aside
and pursue greater practical cooperation, to the benefit
of all communities, on a wide range of issues such as
cultural heritage, energy, customs and justice.
Constructive cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) forms an
essential part of that. For example, there has been
unwelcome politicization of the electricity supply in
Kosovo, particularly in the north. Citizens should pay a

17

S/PV.6264

fair price for their electricity, and the money should go
to whoever supplies it. There is no need for any politics
in that.
A growing number of United Nations Member
States — now 65 — have recognized Kosovo. That
demonstrates growing international confidence in
Kosovo’s statehood. Kosovo has made irreversible
progress since its declaration of independence,
becoming a viable independent State with broad EU
support for European integration. It will be important
that, following the International Court of Justice’s
advisory opinion, Kosovo and Serbia focus on making
progress towards reconciliation and regional stability.
We urge all sides to take practical steps towards further
cooperation and to engage flexibly and constructively
to the benefit of the citizens of the whole territory of
Kosovo.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
working with Kosovo, Serbia and the wider
international community in promoting stability,
reconciliation, regional cooperation and economic
progress, so that Kosovo can advance towards an EU
perspective in parallel with its neighbours.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2010/5) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for introducing the
report. We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadić, as
well as Mr. Skender Hyseni.
We note with appreciation that UNMIK,
operating within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), is successfully continuing the
implementation of its strategic goal: the promotion of
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo. We particularly welcome and commend
UNMIK’s efforts to encourage the process of
reconciliation and to facilitate dialogue and regional
cooperation, as well as its focus on mediation between
the communities and its support for minority
communities.
In that context, we are of the view that efforts to
encourage inter-community dialogue and confidencebuilding among the parties are of particular importance

18

in the area of returns. As stated by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, the number of returns remains
very low. While underlining the importance of returns,
we would like to encourage the increased number of
go-and-see visits, which would give the opportunity to
displaced persons to visit their properties and to make
first-hand assessments of conditions in the receiving
community.
Furthermore, during the reporting period,
UNMIK’s role in assisting the activities of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, in close
coordination with the Council of Europe and the
European Commission, has been significant. The aim
of those efforts is to ensure the participation of the key
stakeholders in the process of reconstructing cultural
and religious heritage sites in Kosovo. Bosnia and
Herzegovina acknowledges those efforts, aimed at the
reconstruction and protection of cultural heritage. We
have also taken note that, at the municipal and mayoral
elections held during the reporting period, voting took
place without major incidents, as stated by the
Secretary-General in his report.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
believes
that
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo is of great
importance. In that context, we note that the positive
relationship between UNMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), operating
within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations, continued to be strengthened during the
reporting period, as stated by the Secretary-General in
his report. We also support the existing practice of
cooperation and coordination among UNMIK, EULEX,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and NATO, the latter present through the troops
of the Kosovo Force, and we hope that that practice
will continue.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina would
like to reiterate that stability and security in Kosovo
are significant to achieving lasting peace and
prosperity in our region. The international community
should continue to play an important role in supporting
the aspirations of the countries of the region to
integration into European and Euro-Atlantic structures.
At the same time, we believe that the countries of the
region should continue to cooperate with the
international community in order to reach those goals.
Finally, fostering good relations and cooperation with
the neighbouring countries is of the utmost importance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

10-21617

S/PV.6264

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
would like to welcome Mr. Boris Tadić, President of
the Republic of Serbia, and to thank him for his words.
I would also like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing and Mr. Hyseni for his
statement.
Mexico has closely followed the process of
reconfiguring the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to circumstances on the ground, and we welcome the
fact that coordination and information exchange with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) have been strengthened in the context of
neutrality, as provided for by resolution 1244 (1999).
We are also pleased that relations between UNMIK and
the parties have improved in recent months, with
positive repercussions for cooperation and the
resolution of matters of mutual interest.
In accordance with international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law, the parties are
obliged to create conditions conducive to the safe,
voluntary and non-discriminatory return of the
displaced and to the adoption of measures to facilitate
that return. My delegation is concerned about the lack
of conditions favourable to the return of the displaced
and refugees to their homes. Although the security
situation in Kosovo has remained stable, factors such
as discrimination, inter-ethnic tensions and the lack of
development opportunities are among the greatest
impediments to ensuring a sustainable return in the
region.
Despite the slight increase in the number of
people voluntarily deciding to return to their
communities of origin, it is clear that much remains to
be done in that area. In that regard, we encourage
UNMIK, together with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to continue
to support the local authorities in promoting
community development programmes aimed at housing
reconstruction, job creation, access to services and
security, and at defining strategies to foster dialogue
and reconciliation among the various communities.
Further, we encourage the parties to establish, under
UNMIK coordination, a mechanism to protect cultural
heritage, and to adopt the measures necessary to stop
the attacks on historical sites important to preserving
the cultural heritage of the peoples of the region.

10-21617

Strengthening the rule of law continues to require
priority attention. We encourage UNMIK and EULEX
to spare no effort in building up the capacities of local
authorities to provide access to justice, fight impunity
and promote respect for human rights. We see the
campaign to promote the Anti-Discrimination Law in
Kosovo as very timely, and we welcome the decision to
strengthen UNMIK’s work in the area of human rights
with the establishment of the Human Rights Advisory
Panel.
Regarding the issue of Kosovo’s unilateral
declaration of independence and whether it is in
accordance with international law, Mexico wishes to
reiterate its position that the matter has been referred
for consideration to the International Court of Justice,
the highest judicial organ for resolving disputes arising
from the interpretation of international law, and that,
until the Court decides, the principle of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity incumbent of all
Member States under the United Nations Charter
remains fully in force in this case.
Historically, Mexico has resolutely and
consistently supported the principles of justice and
international law enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and the work of the International Court of
Justice. In that regard, we have been informed by the
Court that, on 11 December 2009, that organ concluded
the public hearings on the General Assembly’s request
for an advisory opinion on the legality of the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo (see resolution
63/3) and that it was ready to begin its deliberations.
We eagerly await and will respect the Court’s decision.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to start by
welcoming His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President
of the Republic of Serbia, and to thank him for his
statement. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his briefing on the situation
in Kosovo. I also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
statement.
We welcome UNMIK’s continued efforts in the
promotion of security and stability in Kosovo and the
region. We commend the Mission for its work in
supporting
minority
communities,
encouraging
reconciliation and facilitating dialogue and regional
cooperation. We call upon UNMIK to focus more on
promoting security and stability in Kosovo and in the

19

S/PV.6264

Balkans by facilitating practical cooperation among
communities, as well as between the authorities in
Pristina and Belgrade.
My delegation is encouraged that the overall
security situation in Kosovo during the reporting
period remained relatively calm. Nevertheless, it is
potentially fragile, as evidenced by inter-ethnic
incidents of violence in the suburbs of northern
Mitrovica, including attacks on convoys of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the vandalizing of UNMIK vehicles. We
call on all parties to exercise restraint, mutual respect
and tolerance in order to harmoniously live together in
the interest of peace.
We commend the cooperation between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo regarding exchange of information and
coordinating on issues of mutual concern, and we call
for strengthening cooperation in all sectors. We are
pleased to note that EULEX is continuing to operate
under the overall authority of the United Nations and
within the status-neutral framework of resolution 1244
(1999). We also welcome the complementary role
played by Kosovo Force troops in maintaining an
overall safe environment around the cultural heritage
sites.
We salute the efforts of UNMIK, in coordination
with EULEX and KFOR, to continue to encourage both
sides to find a sustainable and peaceful solution. We
also commend UNMIK’s coordination and cooperation
with the relevant international actors and its efforts in
engaging with community leaders to address critical
social services needs, especially in the camps for
internally displaced persons.
Given the importance of regional cooperation for
development and stability, it is crucial that UNMIK
continues to facilitate Kosovo’s engagement in
international and regional forums, as entailed in
resolution 1244 (1999). Once again, we commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier and UNMIK staff for their dedicated service.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for initiating this important meeting. I want to lend my
voice to those who have expressed a very warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President
of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo. I thank them for sharing their perspectives

20

with us. I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
statement in the context of the Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in Kosovo (S/2010/5).
Nigeria welcomes the report and appreciates the
progress made in Kosovo during the reporting period.
In particular, we note that the security situation in the
territory remains calm and, although there are still
pockets of attack, incidents against minorities have
decreased. We also note the efforts to adhere to
democratic standards during the mayoral and municipal
elections in Kosovo.
We appreciate the relationship between the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo authorities and the
growing engagement between UNMIK and Belgrade.
We also appreciate the positive relationship between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), operating within the statusneutral framework of the United Nations. UNMIK’s
consistent and assiduous efforts to foster cordial
relations with all the major players within the region is
worthy of encouragement and support.
In spite of those achievements, we share the
Secretary-General’s concern about the lack of progress
in implementing practical arrangements in the difficult
areas of justice, peace, customs and cultural heritage.
We urge intensified engagements on those issues by all
parties, in particular on discussions that would lead to
a mechanism for an enduring cultural agreement. The
Secretary-General’s proposal to appoint a facilitator to
move that agenda forward merits further exploration.
We welcome the positive development on the
return of Kosovo Albanians to the northern part of
Mitrovica and the constructive engagement between
the UNMIK administration and the Mitrovica
municipality to address pending issues. We urge
UNMIK to continue its outreach activities in that
regard.
Although Kosovo remains calm, the situation is
still fragile. There are still reports of isolated attacks
against minorities. The measures in place to address
that concern should be sustained and strengthened. We
implore Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians to
eschew violence in the northern communities, just as
we condemn violence against UNMIK and EULEX
personnel and resources.

10-21617

S/PV.6264

We want to commend UNMIK for the priorities it
has identified and pursued. We appreciate the efforts of
the Special Representative and his team to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and in the entire region. UNMIK’s unrelenting
engagements with the parties should be directed at
reaching agreement in the rather difficult areas of
justice, peace and cultural heritage.
Nigeria believes that dialogue should be
optimally utilized at all times. We support all of the
peace efforts aimed at reaching a comprehensive
settlement of the issues in the region and call on all
parties to forge a united front through flexibility and
compromise to resolve the contending issues.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming President Tadić of Serbia and
Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo to the Council
today and thanking them for their comments. I would
also like to welcome Special Representative Zannier
and thank him for his briefing and his service in
Kosovo.
It has been nearly two years since Kosovo
became an independent country. Kosovo has already
made tremendous progress in solidifying its
democracy, promoting reconciliation and playing a
constructive role in regional and international
economic cooperation. As others have noted, 65
countries have now recognized Kosovo as a sovereign
and independent State. We commend the people of
Kosovo for the commitment they have demonstrated
and the concrete actions they have taken to implement
the Ahtisaari Plan and to play a responsible role as a
regional neighbour and member of the international
community.
Special Representative Zannier and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) have made valuable contributions to
Kosovo’s progress, as have the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and NATO.
Today, I would like to make five points.
First, the United States congratulates Kosovo on
holding elections in 36 municipalities, including one
expanded Serb-majority municipality and three newly
created ones. We look forward to the elections
expected to occur in the remaining two new Serb
municipalities later this year. As the Secretary-General

10-21617

noted in his report, the November elections and the
December run-offs adhered to democratic standards
and were held in a peaceful atmosphere. The
Government of Kosovo undertook important outreach
efforts to ensure Kosovo Serb participation, which
contributed to the success of the elections.
Secondly, Kosovo continues to take significant
steps to strengthen regional relations. In October,
Kosovo and Macedonia completed demarcating their
shared border and established full diplomatic relations.
In January, the visit of Croatian President Mesić
highlighted the growing friendship and cooperation
among Kosovo and its neighbours. Further, the Kosovo
security force recently deployed units to Albania to
provide humanitarian assistance to flooded regions
there, and on 14 January Montenegro announced that it
too will establish formal diplomatic relations with
Kosovo.
Kosovo has demonstrated that it is ready and able
to play a constructive regional role. We reiterate the
Secretary-General’s call for flexibility in defining a
modus operandi that will facilitate Kosovo’s full
participation in regional and international mechanisms,
such as the Regional Cooperation Council and the
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
Kosovo’s contribution to those groups and its ability to
export goods to all CEFTA members under CEFTA
rules are important to regional stability and growth.
Thirdly, we would like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call to redouble efforts on returns and to
safely increase both their number and their pace. To
that end, we urge the reopening of the Kosovo Property
Agency offices in Serbia without further delay.
Belgrade’s acceptance of the offer of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
facilitate re-establishing that presence would promote
further progress on returns and help resolve related
property claims.
Fourthly, let me say a few words on the questions
of religious and cultural heritage. The United States
welcomes UNMIK’s efforts to facilitate the work of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission. We are
also pleased to note that the Kosovo Energy
Corporation and Serbian Orthodox Church officials in
Kosovo were able to reach agreement on reconnecting
Serbian monasteries and churches in Kosovo to the
Kosovo Energy Corporation’s electrical grid. But we
still need a mechanism to address significant remaining

21

S/PV.6264

concerns, such as vandalism and access to cultural
sites. For that reason, the United States has supported
the appointment of a European Union facilitator to
advance discussions on issues of religious and cultural
heritage.
Finally, I would like to address the issue of
northern Kosovo. Illegal parallel institutions, some of
which were established in 1999, continue to threaten
stability and the rule of law in Kosovo. We commend
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
for the progress it has made towards integrating the
Kosovo Police. We hope to see similar progress in
Kosovo’s courts, as envisaged in the SecretaryGeneral’s November 2008 report (S/2008/692). So far,
that has not been possible due to the Government of
Serbia’s continued opposition. We urge Serbia to look
at the example of reconciliation taking place in other
parts of Kosovo, to the clear benefit of Kosovo Serbs.
I would also like to say a few words about the
provision of the basic service of electricity, to which
the Special Representative referred to today. UNMIK
regulations established an electrical regulatory office in
Kosovo, which in turn gave the Kosovo Energy
Corporation the sole license to distribute and bill for
electricity throughout Kosovo. Attempts by the Electric
Power Industry of Serbia to take control of power
distribution in northern Kosovo undermine that
exclusive authority, harm ordinary citizens’ well-being,
and risk confrontation and division within Kosovo. We
urge those involved to act swiftly to resolve differences
and to respect the legal framework for providing
electricity in Kosovo, including the North.
Kosovo’s independence is irreversible. Kosovo
continues to make its way along the path towards
European and Euro-Atlantic integration. The United
States will continue to support Kosovo as it makes
continued progress and strengthens its democracy, and
we will continue to support the aspirations of all the
States of South-East Europe for integration into Europe
and the Euro-Atlantic community.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
participation at today’s Council meeting of Mr. Boris
Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia. We are
grateful for his assessments, which we share. We also
thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his introduction
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/5) on

22

the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which our delegation has carefully
analysed.
The position of the Russian Federation on
Kosovo remains consistent. We are convinced that
resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full force and is
binding upon all as the international legal basis for a
settlement in Kosovo. The Russian Federation fully
supports the work of UNMIK in discharging its
mandate and the provisions of the November 2008
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/692). That
document sets forth the hierarchy of the United
Nations Mission vis-à-vis other international presences
in the district. As a result, no one is entitled to prevent
UNMIK from doing its job, including with regard to
issues pertaining to ensuring the rights and security of
national minorities and achieving the democratic
standards for the province established by the
international community. It is on those same
foundations that the mutual relations between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) in Kosovo must be built, as both presences
must be status-neutral in nature.
The Security Council and UNMIK are
irreplaceable in ensuring international oversight of the
situation in the district, including in terms of security,
which continues to be very fragile. Further
destabilization of an already fragile situation in the
province is capable of exacerbating internal clashes in
the Kosovo Albanian community, as we saw recently
with the growth of party ambitions. We believe that
international presences must be vigilant in preventing
the development of a negative scenario.
We agree with the alarming assessment of
Serbian President Tadić with regard to the plans
contained in the so-called final decision for northern
Kosovo. We believe that, in today’s difficult
circumstances, we must firmly avert any attempt to
advance all ill-conceived concepts for Kosovo that
might provoke a rise in tension, blatantly contravene
resolution 1244 (1999) and lead directly to a
destabilization of the situation.
We call on UNMIK to carry out its
responsibilities with regard to Kosovo’s external
representation
in
regional
and
international
mechanisms and forums. There should be no changes
or more flexible approaches in that regard. The modus

10-21617

S/PV.6264

operandi has not changed; resolution 1244 (1999)
remains in effect.
We see no particular improvement in the dialogue
between UNMIK and Pristina, to which the report of
the Secretary-General refers. Protocol meetings
between Pristina leaders and the leadership of UNMIK
should deceive no one. Pristina continues to ignore the
United Nations Mission and to hinder its interaction
with Belgrade.
We are carefully following the situation in the
province in the fundamental area of inter-ethnic
relations, which continue to be at an impasse. It is clear
that progress in overcoming the deep divisions between
the Serbian and Albanian communities has been
insignificant. In that context, we would draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that the majority of
Serbs in the district were once again ignored in the
municipal elections conducted by Kosovo Albanian
authorities on 15 November and 13 December 2009.
The higher voter turnout in the southern areas of
Kosovo is proof less of their recognition of the Kosovo
Albanian authorities than of their despair under
increasing isolation. Moreover, we cannot but be
alarmed by reports of the many irregularities during the
voting, as recognized in the Secretary-General’s report
on UNMIK.
We must also refer to what we view as the paltry
effectiveness of the dialogue between Belgrade and the
international civilian presences on the six technical
points, which are important for ensuring acceptable
conditions for the viability of Serbs in the district.
The very important issue of the return of Serb
refugee is still at an impasse, as is the question of the
property of Serbian refugees in Kosovo. As we have
seen from experience, without that the return of
refugees will be impossible.
Unfortunately, there has been no progress in other
areas as well. The only discernable achievement in this
respect was the signing in September 2009 of a
protocol on police cooperation between Belgrade and
EULEX, which included a reference to resolution 1244
(1999). Incidentally, as we understand it, that was
beyond the scope of the six-point talks.
We remain concerned about the unsatisfactory
state of affairs in the important area as the protection
of Serbian religious and cultural heritage. The report of
the Secretary-General refers to many instances of

10-21617

vandalism against Serbian shrines. We expect UNMIK
to achieve real progress in ensuring reliable ways of
protecting Serbian cultural heritage in Kosovo. We
believe that credible preconditions for the planned
cessation of continuous patrols by the Kosovo Force at
Serbian religious sites, along with a transfer of
functions to the predominantly Albanian Kosovo
Police, have not yet been established.
Our position on the unilateral declaration of
independence on Kosovo is well known. Russia
reiterates its willingness to pursue political efforts to
ensure that the issue of Kosovo is addressed in a
legally correct and fair manner, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). To that end, we have
participated actively in the International Court of
Justice’s consideration of the declaration’s conformity
with international law.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia. I
thank him and Mr. Skender Hyseni for their statements.
I should likewise like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his comprehensive briefing. I shall now
proceed to make the following four comments.
First, my delegation welcomes the relative
improvement in the security situation in Kosovo. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2010/5),
there has been a decrease over the past year in the
number of incidents involving minorities. Another
positive development has been the return to duty by
Kosovo Serb police officers. However, the fragile
security situation in northern Kosovo remains a cause
for concern. We therefore urge all parties to protect
ethnic minorities, exercise restraint and avoid any
measures that might threaten stability and peaceful
coexistence there.
Secondly, with respect to the missions stationed
in Kosovo, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in maintaining security and stability,
facilitating dialogue and reconciliation and promoting
regional cooperation. We are also reassured by the
improved relations between UNMIK and the Kosovo
authorities. We therefore urge the Kosovo authorities to
continue coordinating and cooperating with the United
Nations Mission in a constructive and realistic way.

23

S/PV.6264

On the other hand, we commend the close
cooperation between the United Nations with both the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force within the status-neutral framework,
as stipulated in resolution 1244 (1999). We urge all
international partners to pursue coordination and
information exchange with UNMIK in areas of
common interest.
Thirdly, with respect to the elections, we praise
the quiet and organized atmosphere in which the
municipal elections took place. We are also pleased
that the current Government will not prosecute those
Kosovo Serbs who chose to participate in these
elections.
Fourthly, with respect to cooperation on
humanitarian, cultural and development issues, and
although we understand the differing viewpoints
between the parties regarding the status of Kosovo,
while awaiting the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice in this context we call on
all parties to set aside their differences and to
cooperate with each other on humanitarian and
development issues in order to improve the lives of all
Kosovars, regardless of their affiliations.
On the one hand, there is the urgent humanitarian
issue of refugees and displaced persons. The Kosovo
authorities should create conditions conducive to their
safe and voluntary return, since the number of
returnees has been minimal. From this perspective, it is
essential not to politicize the return of refugees, but to
address their security and development concerns. We
also call on local authorities to take measures to
improve the situation in internally displaced persons
camps, especially those located in areas contaminated
with lead, and to address health risks in cooperation
with the United Nations and the relevant humanitarian
organizations.
On the other hand, regarding the cultural heritage
issue, there is a genuine opportunity for both Belgrade
and Pristina to cooperate in developing a special
mechanism on cultural heritage that brings mutual
benefits to and builds trust between both parties. We
share the Secretary-General’s disappointment with the
failure thus far to establish such a mechanism, and we
urge both concerned parties to show openness and
constructive practicality in seeking a solution to this
issue.
Finally, we encourage Belgrade and Pristina to
resume direct and constructive dialogue in order to
avoid creating a climate of tension and confrontation.

24

We believe it crucial for all parties to reach a peaceful
solution to this issue, in view of its potential positive
impact on security and stability in the West Balkans.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We hope that the Government of
Serbia and the Kosovo authorities will find a solution
acceptable to both sides through dialogue and
negotiation.
The
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo should continue to
carry out its mandate prudently under resolution 1244
(1999), in line with the changes on the ground in
Kosovo.
We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will continue to play an active role
in seeking an appropriate solution to the issue of
Kosovo, including by enhancing communications with
the parties concerned, and in particular in helping push
forward the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo.
We welcome the efforts of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo as it continues to
undertake its tasks under the overall authority of the
United Nations and within the status-neutral
framework set out in resolution 1244 (1999), so as to
play its due role in maintaining peace and stability in
this region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
President Tadić has asked for the floor. I now
give him the floor.
President Tadić: Let me begin by repeating that
Serbia’s central strategic priority is a peaceful,
negotiated solution to the future status of Kosovo. In
that respect, Serbia is committed to becoming a
member of the European Union and to seeing the
whole region integrated into the European Union in the
future. Serbia is a constructive and reliable partner in
that respect. We have submitted our candidacy and
confirmed our European vision, and I want to thank all
the countries that acknowledged this important
development in this forum.
I also want to thank the 127 States that respect
the basic principles of the United Nations Charter and
Serbian sovereignty and territorial integrity by not
recognizing the unilateral declaration of independence
of Kosovo.

10-21617

S/PV.6264

It is deeply disappointing and incredibly shocking
that Mr. Hyseni has made the claim, even today, that
new talks on status and negotiating could “provoke a
new conflict”. That reflects a very strange
understanding of dialogue and negotiations. In my
view, it is a direct threat. It is truly outrageous and
shows the truly destabilizing consequences of the
unilateral declaration of independence.
We have all suffered because of the bad policies
and terrible visions of our leaders in the Balkans in the
1990s. We have all suffered together. We have had so
many human victims in the region, on all sides. I am
very sorry because of that. Everyone who uses such
argumentation is destabilizing the region once again.
Allow me to say a few things about the elections
that happened in Kosovo and about crystal-clear
figures. In the first round of these elections, 6,022
Serbs voted, according to a United Nations report, and
more than 100,000 Serbs live in Kosovo today. Thus, at
the very most, 6 per cent of Kosovo Serbs voted. There
were 23,000 international observers — four times as
many observers as Serb voters.
Regarding the electricity problem in the northern
part of Kosovo, Electric Power Industry of Serbia has
provided electricity for the ordinary people living there
only because Kosovo Energy Corporation cut off the
supply of power to northern Kosovo, and only after
that. By providing electricity for ordinary people, we
have averted a humanitarian catastrophe affecting up to
100,000 residents. What happened with respect to the
electricity supply in Kosovo is crystal clear. I hope that
it will be possible to find a practical solution and to
depoliticize this issue, and I totally agree that the
money should go to whoever supplies the electricity, as
noted by the representative of the United Kingdom
representative in this forum.
I would also like to respond to some of the other
comments made this afternoon. I want to acknowledge
the statement made by the representative of our
neighbour country Bosnia and Herzegovina. Being a
responsible member of the international community,
Serbia will continue to fully support the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
will strongly oppose any attempt to partition that or
any other State Member of the United Nations. We will
also keep encouraging all three constituent peoples to agree
on necessary reforms with the aim of accelerating Bosnia’s
accession to the European Union, which is a strategic
priority for all.

10-21617

We have made it clear that we will support
whatever arrangement is acceptable to the parties,
stressing the need for pragmatism and compromise.
Completing the reconciliation process is an imperative,
not only in Bosnia but everywhere in the region. The
forthcoming resolution on Srebrenica, to be introduced
in Serbia’s National Assembly, is intended to
contribute to this process and to enhance regional
peace and stability. Regrettably, other important
stakeholders have failed to be constructive. We
strongly condemn the dangerous sabre-rattling and
war-mongering statement of the Croatian President,
Mr. Stjepan Mesić. There is no justification for
threatening the use of force against Bosnia or any other
Western Balkan country. Serbia categorically rejects
such provocations, and we expect every other
responsible stakeholder to do the same. We have had
enough of this.
At the same time, to be crystal-clear, Serbia
remains fundamentally committed to working with
Croatia and all other United Nations Member States on
resolving all outstanding bilateral and regional issues.
Serbia is going to support integration into the European
Union of all Western Balkan countries, honestly and
fully.
I am grateful for this opportunity to explain the
official position of the Serbian State.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Mr. Skender
Hyseni has asked to make a further statement, and I
call on him now.
Mr. Hyseni: For the sake of clarification, I wish
to state that Kosovo and Serbia negotiated final status
for Kosovo for two and a half years. At the end of
those negotiations — at the final round of talks, which
took place in Vienna — the Kosovo side proposed a
friendship and cooperation treaty between Kosovo and
Serbia, suggesting that joint commissions would be
established
as
instruments
to
observe
the
implementation of provisions on the protection of the
Serb minority in Kosovo. Kosovo is committed to
peace and dialogue with all its neighbours, and that is
what Kosovo has been engaged in.
I cannot leave this Chamber without clearly
underscoring that Kosovo is the last country which
would want disorder or destabilization. Kosovo has
suffered for too long — for more than a century —
under various foreign regimes. One should not
interpret wishfully any statement coming out of
Kosovo. We are not being obstructive or interfering in
Serbia or in any system in Serbia, as the Serbian

25

S/PV.6264

Government has been doing by interfering very
disruptively in many systems of Kosovo. Kosovo
possesses and is a single legal entity: a single judiciary
and juridical entity. Nominating prosecutors and judges
for the courts in Kosovo constitutes a severe attack on
the systems of another country — a neighbouring
country. That sort of continued interference may
destabilize the region; it may destabilize Kosovo. We
all want to avoid that.
I can assure the Council that Kosovo is the last
country on Earth to destabilize the region. Quite the
opposite: we all know how significantly — how
critically — Kosovo’s independence contributed to
regional peace and safety.
Dialogue on Kosovo’s independence and
negotiations
on
Kosovo’s
independence
are
unacceptable. It is something we cannot and will not
subscribe to. Let me re-emphasize Kosovo’s willingness
and readiness, as soon as tomorrow, to sit with the
authorities in Belgrade and discuss any issue whatsoever
of common interest — and trust me: there are many
issues of that kind. We would like to see Belgrade
joining in the efforts of other countries in the Western
Balkans to build a better future for all: a European
future; a North Atlantic future.
I wish to comment very briefly on a few claims
that were made here today. With respect to the
participation of Kosovo in regional structures and
initiatives, yes, Kosovo is willing to take part in all
such initiatives, as we are certain that that would
benefit not only Kosovo but also the region. But Serbia
is blocking our participation, as it is blocking our
exports. We buy a lot from Serbia; we import a lot. But
we cannot export to Serbia, because Serbia has been
blocking exports from Kosovo.
The electricity issue has become almost
ridiculous. I would like to know: in what country
where there is profound law and order are citizens
allowed not to pay their electricity bills? We have
tolerated that in Kosovo for more than 10 years, and
we are willing to look into the needs of our
communities — into the needs of members of the Serb
community in the first place — as we have done for
more than 10 years. For more than 10 years, the vast
majority of the members of the Serb community have
not paid their electricity bills. We are a country which
is scoring economic growth and which is making
progress. But we are not yet rich enough to allow any

26

of our citizens not to pay for what they purchase. Still,
we are willing to look into the possibility of various
subventions, as we have done in the past, to meet the
needs of our citizens.
I just need also to clarify, for the sake of better
understanding, the issue of a so-called minister for
Kosovo visiting Kosovo. As all members may know,
there is a principled agreement between the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
international presence in Kosovo, and the authorities in
Belgrade to announce such visits. The order is thus: the
visits are announced to the international presence in
Kosovo, and the latter comes to us seeking
agreement — which of course we give. And we
facilitate those visits. We provide an escort; we provide
transportation: whatever we are required to do. The
visit to which President Tadić referred was carried out
on a very specific day: on the day of the solemn
inauguration of the new municipal assembly in
Shtërpce. That should not have happened. It was a
clear provocation: a clear challenge to the security
situation in that Serb-majority municipality. And we
consider that and other recent actions on the part of the
Republic of Serbia into Kosovo to be clear
provocations and a clear challenge to security and
stability in Kosovo.
What we stand for is in fact a profound
understanding with the Republic of Serbia, and we are
ready to seek ways that are acceptable to all sides to
work together. We should help one another as we move
ahead with European and NATO integration. But we
cannot and will not discuss Kosovo’s status: Kosovo’s
independence. It is a country which has been
recognized by 65 nations around the world. And trust
me, many more recognitions are coming in the weeks
and months ahead. So, the sooner the authorities in
Belgrade realize this reality — and accept it as a
reality — the better. We are not inviting Belgrade to
recognize Kosovo formally, at least not in any near
future. But non-recognition should not prevent
Belgrade from working with us on the great many
issues of profound mutual interest for regional peace
and safety.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

10-21617
