RESOLUTION ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE
FOR EXTRA-BUDGETARY FUNDS
.
693 (VII). Appointment of a Negotiating
Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds
The General Assembly,
C onsidering the necessity for establishing procedures

for obtaining funds to finance special programmes _not
provided for in the regular budget of the Umted
Nations,
N oting the report 1 of the Negotiating Committee
for Extra-Budgetary Funds appointed at the sixth
session of the General Assembly,
N oting that the Executive Board of the United N_ations International Children's Emergency Fund, at 1ts
session in October 1952, expressed the opinion: 2
(a) That responsibility for raising funds for that
organization, which in the past bas been undertaken
by the Executive Director of the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund, should in future
be shared by governments and the Executive Director;
( b) That governmental responsibility in this field
might best be undertaken through the good offices of
a negotiating committee for extra-budgetary funds
appointed by the General Assembly,
Concluding that a Negotiating Committee for ExtraBudgetary Funds should again be established to assist
in obtaining funds for the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance, the programme of the United
Nations • Relief and Works Agcncy for Palestine
Refugecs in the N ear East, the programme of the
United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency, the
programme of the United Nations International Childrcn's Emergcncy Fund and such other special programmes not provided for in the regular budget of the
United Nations as may be designated by the General
Assembly,
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds composed of not more than ten members
for the purpose of consulting as soon as possible with
Member and non-membcr States as to the amounts
which govemments may be willing to contribute on a
voluntary basis towards the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance, the programme of the United

Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the programme of the United
Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency, the programme of the United Nations International Children's
Emergency Fund and such other programmes as may
be approved by the General Assembly for which fuhds
are not available through the regular budget of the
United Nations, and for which the Negotiating Committee is specifically requested by the General Assembly
to obtain pledges of voluntary contributions from governments;
2. Autliorizes the N egotiating Committee to adopt
the procedures best suited to the accomplishment of
its task, bearing in mind:
(a) The necessity of maintaining the identity and
integrity of each programme ;
( b) The necessity of obtaining pledges and payments of contributions to each programme as soon as
possible;
( c) The need for securing the widest possible and
most equitable participation in the programmes ;
( d) The desirability ~f ensuring that any contribution in kind is of a nature which meets the rcquirements of the contemplated programmes;
( e) The degree of assistance which can continue
to be rendered by specialized agencies, non-member
States and other contributors;
3. D,cides that, as soon as the N egotiating Committec has ascertained the extcnt to which States arc
willing to makc contributions, the Secretary-General
shall, if the Committeeo so requests, arrange an appropriate meeting or meetings of Membcr and nonmember States at which the pledges of Membcrs and
non-members may be made known;
4. Requests the N egotiating Committee to report
to the General Assembly at its eighth session, and requests the Secretary-General to place the report on
the provisional agenda of that session.
389th plena.ry meeting,
25 October 1952.
ln accordanct with the terms of the abovt resolution, the
President of the General Assembly, al the 393rd. plmary meeting on 11 November 1952, announced that he had appointed
a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds composed. of the following M tmber States:

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 43, documents A/2210, Corr.1
and Add.1.
2 See Official Records of the Economie and Social Coffflcil,
Fifteenth Session, Supplemtnt No. 2, para. 57 et stq.

AusTRALIA, CANADA, CÔLOMBIA, FRANCE, HArrr, I..DANON,
THE UNITED Kn,GDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN lRELAND AND THE UNITED STATES OF AKDICA.

P AJCISTAN,

67
