S/PV.7145

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7145th meeting

Thursday, 20 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Maes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Sarki
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-seventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2014/123)

14-27009 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1427009*

S/PV.7145

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

at Liberia’s main university were interrupted for three
months due to student protests and violence. Eleven
anti-government protestors were charged with sedition
in October, bringing criticism that the Government
was using the law in an instrumental manner to
dampen opposition and dissent. Tensions between large
concessions and communities continued.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-seventh progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2014/123)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Karin Landgren, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Staffan
Tillander, Chair of the Liberian country configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and representative of
Sweden, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/123, which contains the twentyseventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to update and complement the report before the Council
on the situation in Liberia (S/2014/123).
The political and security environment remains
relatively stable. Progress continues in a number of
areas, but as Liberia enters its second post-conflict
decade, it also continues to face great challenges
to institutionalizing reforms in critical sectors and
building capacity for effective governance. These are
complex and daunting processes, as even before the
war Liberia had few well-functioning meritocratic
institutions and effective accountability mechanisms.
Seizing this window to get the fundamentals right will
be critical to consolidating Liberia’s hard-won peace
and to charting the country’s inclusive development.
Voices across a wide spectrum continued to express
dissatisfaction with national authorities and policies.
Motorcycle taxi unions, business owners and civil
society have held demonstrations; health workers have
gone on strike twice since December; and all operations
2/7

20/03/2014

Legislative elections for half of the Senate’s
30 seats are scheduled for October. Approaching the
end of the voter roll update, the National Elections
Commission has registered some 60,000 people, far
short of its initial goal of 400,000 — a goal later cut
by half. About one-third of registrants are women.
This month, the Senate approved an amendment to
the election law that encourages parties to include at
least 30 per cent women in their governing structures
and candidate lists. Although this falls short of an
obligation and still requires the concurrence of the
House of Representatives, the measure represents a
step forward in the public debate over women’s political
representation.
Turning now to Liberia’s reform processes, since
January the Constitution Review Committee has had
more structured and sustained engagement with the
legislature. The United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) continues to advocate for broader agreement
among major stakeholders, including the executive,
on the scope and timeline of constitutional reform.
The Committee’s civic education activities faced
severe delays, causing their public consultations to
be conducted largely in parallel with civic education.
A national conference to validate constitutional
amendment proposals ahead of their submission to
the President is planned for April. Should this also
be delayed, the mid-2014 target for submitting these
proposals may be difficult to meet. On the other hand,
pushing the pace in order to meet these timelines could
risk compromising the quality of public consultations
and miss the opportunity to incorporate the public’s
views.
The Government also took further steps towards
implementing its decentralization policy. Efforts
towards deconcentrating 12 ministries and agencies
continued, with greatest progress in critical service
areas, such as health and education, where both
ministries have established county boards and devolved
some monetary resources and decision-making. The
Governance Commission is attentive to UNMIL and
donor partner concerns about weak coordination in the

14-27009

20/03/2014

The situation in Liberia

overall deconcentration process. A local Government
act, calling for the election of local officials and other
critical measures for effective decentralization, has
been drafted and is now with the President, although
the current version would require constitutional
amendment for its implementation.
These reforms are fundamental for the country’s
future, more inclusive, character, which also links
them to national reconciliation. With the National
Reconciliation Road Map giving structure to the
process, and with the Peacebuilding Fund having
allocated $15 million to reconciliation initiatives, some
progress has been made. The Palava Hut initiative
was launched in October, but discussions around
methodology continue, and actual implementation has
not yet begun. A national history project and a review
of national symbols have both been launched, although
their implementation has been slow. The Government’s
contribution to the implementation of the Road Map has
been limited, with most successes being in those areas
receiving funds from the international community.
Let me turn now to two broad areas central to
continued stability: issues of accountability and
transparency, and issues of justice and security.
There have been some recent efforts to
secure greater public accountability. The Liberia
Anti-Corruption Commission has begun investigating
bribery allegations made against a former legislator
and an official of the National Oil Company of Liberia.
Also, last month six former senior officials of the
Forestry Development Authority were indicted on
charges of economic sabotage and criminal conspiracy
related to the fraudulent issuance of timber private use
permits for commercial logging on 2.5 million hectares
of land. The Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy
also completed a draft mine and mineral act, calling
for benefits-sharing with communities. The Liberia
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative has done
important work in conducting post-contract award
process audits and strengthening the sanctions regime
for non-compliant companies and the Government.
These developments are positive, and I cannot overstate
the importance of greater accountability, transparency
and consultation with communities in Liberia’s valuable
natural-resource sector.
Since last month, the Armed Forces of Liberia have
been led by a Liberian for the first time since the war.
There was palpable jubilation in the streets and on the
airwaves at the appointment of Brigadier General Daniel

S/PV.7145

D. Ziankhan. As the Council is well aware, progress in
Liberia’s security sector is critical to UNMIL’s steady
military drawdown. The Liberia National Police (LNP),
bearing the greatest burden of the security transition,
has been hard pressed to cope. Complicated budgetary
procedures and its own weak capacity for financial
management have limited the ability of the police to
administer even small allocations. I want to highlight
some important commitments the Government made at
the start of this year that are expected to give a boost to
the security sector.
The first is the personal engagement of the Minister
of Finance. In February, the Minister took steps to
ease the complicated requirements for disbursement
of transition-related funds to the police, immigration
service and other agencies. This will alleviate the
paralysis at the police training academy, which has over
1,000 recruits waiting to start training. These funds will
also help to resource urgent operational requirements
related to the security transition. UNMIL applauds
the Minister’s continued involvement, which has also
addressed critical needs at the Bureau of Immigration
and Naturalization.
The second is the President’s own commitment to
activating more training resources and the better use
of facilities. With partners, the United Nations has
supported the fast-tracking of management training for
officers of the LNP and the Bureau of Immigration and
Naturalization at the Ghana Institute of Management
and Public Administration. Together with the Bureau
of Immigration and Naturalization, UNMIL is
also supporting the conversion of former UNMIL
facilities in Foya, Lofa county, into a new immigration
training centre. However, more needs to be done to
operationalize the LNP regional training centre in
Harper, and to make better use of training facilities at
the justice and security hub in Gbarnga. The President
has also committed to achieving a better balance in the
2014-2015 national budget between infrastructure and
national security, and to streamlining procedures for
financing recurrent costs.
There has been progress in a number of areas
within the security sector following a series of reviews
conducted last year. Most notable has been the baseline
assessment of the Liberia National Police, which has
informed a new LNP strategic plan and a joint LNPUnited Nations development framework that outlines
specific and targeted interventions to fill gaps, while
including a robust monitoring and evaluation system.

14-270093/7

S/PV.7145

The situation in Liberia

20/03/2014

The framework is expected to be signed by the LNP and
UNMIL next week. A similar joint baseline assessment
of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization will be
completed this year. Following a security sector reform
retreat in September, marked by frank discussion, the
National Security Council is overseeing preparation of
a new national security strategy. UNMIL will continue
to offer support through this process.

a minute fraction of pending cases, with UNMIL
monitoring showing that, on average, only 8 per cent
of cases are fully tried. The first justice and security
hub is operational and has brought services to the
counties it covers. Based on lessons learned, services
are now slowly being rolled out in the second and third
hubs. Once hubs are established, it is the Government’s
obligation to sustain their functioning.

In June, UNMIL will complete the second phase
of its three-phase military drawdown endorsed by
the Council. As I speak, United Nations troops are
withdrawing from counties along the Sierra Leone
border to cover other areas, and another battalion is
being repatriated. At the conclusion of these movements,
half of Liberia’s counties will be left without a fixed
United Nations military presence, with the remaining
battalions configured to provide coverage in Monrovia
and along the Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea borders, which
are also the country’s most populated areas.

Measures have also been taken to implement the
recommendations of last year’s management and
accountability review of the police, judiciary and
prosecution, which were validated in November.
Among these is the drafting of a police act, which is
expected to address clear and merit-based recruitment
and promotion procedures within the police and issues
of police oversight. However, the disbarring of the
Minister of Justice for six months by the Supreme Court
in January has created additional challenges to gaining
momentum in justice and security sector reforms.

The joint transition planning process is an example
of exceptional collaboration between UNMIL and the
Government. The implementation of the first phase
highlighted deep institutional weaknesses and stringent
resource constraints. National institutions have begun
taking on security functions in areas no longer covered
by UNMIL, such as static guard duties at important
locations, including at the Monrovia Freeport and the
Central Bank. To achieve this, however, they have
spread existing capacity more thinly, and at times
diverted resources away from priority areas.

Meanwhile, there are encouraging parallel
developments that can also help to reduce conflict. Last
week I visited one of Liberia’s six land coordination
centres, in Harper, Maryland county, and met with two
claimants who had been locked in decades of dispute
over their lands. The centre is working to resolve this
and to demarcate the properties. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund-supported alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms, such as the land coordination
centres, using trained staff, will remain important
and should receive significant international support
for the years to come. As the local head of the land
coordination centre explained to me, its mediation role
is free, also making it more attractive to users than the
justice system.

When planning began for this security transition,
the impending withdrawal of United Nations forces from
any county prompted public and Government anxiety.
The public discourse has shifted now to acknowledging
that UNMIL will not be staying forever. The coming
phases will need careful management. The detailed joint
planning to date, Government and UNMIL dialogue
with communities, and the calibrated and gradual
phasing of the drawdown have been instrumental in
allaying concerns, while making clear the goals to be
reached by Liberia’s security institutions.
An effective security sector needs to work with
a functioning criminal justice system that inspires
public trust, which remains extremely low in Liberia.
Some 75 per cent of the prison population is in pre-trial
detention, creating insecurity in overcrowded prisons,
while failure effectively to prosecute even serious
crimes promotes a culture of impunity. Many courts
in Liberia still fail to sit, and those that do address
4/7

Since I last addressed this body (see S/PV.7029),
there has been steady progress towards durable
solutions for those who sought refuge in Liberia
in connection with the Ivorian post-election crisis.
Voluntary repatriations surpassed targets in 2013,
and in January and February of this year over 5,300
refugees returned to Côte d’Ivoire, with the assistance
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). However, in the early morning
hours of 17 February, the Government of Liberia,
a party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees, forcibly returned a group of Ivorians,
including 14 refugees, to Côte D’Ivoire, in breach of
international law, in what appears to have been a closely
coordinated operation with the Ivorian Government. Six

14-27009

The situation in Liberia

20/03/2014

of the refugees have since been returned to Liberia. The
Government has not been forthcoming with UNMIL as
to the nature of the operation.
Over 46,000 Ivorian refugees remain in Liberia, and
I am concerned that recent events, including an attack
in Côte d’Ivoire near the border on 23 February, may
have a chilling effect on returns. I am encouraged that
the two Governments, with UNHCR, plan to resume
the work of the Tripartite Commission on Humanitarian
and Refugee Issues at the ministerial-level meeting this
month. Despite a long period of calm, the situation
remains fragile along the Liberia/Côte d’Ivoire border.
Aside from their apparent security cooperation,
engagement between the two Governments on concrete
measures to stabilize the border has continued to be
overshadowed by other priorities, or hampered by
resource constraints.
With the closure of our sister mission in Sierra
Leone this month, we reflect on the stability that has
returned to West Africa and to Liberia’s neighbours.
As we look ahead, we are conscious of regional and
national watershed events to come: presidential
elections in 2015 in Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire, and in
2017 in Liberia. Much is at stake here, and stability and
confidence will need to be maintained. We are equally
conscious of the enormous pressures on United Nations
peacekeeping globally, with resources needed in
several countries simply to avert immediate bloodshed.
UNMIL is currently engaged in a comparative analysis
with the United Nations country team, on which we
expect to report at our next meeting. But the Council
should be under no illusion that the bulk of UNMIL
work can be assumed by anyone other than the
Government of Liberia itself. Continuing to manage
an appropriate exit strategy from Liberia, in whose
stability the international community has invested so
much, will remain a delicate challenge for UNMIL and
for the Council.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Tillander.
Mr. Tillander: Let me first express my appreciation
to the presidency of the Security Council for its
invitation to me to give the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) perspectives on key peacebuilding challenges
facing Liberia.

S/PV.7145

I will focus my remarks today, on justice and
security, national reconciliation, and land tenure and
natural resources, and I will also discuss mobilization
of support and resources and the need to accelerate
capacity-building in view of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) transition.
The PBC country configuration for Liberia — with
its approximately 40 Member States — offers support
based on the statement of mutual commitments, and
in close collaboration with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNMIL. As we are now
in the process of finalizing the third review of the
statement, we can conclude that while some progress has
been made on building capacity in justice and security,
and while some aspects of national reconciliation
have moved forward, many commitments still remain
unfulfilled.
If Liberia is to implement its own plans and stated
policy goals, there is a need for sustained Government
attention and focus on key peacebuilding challenges.
While the international community can certainly play
an important supportive role, there is no substitute for
Liberian ownership, political will and leadership. The
good offices of the United Nations and partners can
support continued Liberian attention to peacebuilding
priorities through dialogue and the marshaling of
support and resources.
One area of particular concern is justice and the rule
of law. Progress here has been very slow, as is evident
not only in police training, but also in the slow pace
of reform of the judiciary, corrections and other areas.
As the UNMIL drawdown continues, it is necessary
for Liberian institutions to increase their capacity to
provide satisfactory standards of justice, security and
other related services across the country. What can then
be done to accelerate progress?
One example was offered during my most recent
visit as the Minister of Finance, in connection with the
discussion on the statement of mutual commitments,
initiated a series of meetings with all involved, aimed
at ensuring that police training will get the decisions,
commitments and budget necessary to move ahead.
This high-level coordinated engagement needs to
continue, and implementation must follow. Sustained
attention is necessary. If that happens, police training
may improve. There is no reason why that should not
be possible, but the experience of the past 18 months

14-270095/7

S/PV.7145

The situation in Liberia

has not been encouraging in this regard. Hopefully, we
should now see a change.
The sustainability of progress is a concern, as is the
need to ensure a balanced strengthening of the entire
rule-of-law chain. As I observed during my recent visit
to Liberia, relations between the State and citizens are
fragile and the sense of mutual trust is weak. To improve
public trust, political and judicial services must focus on
quality as well as quantity, and ensure stronger public
oversight. A comprehensive and coordinated approach
is necessary, effectively linking short-term measures to
long-term development plans. UNMIL and the United
Nations country team should continue to work hand
in hand and increase their integration. For the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), no other
task is more important than this, and its contribution
must be effective, efficient and timely. That is especially
true in view of the UNMIL drawdown and the need to
coordinate a comprehensive and integrated approach to
rule of law.
The regional justice and security hubs aim to
facilitate decentralization and better access to justice
for all levels of society in every region of the country.
The first hub in Gbarnga is now providing services to
the three counties. Its impact can be felt to varying
degrees throughout the counties concerned and is
being assessed and evaluated to guide future efforts. In
particular, the quicker deployment of police officers to
emergency situations in the hub counties has prevented
conflicts from escalating. One major challenge has
been public outreach to inform people in all three hub
counties about the services that the hub is offering.
Unfortunately, as surveys have shown, the hub is known
mostly to people living in the Gbarnga region.
Based on lessons learned from the first hub,
including the public outreach component, services are
beginning to be delivered from the second and third
hubs, but this time the focus has been on services rather
than infrastructure for quicker roll-out. These are
positive developments, in the right direction, although
they are not fast enough, especially in view of the
UNMIL drawdown.
Several bilateral partners are already involved in
justice and security. Some, including the European
Union, are in the process of stepping up support and
considering substantial levels and with long-term
commitment. If this is to be possible and have the
intended effects, Government commitment must

6/7

20/03/2014

be strong and evident through sufficient budget
allocations, commitment to reform, and political will.
Bilateral donors would be more eager to engage when
linked to clear Government leadership and strategy.
On national reconciliation, and as stated by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Landgren,
the Government of Liberia launched the Palava
Hut programme, the national history project and
the national symbols project. Discussion on SouthSouth cooperation may lead to inspiring exchanges of
experiences from other countries, but in most of those
areas implementation remains very slow. The Liberian
Government must ensure that the institutions responsible
for the different areas have the determination, mandate
and resources necessary, and that implementation is
accelerated within the coordinated framework of the
road map for reconciliation. There is a need for action
to deal with the past, truth-telling, atonement and
reconciliation, to ensure women’s participation, and
to follow up the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. The Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) has provided considerable support already, and
it is encouraging that the Government has stated that
it will commit additional resources to implementation.
That will be absolutely essential. There is also a need
for a costed and coordinated implementation plan.
The PBC is prepared to support Government-led
efforts to marshal support and resources for national
reconciliation.
Land and natural resources are essential to
peacebuilding efforts. If managed correctly, they may
contribute to peace consolidation and sustainable
economic growth. During my last visit, I had the
opportunity to see some of the progress made in landdispute resolution, supported by the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme, the World Bank and
the United States. The land law and the establishment of
a land agency could become important tools for further
progress in dealing with conflicting claims to land by
communities, concessions and individuals. This is also
one of the issues raised in the letter I received from
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003), and one of several issues I raised
with the President and Ministers during my recent visit.
Government representatives acknowledged that more
is needed to deal with the challenges and to ensure a
sustainable management of land and natural resources.
The World Bank and UNDP are now stepping up efforts

14-27009

20/03/2014

The situation in Liberia

and support in this area, including with support from
the PBF and the encouragement of the PBC.
In line with its stated intention to fight corruption,
the Government of Liberia has recently taken actions
to take perpetrators to court. This is welcome, but
more needs to be done to ensure that corruption does
not go unpunished. Oversight mechanisms need to
be strengthened across all public institutions. The
judiciary needs to be strengthened, and the Liberia
Anti-Corruption Commission should be given the means
and tools to ensure accountability, in complementarity
with the criminal justice system.
Civil society plays an important role in channeling
the views of groups, individuals and local communities,
thereby supporting a free flow of information that will
help decision-makers in the private and public sectors
to better understand the nature of the challenges and
to promote mechanisms that will help resolve disputes,
or maybe even deal with them before they appear. It
is important to secure the political space from which
these organizations operate.
Nowhere is this more obvious than on gender issues,
where women can play a key role in promoting peace

S/PV.7145

and reconciliation with strong and sustained support
from Ministers concerned, UN Women and UNMIL.
With the PBF increasing its allocation for genderrelated activities in Liberia above the 15-per cent
target set by the Secretary-General, the Government
and partners have every reason to step up their efforts
to ensure that women can play the necessary role in
building sustainable peace in Liberia.
The Liberian agenda for transformation, together
with the Government’s commitment to elaborating
a new deal compact, should provide a continued and
strengthened focus on all five State-building and
peacebuilding goals, including those covered by the
statement of mutual commitments. The PBC should
contribute to this effort and ensure that its work
supports national ownership and is aligned with such
jointly elaborated mechanisms.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Tillander for his briefing.

French):

I

thank

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

14-270097/7
