United Nations

A/RES/65/210

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 March 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 68 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2010
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/65/456/Add.2 (Part II))]

65/210. Missing persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes, principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Guided also by the principles and norms of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 1 and the Additional Protocols
thereto, of 1977, 2 as well as international standards of human rights, in particular the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 4 the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,4 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993, 7
Taking duly into account the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006,
Recalling all previous relevant resolutions on missing persons adopted by the
General Assembly, as well as the resolutions and decisions adopted by the
Commission on Human Rights and the Human Rights Council,
Noting with deep concern that armed conflicts are continuing in various parts
of the world, often resulting in serious violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).
4
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
2

10-52514

*1052514*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/210

Noting that the issue of persons reported missing in connection with
international or non-international armed conflicts, in particular those who are victims
of serious violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights
law, continues to have a negative impact on efforts to put an end to those conflicts and
inflicts grievous suffering on the families of missing persons, and stressing in this
regard the need to address the issue, inter alia, from a humanitarian and rule of law
perspective,
Considering that the problem of missing persons may raise questions of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, as appropriate,
Stressing the importance of ending impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law with respect to missing persons,
Cognizant that States that are parties to an armed conflict have a responsibility
for countering the phenomenon of missing persons, taking all appropriate measures
to prevent persons from going missing and determining the fate of missing persons
and for recognizing their accountability as regards implementing the relevant
mechanisms, policies and laws,
Bearing in mind the effective search for and identification of missing persons
using forensic sciences, and recognizing that great technological progress has been
made in this field, including DNA forensic analysis, which can significantly assist
efforts to identify missing persons and to investigate violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
Recalling the Agenda for Humanitarian Action, in particular its general
objective 1, to “respect and restore the dignity of persons missing as a result of
armed conflicts or other situations of armed violence and of their families”, adopted
at the Twenty-eighth International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent,
held in Geneva from 2 to 6 December 2003, and resolution 3 entitled “Reaffirmation
and implementation of international humanitarian law: preserving human life and
dignity in armed conflict”, adopted at the Thirtieth International Conference of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 November 2007,
Noting the panel discussion on the question of missing persons held at the
ninth session of the Human Rights Council, 8
Taking note of the progress report of the Human Rights Council Advisory
Committee on best practices on the issue of missing persons, 9 and noting the request
of the Human Rights Council to the Advisory Committee to finalize the study on
best practices and to submit it to the Council at its sixteenth session, 10
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General prepared
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/183 of 18 December 2008, 11
Noting with appreciation the ongoing international and regional efforts to
address the question of missing persons and the initiatives undertaken by
international and regional organizations in this field,

_______________
8

See A/HRC/10/10.
A/HRC/14/42.
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum
(A/65/53 and Corr. 1), chap. III, sect. B, decision 14/118.
11
A/65/285.
9

2

A/RES/65/210

1.
Urges States to strictly observe and to respect and ensure respect for the
rules of international humanitarian law, as set out in the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 19491 and, where applicable, in the Additional Protocols thereto, of
1977;2
2.
Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
appropriate measures to prevent persons from going missing in connection with the
armed conflict, to account for persons reported missing as a result of such a
situation and to ensure the effective investigation and prosecution of offences linked
to missing persons, consistent with their international obligations;
Reaffirms the right of families to know the fate of their relatives reported
3.
missing in connection with armed conflicts;
4.
Also reaffirms that each party to an armed conflict, as soon as circumstances
permit and, at the latest, from the end of active hostilities, shall search for the persons
who have been reported missing by an adverse party;
Calls upon States that are parties to an armed conflict to take all
5.
necessary measures, in a timely manner, to determine the identity and fate of
persons reported missing in connection with the armed conflict and, to the greatest
extent possible, to provide their family members, through appropriate channels, with
all relevant information that they have on their fate;
Recognizes, in this regard, the need for the collection, protection and
6.
management of data on missing persons according to international and national
legal norms and standards, and urges States to cooperate with each other and with
other concerned actors working in this area, inter alia, by providing all relevant and
appropriate information related to missing persons;
Requests States to pay the utmost attention to cases of children reported
7.
missing in connection with armed conflicts and to take appropriate measures to
search for and identify those children and to reunite them with their families;
Invites States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate fully with
8.
the International Committee of the Red Cross in establishing the fate of missing
persons and to adopt a comprehensive approach to this issue, including all such
legal and practical measures and coordination mechanisms as may be necessary,
based on humanitarian considerations only;
Urges States that are parties to an armed conflict to cooperate, consistent
9.
with their international obligations, in order to effectively solve cases of missing
persons, including by providing mutual assistance in terms of information-sharing,
victim assistance, location and identification of missing persons and recovery,
identification and return of human remains;
10. Urges States, and encourages intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to take all necessary measures at the national, regional and
international levels to address the problem of persons reported missing in
connection with armed conflicts and to provide appropriate assistance as requested
by the concerned States, and welcomes in this regard the establishment and efforts
of commissions and working groups on missing persons;
11. Calls upon States, without prejudice to their efforts to determine the fate
of persons reported missing in connection with armed conflicts, to take appropriate
steps with regard to the legal situation of missing persons and the needs of their
family members, in such fields as social welfare, financial matters, family law and
property rights;
3

A/RES/65/210

12. Stresses the need to address the issue of missing persons as a part of
peace and peacebuilding processes, with reference to all justice and rule of law
mechanisms, including the judiciary, parliamentary commissions and truth-finding
mechanisms, on the basis of transparency, accountability and public involvement
and participation;
13. Invites relevant human rights mechanisms and procedures, as
appropriate, to address the problem of persons reported missing in connection with
armed conflicts in their forthcoming reports to the General Assembly;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Human Rights Council at
its relevant session and to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution, including
relevant recommendations;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Governments, the competent United Nations bodies, the specialized
agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and international humanitarian
organizations;
16.

Decides to consider the question at its sixty-seventh session.
71st plenary meeting
21 December 2010

4
