THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

st

MEETING:26JUNE
NEW

1982

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2381)

. , . . . r.o....................*.......

I

of the agenda , . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162) . , . . . . . . , , , , . , , . . *. . . *. . . . . . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , *.

1

Adoption

S/PV.238 I and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2381st MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 26 June 1982, at 2.45 a.m.
Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

Prc~.sidrnt:

de NANTEUIL

Pwsc~nt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet’Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional
1. Adoption

agenda (SIAgendaf2381)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162)

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)
I I The PRESIDENT
(intespsetrrtion from French):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [237&h, 2375th mu’ 2377th
me~rings], I invite the representatives of Lebanon and
Israel to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table;
I invite the representative of Egypt to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

3. At the request of members of the Council, I would
point out that the following corrections should be
made in the text. Operative paragraph 1 should read
as follows:
“Dernonds that all the parties observe an immediate cessation of hostilities throughout Lebanon;“.
Operative

paragraph 5 should read:

“Sup/~)rf.s the Government of Lebanon in its will
to regain exclusive control of its capital and to that
end to install its armed forces which shall take up
positions within Beirut and interpose themselves
on its periphery:“.
Operative

paragraph 8 should read:

“Rqwsts
the Secretary-General
to report to
the Security Council on an urgent and sustained
basis not later than 1 July 1982 on the status of
implementation
of the present resolution and of
resolutions 508 (1982), 509 (1982) and 512 (1982);“.
4. Members of the Council also have before them
the following documents: S/15233, containing the text
of a letter dated 18 June from the representative of
Cuba to the President of the Council; S/15243, containing the text of a letter dated 18 June from the
representative
of Cuba to the Secretary-General;
S/1.5248, containing the text of a letter dated 22 June
from the representative of Jordan to the SecretaryGeneral; S/15251, containing the text of a letter dated
23 June from the representative
of Hungary to the
Secretary-General;
and S/15254, containing the text
of a letter dated 24 June from the representative of
France to the Secretary-General.
5. I shall now make a statement
the representative of FRANCE.

in my capacity as

6. In submitting this draft resolution to the Council
for its approval, France wishes solemnly to note the
serious concerns aroused by the latest developments
in Beirut both among its own people, which have
feelings of friendship for the people of Lebanon, and
among its highest officials.
2. The PRESIDENT
(iilte,prettrtio/z ,ficm French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15255/Rev.2,
which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France.

7. Today what is to be feared is nothing more nor
less than the total destruction of entire neighbou,rhoods of the city of Beirut, already ravaged by 12 yeaks
of armed clashes and threatened in the coming days
with complete devastation. Within this martyred city,

__---

Agoinsf: Unitkd States of America

the Lebanese and Palestinian
civilian populations
risk having to pay very dear for a war being waged in
the very places where they spend their daily lives.

Ahstoining:

8. Faced with such prospects, the French Government considers that the Council has the obligation
to act. On the basis of its resolutions 508 (1982), 509
( 1982) and 5 12 (I 982), it must remind the parties to the
conflict, and particularly Israel, with all the seriousness that the situation demands, of the requirements
of the cease-fire. In order to protect the innocent civilian populations
from the consequences of the
clashes, it must impose a disengagement of the forces
fighting in West Beirut and ensure that that city is
spared from total destruction by means of effective
neutralization.

13. The PRESIDENT
(intrrpwttrtion
j>om Frvndr):
I shall now call on those representatives who hitve
asked to be allowed to make statements after the
voting.
14. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States off Amcrica): The fundamental basis of the policy of the United
States is now, and has consistently been, to contribute
to the restoration of the full authority of the IGovernment of Lebanon throughout its land and it:: sovereignty and territorial integrity.
My Government is
deeply moved by the suffering of the Lebanese people
in the present crisis. We had hoped that the draft rcsulution before the Council tonight would have reflected
this basic concern. Unfortunately
the draft resolution,
while containing many elements we support, fails 10
call for the essential requisite for the restoration of the
authority of the Government of Lebanon, that is the
elimination from Beirut and elsewhere of the presence
of armed Palestinian elements who neither submit to
nor respect the sovereign authority of the Llebancse
Government.

9. In the present situation the United Nations can,
by its action, promote a development which will banish
the spectre of war and desolation. Alongside the
Lebanese army, on which the full task of interposing
itself and protecting the civilian population will fall,
the Council could agree to station United Nations
military observers. Their presence would first and
foremost meet the concern of the international community, which is also the concern of France, to alleviate the sufferings of the victims of the fighting, to
ensure that international assistance reaches the civilian populations and to guarantee the restoration of
minimum security in the area.
10. This neutralization of kest Beirut which France
proposes cannot therefore be considered as a lasting
political solution. It is only the first condition for the
opening of genuine negotiations designed to guarantee the existence, security and legitimate rights of
each of the States and peoples involved and primarily
those of Lebanon itself. The final solution to the
present tragedy will be achieved through the restoration of the integrity, sovereignty and independence
of Lebanon. It also implies that the problem of the
Palestinian people, without the solution of which
there can be no hope for peace and stability in the
Middle East, will be solved by the recognition of that
people’s right to a State enjoying the same rights as the
other States of the region, in particular the State of
Israel.
11.

None

15. The omission of this requisite, in our view, thus
is inconsistent with the essential goal of restoration
of Lebanese sovereignty. That, we believe, is a fatul
flaw.
16. The draft resolution does contain many elcments that we support, namely: first, a call for itn
immediate cease-fire; secondly, a call for simultaneons
withdrawal of Israeli and Palestinian forces from the
area of Beirut; and thirdly, the proposal that United
Nations observers, upon the request of the Government of Lebanon, monitor the cease-fire.
17. The members of the Council are well aware uf
the threat which armed foreign elements pose to the
authority of the Government of Lebanon and to stubility throughout the region. We deeply regret that
this central factor was not accorded the weight WCJ
believed it must have in the draft resolution before
us.

I shall now resume my functions as PRESIDENT,

12. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to vote on the draft resolution before it, with the corrections which I read out at the beginning of the meeting.
If’ there are no objections, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote,

(intcrprctcttion
18. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the representative
whom I now call.

In .fi~of~~: China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom
of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zaire

.fiorn Frcnchl:
of Israel, upon

19. Mr. BLUM (Israel): On Friday, I I June, the
Government of Israel adopted a decision which stated.
inter trlirr :
2

i

~

“Following
the completion
of the mission with
which the Israel Defence Forces were charged, the
Government
instructed the army and all its formations to cease fire beginning today at 12 noon. From
that hour onwards the Israeli army will not fire on
all fronts in Lebanon unless fired at.”

throughout
Lebanon has been holding
is to say for the past 13 hours.

since, that

21, The PRESIDENT
(i,~ropl.c~forion ,fi*om Frcnd?):
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon,
upon whom I now call.

This position of my Government has been reaffirmed
on a number of occasions since, despite the fact that
the cease-fire has been broken and violated repeatedly by the other side.

22. Mr. TUl?NI (Lebanon): It is no longer the hour for
speeches, Mr. President, and 1 simply take the floor to
say how much my country and Government appreciate
the initiative of France and its President, Mr. Mitterrand. We know that no resolution can be perfect. The
draft before the Council is not something we can
discuss-we are not members of the Council. We can
only express our regret at the fact that it was not
adopted.

20. In keeping with this position, my Government
once again instructed the Israel Defence Forces
yesterday, 25 June, to cease fire on all fronts in Lebanon at 8 p.m., local time, corresponding to 2 p.m.,
New York time. According to the information
that
reached me some I5 minutes ago, this cease-fire

I

3

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to; United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New
SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprds
des vcntes.
New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations.

New York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estdn en venta en librerlas
a su librero
o dirijase
a; Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sont en vente dans les librairies
ct les agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas panes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNJDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas.

8%60989-June

1989-4.050
