CONTENTS

Letter chtcd 10 April 1981 frsm the Permanent liepresentative of Uganda
to thc Uniteci Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
c-714434) ,, 1. . . ,.,,,~,.,,,l.,..,,,,,.,~,..,...,~,..,,......,~,,.,.

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Snpplc~mc~nts of the Qffirirrl Records of tlzc .Sct*urit~~
Conncil, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolr~rio/r.s cr/rr/
Decisiom oJ‘ t/~ Serwity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2269th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 22 April 1981, at 3.30 p.m.
pïpsident: Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).
plusej~t: The representatives of the following States:
China,France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan,
Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Lww),
Mr. Fourie (South Aflica),
Mr. Hameed
(Sri Lanka), Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo
(Togo), Mr. Salim
(United Replrblic of Tanzania), Mr. Vrhovec (Yugosirrvitr), Mr, Kanza~lda wa Kamanda (Zaire), Mr. Goma
(Zarnhia) and Mr. Mangwendc
(Zimbabwe)
took the
places resenvd ,fiw thrm at the side of the Council
c~ilarirher.

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14434)

2. The PRESIDENT: 1should like to inform members
of the Council that 1 have received a letter from the
representative of Romania, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, 1 propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda

At the invitatiorl of the President, Mr. Marinescrr
(Ramania) took the place rcscrscd for him at the side
of thc Corrncil chamher.

ProvisionaI

agenda (S/Agenda/2269)

1. Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed ta the President of the Security Council
(S/14434)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisionstaken at previous meetings [2267th rrntl 2268th
/?wtings], 1invite the representatives of the following
countries-Algeria, Angola, Benin, Canada, Cuba,
Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe-t0 particiPatein the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of thc President,
Mr. Benyahia
(Alwia),
Mr. de Figueircdo (Angola), Mr. fIout~gnvorr
(Beifin), Mr. Mord~~
(Can~daj,
Mr. Malmierca
(Clll)~O, Mr. Gedle-Giorgis
(Ethiapia),
Mr. Jeiorrek
(F~~d~al Replrhiic of’ Germa~y),
Mr, Co~mbassa
(Glli~l~~~l), MI.. Rao (India),
MI+. Klr.sunlcratmac!jrr
(~fldo/wsia),
Mr, Shcurer
(Jamaica),
Mr. Kasina

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision
taken at the 2267th meeting,1invite the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia andthe delegation
of the Council to take places at the Security Council
table.
At thc invitation qf the President,
Mr. Lusaka
(Pwsidcnt c$the United Nations Councilfor Narnibia)
ami thc other nwmhers of the delegation took plnces
at thc Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision
also taken at the 2267th meeting, 1 invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table.
At thP invitation c$thc President, Mr. Peter Mueshihangc took CI place ut the Cotnncil table.

5. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (interprvtation
from
When the General Assembly at its thirty-fïfth
sessionconsidered the situation brought about by the
refusa1 of South Africa to abide by United Nations
resolutions on Namibia, by an overwhelming majority
and without a single vote against, it declared the urgent
need to ensure the early attainment of self-determination, freedom and genuine national independence in
a united Namibia [resolution 35/227A].

Sp«/lis/f):

6. This declaration of the General Assembly, which
represented the lofty expression of the will of the international comrnunity,
was largely based on the New
Delhi Declaration,’
issued in February by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, which in paragraph 45 firmly condemned the
racist régime of South Africafor its persistent refusa1 to
withdraw from Namibia
and, in particular,
for its
deliberate sabotage of the Geneva meeting, convened
with a view to implementing
the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia.

Zambia, and by the representative of the President of
Zimbabwe; the President of SWAPO also attended.
The final communiqué released on 15 April [S//4464,
C/III~~X], the eve of the Algiers ministerial
meeting,
gave a vote of confidence to the Co-ordinating
Bureau,
for it to adopt practical measures of assistance to
SWAPO and to achieve the mobilization
of the international community
in support of the struggie for
Namibian independence.
12. At the conclusion of its deliberations
at the
extraordinary
ministerial
meeting
at Algiers, the
Bureau decided [S//4#58, LII?I~P.X, pnrcr. 22 s] that,
besides the Ministers for Foreign Affairs already
selected by the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
-that is, the current President of the Council of Ministers of the OAU; the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the front-line States, namely, those of Angola,
Botswana, Mozambique,
the United
Republic
of
Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe; and the Minis’cers
for Foreign Affairs of the Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone,
Togo, Tunisia and Uganda-the
following Ministers
for Foreign Affairs should also be designated: those of
Algeria, Cuba, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Liberia, Panama, Senegal, Sri Lanka and
Yugoslavia. They were to participate in this series of
meetings of the Security Council, as representatives
of the non-aligned movement. It is by virtue of that
mandate that the Ministers for Foreign Affairs 1 have
just mentioned have corne here to take part in this
debate to request the Security Council urgently to
impose on South Africa comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, in order to compel the Pretoria régime
to put an end to its illegal occupation of Namibia and
SOthat the implementation
of the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia might be promoted
within the United Nations system.

7. The New Delhi Conference-and
the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations agrees with thisconsidered that the Pretoria régime was fully responsible for the failure of the pre-implementation
meeting,
the only purpose of which was to set the date for a
cesse-fire and to put in place the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG), in conformity
with Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
8. At the New Delhi Conference, as well as in the
discussions which took place in the General Assembly
of the United Nations, there was well-deserved recognition of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), as the sole and authentic representative of the people of Namibia, for its constructive
approach and its impeccable statesmanlike
attitude,
given the serious situation created by South Africa
at the Geneva meeting. Recognition was also given to
the front-line States and to Nigeria, for their role as
observers.
9. We attach particular importance to the fact that,
in paragraph 47 of the New Delhi Declaration, the Ministers paid special attention to the role of the contact
group of Western States. They regretted the apparent
reluctance of the countries members of the group to use
their enormous influence and power over South Africa
to obtain its co-operation with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations in his efforts to implement the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
They also urged a11countries, in particular France, the
United Kingdom
and the United States, permanent
members of the Security Council, to co-operate fully
with the Council in adopting effective enforcement
measures against South Africa.

13. Given the lawless behaviour of South Africa,
consisting of utter contempt for the resolutions of the
General Assembly, the Security Councii and the International Court of Justice, the Government of Panama
considers that there is every justification
for the
Security Council to adopt the measures of coercion
which are demanded by the serious situation in Namibia, taking account of the following elements: first,
that Namibia is the direct responsibility
of the United
Nations and that its occupation by South Africa is
illegal; secondly, that the Organization has a solemn
commitment
to bring about the self-determination,
freedom and national independence
of Namibia;
thirdly, that there must be respect for the territorial
integrity of Namibia, including Walvis Bay, the Penguin Islands and other off-shore islands, and, that
Namibia’s territorial
integrity cannot be called into
question or permitted to suffer the least damage; and,
fourthly, that the United Nations Council for Namibia,
as Administering
Authority for the Territory
until
independence, should promote and strengthen its cooperation with the governmental
and non-governmental organizations
which support the iiberation

10. As a result of the mandate conferred by the New
Delhi
Conference,
the extraordinary
ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the NonAligned Countries took place at Algiers, from 16 to
18 April, to assess the situation in Namibia
and to
adopt specific measures with a view to stepping UP
the assistance given to the struggle, which is being
carried on by the people of Namibia, under the leadership of SWAPO, its soie and legitimate representative.
11. The tasks of the ministerial meeting at Algiers
were strongly encouraged by the summit meeting held
at Luanda by the Presidents of Angola, Botswana,
Mozambique,
the United Republic of Tanzania and
2

struggle
of the Namibian peopie under the ieadership
of SWApO, its sole and authentic representative.

14. The international community cannot recognize,
a,,dmust reject, any assembly, administration or entity
establishedin Windhoek which is not the result of free
elections in Namibia held under the supervision and
control of the United Nations. The international community
is committed-and my Government honours
that commitment-to recognize the constructive contribution of SWAPO in the search for peaceful formulas to solve the problem. In the view of Panama,
such a solution cari only be the immediate cancellation of South Africa’s illegal administration in Namibia
andaguarantee of the prompt independence of a united
Namibia through free elections held under the control
and supervision of the United Nations.
15. The position which Panama puts before the
Council on the question of Namibia, in addition to being
within a non-aligned framework, is basically a Latin
American position, as was highlighted during yesterday’s informa1 consultations, where the most open
harmony and identity were to be seen between the
positions taken by the delegations of Mexico and
Panama, which this year OCCLIPYthe Council’s two
Latin American seats.

“We must now concentrate on the questions”c
Namibia and of the elimination of
in South
Africa, lest we face the continuing frustration of
those peoples there and of a11of us at the United
Nations. Every effort must be made to ensure that
prompt and fruitful results are gained from the work
accumulated throughout these years at the United
Nations towards a solution for the problem of Namibia, whose people are represented by the South
West Africa People’s Organization. The risk we
have been running since Security Council resolution 435 (1978) was adopted two years ago is that of
having placed too much trust in negotiations that
have not developed in accordance with legitimate
expectations. The persistence of military aggressionsconducted by the Government of South Africa
against Angola and Zambia is unacceptable. Political
contrivances such as the installation of the so-called
Nations Assembly of Windhoek are also unacceptable. The very latest exchangeof messageswith the
Secretary-General betrays the evasive and delaying
attitude of South Africa.”
rrparthcd

1would interject here that this morning we saw another
example of this sort of policy, which is disruptive, and
contrary to the United Nations system. The Brazilian
Minister concluded by saying that:

16. The voices raised throughout the Latin American
continentare voices of support for the aspirations of the
Namibian people and of the countries of southern
Africa. Only yesterday [2267r/znrectirrff], the Minister
for External Relations of Cuba, Mr. Tsidoro Malmierca,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica,
Mr. Hugh Lawson Shearer, who represent two Latin
American countries with different political systems,
arguedwith equal emphasis and determination for the
prompt independence of Namibia. There is no need ta
quote them, for the echo of their important statements
still lingers in this chamber.

“In this, as in other problems pending on our
agenda, the position of the Organization of African
Unity and, in particular, that of the front-line States,
is fundamental inasmuch as, on 2 June last, they
have reaffirmed at Lusaka the priority they accord
to the question of Namibia on the basisof documents
already adopted by the United Nations.”
19, Colombia, through its Minister for External
Relations, Mr. Diego Uribe Vargas, declared4 that:
“The process of decolonization, for which the
United Nations may justly claim the greatest credit
ever since its foundation, has met with the obstinate
resistance of the South African Government in its
attempt to create the necessaryconditions for recognition of Namibia as a free and sovereign nation.
This is all the more serious if we realize that South
Africa continues to pursue its policy of npn&reitl, a
flagrant violation of the most elementary human
rights and a vestige of the discriminatory policy of
ancient empires.”

17. The Latin American position was consistently
expressedby the Ministers for External Relations of
the countries of the region during the general debate
at the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
I shahcite a few examples. The Republic of Argentina,
representedby the then Minister for External Relations
and Worship, Mr. Carlos Washington Pastor, maintained that:
“The international community is still awaiting
the end of the illegal occupation of Namibia. That
Territory must accede to sovereignty with complete
territorial integrity. The present situation must be
brought to an end, because its persistence calls into
question the implementation of the principles and
decisions of the United Nations and, at the same
time, constitutes a significant danger to the peace and
security of Africa and the entire world.“?

The Colombian Minister concluded by calling once
again on the Assembly
“to condemn apartheid and to require South Africa
to comply with its international obligation to permit
the complete independence of Namibia with a11the
prerogatives inherent in the sovereignty of States.”

18. The Minister of State for External Relations of
Rrazil, Mr. Ramiro Saraiva Guerreiro, argued in the
GeneralAssembly” that:

20. Chile, through its Minister for External Relations,
Mr. René Rojas Galdames, pointed out that the
example of Zimbabwe should serve in other out3

standing
Minister

situations,
said:

such as the case of Namibia.

The

“In this regard we cal1 on the parties to make it
possible for the Security Council plan for Namibia
to be carried out.“”
21, Costa Rica, in favouring the independence of
Namibia, stated its position clearly when its Minister
for External Relations, Mr. Bernd Niehaus Quesada,
spoke of the need to carry out the decolonization
process and at the same time condemned South Africa
as the perpetrator of
“one of the most monstrous political ideologies
mankind has known, and one of the political systems
most incompatible with humanity that has ever been
devised.‘lh
22, Guyana, as its Minister
Mr. Rashleigh Jackson, stated,

for Foreign

Affairs,

‘&can no longer put up with the unparalleled effrontery of South Africa. We must resolutely implement
the plan SO carefully and elaborately devised for the
early independence
of Namibia-for
Namibia
is
decidedly next on the calendar of political freedom.
Let us reserve its place in this Organization now.“7
23. As stated by its Minister for ExternaI Relations,
Mr. José Zambrano Velasco, Venezuela, faithful to
the tradition of the Liberator
“supports a11actions designed to eradicate from the
face of the earth racism in a11 its forms, especially
the form which claims to set itself up as a system, as
is the case in South Africa with apartheid.
“Our support for the independence of Namibia, in
accordance with United Nations decisions, is clear
and unequivocal.“x
24.

The not-too-edifying statement made this morning
by the Government of South Africa
places the Council in the difficult situation of having to
decide whether, given the Pretoria régime’s attitude of
open rebelliousness, it should or should not impose the
sanctions authorized under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. We therefore insist on the
advisability of the five Powers authors of the United
Nations plan for Namibia [S/I2636 of 10 April 19781
exerting a11 possible persuasive pressure on South
Africa to abide by decisions of the Security Council
within the United Nations system.
[2268th n~~t/t?g]

25. At the same time, as long as the South African
Government persists in ignoring those decisions, the
Security Council must take the action requested by the
extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau ofthe Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers in
Felyuary, as well as by the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aiigned
Countries, held at

New Delhi in February-namely,
the immediate imposition against South Africa of The comprehensive
mandatory sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter, including an oil embargo-in
order to compel
the Pretoria régime to end its illegal occupation
of
Namibia.
26. We are aware that as is stated in the report of the
Economie Commission
for Africa,” South Africa by
various means controls the economies of Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland and-to
a lesser extent but
nevertheless significantly
the economies of Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe, with which the South
African economy is intimately linked. Therefore, note
should be taken of the special geographical position of
the countries bordering on South Africa, and suitable
measures should be adopted to extend material and
financial support to those countries SO that they may
withstand the effects which any sanctions imposed on
South Africa would have on them.
27. The dilemma faced by the Western Powers is that
of joining in an international
consensus favouring
genuine independence for Namibia or, on the contrary,
of aligning themselves with the cause of the Pretoria
racist régime, a régime which lacks the support of the
black majority and of the international community
and
is based on repression and violence, which naturally
result in violent chain reactions.
28. The Namibian independence process cannot be
halted. Logically, then, African peoples must weigh the
degree of co-operation and friendship of other nations
by the extent to which the latter favour or oppose
genuine Namibian
independence.
That explains the
special responsibility
which States members of the
United Nations place on the five Western Powers for
compliance with the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia, which they have authored and
which is embodied and formalized in Council resolution 435 (1978).
29. Any assurances which those Western Powers
could offer in this debate as to their political Will to
co-operate and to foster implementation
of resolution
435 (1978) would considerably
clear the political
climate in southern Africa.
30. The United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibiaenvisages,
in the first place, the verification of
free elections held under United Nations supervision
and control. The establishment
of a constitutional
assembly ta determine the structure of the new State
should be-because
it could not be otherwise-the
result of those elections, with the participation of those
who would be freely elected through popular direct
suffrage.
31. Any scheme, formula or expedient
aimed at
undermining United Nations authority in that process
already envisaged-such
as, for example, the launching
of a constitutional
conference prior to verification of

the election results-not only would be contrary to the
United Nations plan, which was the initiative of the
Western Powers, but also wouid be in open contradiction to the aspirations of the people of Namibia and of
the international community in general.
32. No one cari be unaware that SWAPO has the
overwhelming support of the people of Namibia, and
those who, in popular elections honestly administered
by the United Nations, anticipate defeat in the face of
the overwhelming popular strength of SWAPO are, of
course, eager to promote other formulas which are not
in keeping with the United Nations plan or with the
system of representative democracy advocated by the
Western Powers. These new schemes, which have no
basis in logic, morülity, or law, would be disturbing
elements and would contribute to a further worsening
of the explosive situation in the region, We therefore
believe that any other formula for settling the question
of the indcpendence of Namibia promoted by the
Pretoria régime nnd its collaborators faced with the
obvious prospect of defeat in free elections would
be neither logical, just, nor serious; it would be inconsistent; it would have no future, and it wouid be unacceptable to international public opinion.
33. In the light of a11those circumstances, we consider
it extremely urgent that the Western States permanent
mernbers of the Security Council which have the means
to do so--and we again appeal to them--should undertake decisive action with regard to South Africa to
induce that Covernment to accede to formulas that
would ensure its co-operation with the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the Council to implement the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
34. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs ofzambia, Mr’. L. K. H. Goma,
M.P. 1welcome him here and invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
35. MI-. GOMA (Zambia): Mr. President, on behalf
of my delegation, 1wish to begin by congratulating you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. 1also wish to pay tribute
to your predecessor, Ambassador Florin of the German
Democratic Republic, for the manner in which he
presided over the work of the Council last month.
30. The problem of Namibia is one of decolonization
and illegal occupation. Justice, freedom and independence have been denied the Namibian people for too
long. This series of meetings of the Council would not
have been necessary had it not been for the continued
intransigence of the South African régime. There was
much hope in Africa and elsewhere that, following the
adoption of Council resolution 435 (1978), Namibia
was at long last headed for freedom and independence.
37. The situation in Namibia has today reached a very
critical stage. The United Nations, as is well known,
has made many efforts with a view to Iïnding ajust and

peaceful solution to the problem of Namibia. Many
difficulties tiere encountered in the process ofnegotiations before and after the adoption of resolution 43.5
(1978). Throughout, the name of the gameon the Part of
the South African régime has been procrastination and
prevarication. At every stage the international community has been treated to South Africa’s all-toofamiliar and worn-out deceptive manoeuvres.
38. We are a11familiar with the results of the preimplementation meeting convened at Geneva last
January under the auspices of the Secretary-General
for the purpose of implementing the United Nations
plan for Namibia. The Geneva meeting failed solely
because of the unreasonable stance of the South
African régime. And let it be remembered that the
Geneva meeting was but one in a series of concessions
to South Africa by the United Nations. By convening
the Geneva meeting, the United Nations was bending
over backwards to try to accommodate South Africa.
39. Since the failure of the Geneva meeting, we have
not seen any other proposafs for the peaceful settlement of the problem of Namibia. As far as we are concerned, therefore, the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia remains the only valid basis
for a negotiated settlement.
40. With the failure of the Geneva meeting, the
existing situation in and around Namibia has become
dangerously explosive. We have therefore corne ta
the Security Council because we continue to believe in
the need to find a peaceful solution to the Namibian
problem. This we do in spite of the obvious South
African attempt to make us despair and abandon the
negotiation process.
41. Contrary to the spirit of the negotiations and in
direct contravention of numerous United Nations
resolutions, South Africa has continued its efforts to
impose a so-called interna1 settlement on the people of
Namibia, it has encouraged the growth of and financed
so-called political parties in Namibia whose primary
interest is opposing SWAPO rather than liberating
Namibia. A so-called constituent assembly of South
Africa’s puppet groups in Namibia has been established. The militarization of Namibia has continued
and today over 100,000 South African troops are reported to be stationed in Namibia. Together with other
South African instruments of oppression, they continue
to commit atrocities against the Namibian people.
Namibia today is besieged by a calculated South
African reign of terror. Members of SWAPO are daily
victims of unwarranted detention, imprisonment and
torture.
42. Throughout the process of negotiations, and
indeed to this day, South African acts of aggression
against independent African States, with the utilization of Namibia as the launching pad, have continued
unabated. The People’s Republic of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and my own coutrtry, Zambia,

What is urgently needed is the implementation

have been constant targets and victims of South African
aggression. Many innocent lives have been lost and
incalculable damage to precious property has been
done in our respective countries.

of the

present plan as it exists. Those who initiated this plan
have not applied sufficient pressure on South Africa to

ensure its co-operation.
47. The five Western Powers therefore have a particular responsibility to support the adoption of important
enforcement measures against South Africa in order
to achieve this objective.

43. Indeed, there has been a massive beefing up of
South African military forces in Namibia and on the
borders of neighbouring countries. There are thus
huge and well-equipped South African military bases
on our borders with Namibia. In addition, South Africa
continues to train dissidents from neighbouring countries and to recruit mercenaries to work against these
countries. The aim of South Africa in a11these actions
is the destabilization of sovereign and independent
African States in southern Africa,

48. 1 cannot conclude my statement without paying
tribute to the people of Namibia, under the leadership
of SWAPO, for their steadfastness in the struggle For
the liberation of their country. The people of Namibia,
under the leadership of SWAPO, have tried to salve
the problem of Namibia by peaceful means. South
Africa, as evidenced by its actions, has repeatedly
rejected this approach. As a result of this rejection
there has been an escalation of hostilities in the region.

44. Clearly, the continued illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa constitutes a serious threat
to international peace and security. It is against that
background that we urgently seek the adoption of
effective enforcement measures which Will compel
South Africa to withdraw from Namibia and thus
defuse the explosive situation that currently exists in
and around Namibia. That is the challenge before the
Security Council. In the circumstances, it is incumbent
upon all the permanent members of the Security Council to seek an immediate solution of the Namibian
problem. That would demonstrate the necessary
political Will on their part, which is essential to enable
the Council to discharge its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
throughout the world. In this context, the Western
permanent members of the Council, which we
know possess enormous influence and leverage over
South Africa, should not shirk their responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, now seriously threatened in southern Africa, because of South
Africa’s perceived economic and strategic importance
to them.

49. SWAPO has proved itself as the champion of the
struggle for the liberation of Namibia. It is the custodian
of the genuine interests and aspirations of the Namibian
people. As such it deserves increased and concrete
international solidarity and material support to enable
it to wage even a more effective struggle for the liberation of Namibia.
50. Let it be clear that there cari be no settlement of
the Namibian problem without the participation
of
SWAPO.
51. The Councii should now accept its full responsibilities.
The entire international
community
is
impatient for a solution to the problem of Namibia,
as cari be seen from the resolutions of the General Assembly of the United Nations and the declarations of
the OAU and the non-aligned movement. The Namibian people have been denied their inalienable
rights for too long. Let freedom and national independence corne to Namibia without any further delay.

45. Namibia must be liberated and apcwtkeid in South
Africa must be eradicated. We wish to emphasize the
role of the United Nations, and in particular that of
the Security Council, which must be the vehicle for
bringing about peace in southern Africa on the basis
of these objectives. We are for meaningful solutions to
the problems of southem Africa through the United
Nations. We would therefore abject to any attempt
under whatever pretext to remove the question of
Namibia from the United Nations and seek a solution
outside it. We would find no justification for any such
attempt. Indeed, we would question the motives of
those seeking to exclude the United Nations at a time
when there is a viable plan for the liberation of Namibia on the basis of Council resolution 435 (1978).
Namibia is and must remain a Territory for which the
United Nations has direct responsibility until independence.

52. The genuine liberation of Namibia for which the
United Nations is striving should indeed be a source of
pride and satisfaction to all of us who believe in the
United Nations. The credibility of the Organization
would indeed be greatly enhanced if we were able to
find and effect a peaceful solution to the problem of
Namibia, a Territory for which the United Nations
has accepted direct responsibility until independence.
53. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Togo,
Mr. Anani Kuma Akakpo-Ahianyo.
1 welcome him and
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
54.

Mr. AKAKPO-AHIANYO
(Togo) (hterprrtaF~end): Mr. President, in this month of April
the presidency of the Security Council has fallen to
you. 1 should like to congratulate you and to express
to you my conviction that under your leadership the
work of the Council is sure to be successful.

tiort jhn

46. We do not need another plan for the independence
of Namibia; there is nothing wrong with the present
plan, which was the product of protracted negotiations.
6

\
mandate of conducting those Territories to self-determination. Since then most of the administering Powers
have honourably discharged their mandates and the
Territories formerly administered by them bave
become independent and occupy places in the Organization. During that time South Africa, which received
the Mandate over Namibia, has persisted in refusing to
comply with the commitments it undertook and is
constantly showing its scorn for the international community. This defiance of the whole of mankind is a
challenge that must be met unanimously, by a11mankind. But no; it would appear that some hesitate to
condemn the casualness with which South Africa
persists in flouting the international community. Some
morality!

55. 1 should like also to congratulate your predecesser, the representative of the German Democratic
Republic, on the competence with which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council last month.
56. When one thinks of the Namibian problem and
the tragedy of trptrrthcitl, one cari only be aghast at the
prospect: most of the human values of this world are
being shaken to their very foundations.
57, South Africa has constantly hurled defiance at
the whole of humanity and arrogantly flouted a11the
decisions of the United Nations. It has been trampling
underfoot the most elementary freedoms and daily
commits acts of aggression against neighbouring countries. There are even Members of this very Organization which cari find excuses for South Africa, if they
do not actually support it. Some morality!

63. Al1 credit must be given to the administering
Powers which have gradually, one after another, led
to international sovereignty the countries which had
been placed under their trusteeship by the Organization. My country, Togo, won its right to sit in the United
Nations thanks to the struggle of the Togolese people,
assisted by other peoples, but, it must be recognized,
thanks also to the fact that the administering Powers
respected the commitments that they had undertaken.
Burundi, Cameroon, Rwanda and Tanganyika became
independent in similar circumstances. That is entirely
to the credit of the administering Powers of those
countries. Logically, those Powers should have been
in the front lines in today’s struggle to prevail upon
South Africa to respect, as they themselves did for
their part, the commitments undertaken. But it would
appear that they are hesitant and that some are even
preparing to take refuge behind the convenient screen
ofabstention; others are preparing to cast a veto against
the unanimous Willof the whole of Africa and the peaceloving peoples of the world, indeed against the policy
which they themselves applied to countries which
were formerly under their administration. It appears
that they are preparing to do this in support of cq.w-thein/. Some morality!

58. In this last quarter of the twentieth Century we
have the distinct impression that the world is no longer
governed by any morality. Economie chaos has becorne SOgeneralized that everyone is clinging to his
privileges and does not even have time to notice that,
by his side, he is trampling his neighbour underfoot.
We have the impression that every nation is bent,
single-mindedly, on the exclusive preservation of its
own interests, even if this means trampling on others in
the way. Even man’s labour no longer finds its ideal.
Thus in certain parts of the world the fruits of human
labour, because the Iaws of the market are SOinexorable, cannot be sold and at best are fed to pigs.
59. Transnational corporations are bent on profit, on
maximizing profit. They are ready to take anyone as an
ally, even someone who in the second half of the
twentieth Century refuses to recognize the value of
man. The kingdom of crpcrrtheitl offers the best conditions for profit in this time of economic chaos, and
people Will support it even if every day it sets dogs
on the blacks. What does it matter? Some morality!
60. In this country, where we are in this magnificent
glass palace, it would appear that 12 per cent of the
population is black-and they have the right to vote,
we are told. But in South Africa there are 16 million
blacks, and 3 million whites who have subjected the
blacks to their pitiless yoke. Africa is simply asking for
the end of crpcwtheid SOthat the 16 million blacks cari
have their voice heard, like the 12percent blacks here.
But that is in vain. It would appear there are people
here who are preparing ta cast a veto against this
demand. Some morality!

64. In the industrialized world strikes, and acts of
terrorism are matters of great concern; and there is
also concern for each gulag born every day. But now
people are getting worried about the fact that Africans
-blacks for the most part, moreover-are disturbing
the clear conscience of people with problems concerning the emancipation of the blacks of Namibia and
South Africa. Some morality!
65. The anti-left reflex is no longer an alibi, since the
birth of Zimbabwe. Formerly the refusa1to lend assistance to the struggle of the peoples of southern Africa
was justified by alleging that leaders were remotely
controlled by Eastern Powers--or Powers from somewhere or other-and that the accession of the black
majority to power would be followed by a massacre of
whites. For a year now independent Zimbabwe has
been a resounding proof to the contrary. A multiracial
viable society is possible in southern Africa-in
Zimbabwe, in Namibia, in South Africa. Africa needs

61. In Namibia the South African régime is persisting
in refusing to face the facts.
62. At the end of the First World War, the League of
Nations and, after the Second World War, the United
Nations entrusted the administration of Territories
formerly under the control of Germany to other
Powers. The administering Powers were given the
7

I.,
j\

choice and may even have to turn t0 the devil himself,
ls that the end which people bave in view?

all its children: it needs its black children and it needs
its white children. Black Africa and white North
Africa have always fraternized in the same @rit of
solidarity throughout the centuries. Now why do we
have these prejudices whereby black Africa cannot
possibly apply the same fraternization with white
Africa in southern Africa? Prejudices of this kind are
inspired entirely by racism on the part of those people
who harbour those prejudices. Some morality!

72. But history is there to teach US. DO the industrialized countries really want the sincere friendship of
Africa-the whole of Africa, the Africaof today and the
Africa of tomorrow? Or do they really prefer to ally
themselves with retrogressive forces that have no
future?
73, For its vast wealth, Africa needs the technology
ofthe industrialized countries. But if the industrialized
countries today prefer to a whole future certain gold
ingots sullied by rrparrheid, they Will have chosen the
easy way out, the line of least resistance. They Will
have ensured the material interests of certain trans.
national corporations that know they are condemned
by history, and they wiil have missed the train of
mutually advantageous international
co-operation,
which Africa is offering the industrialized
countries,
But the industrialized countries should know that they
Will have trampled underfoot their own morality by
wishing to consume everything today without thinking
of what Will be left tomorrow.

66. Today our social and moral sensitivities are becoming dangerously blunted. Those of us who still
remain believers are really beginning to wonder what
cari be the point of reciting 1981 times a day Mary,
Jesus, Holy Spirit or Allah Akbar. Formerly when one
knelt in church or in a mosque it was with the pious
idea of asking for divine benediction on earth and
begging forgiveness. Today, when it turns out that
there are Powers in the world-and by no means the
smallest ones-which it would appear are preparing
to cast a veto against the claim of the Namibian people
who are seeking nothing more than to live in peace
with a11their sons and fairly and equitably to enjoy the
fruit of their children, we wonder desperately what is
the point of our genuflexions on Sunday or Friday.
Some morality!

74. Yesterday, for Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe was
represented as a bogy man who would throw out a11the
whites once he came to power. People sat on the fente
and shilly-shallied; they supported the Ian Smiths, the
Muzorewas, the Sitholé-Muzorewas
and many other
puppets. But when the forces of democracy were
allowed free rein, the nationalist tidal wave was overwhelming; and there was a striking manifestation above
a11 of this capacity of Africa to show others that the
racism to which they had resorted was not one of the
fundamental values of Africa.

67. In Namibia the colonizing Power of pre-1914 left
a strong colony of its own nationals. Its role is particularly important, because it proclaimed its intention
not only to root out for ever from its history any traces
of nazism but also to contribute to scrupulous respect
for the rights of man wherever those rights were being
flouted.
68 In Namibia the elementary rights of the black
majority are being flouted. It is to be hoped that the
Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic Will unhesitatingly lend their support
to the peoples which want to see the advent of majority
rule in Namibia.

75. Today, when Zimbabwe should serve as an
example to those very people who try to sow fear and
terror, allegations are once again being unearthed that
the white minorities should feel panic about SWAPO
-as if Africa has not sufftciently demonstrated that, if
it is fighting racism and upurtheid, it is not doing SO
in order to install those scourges within an independent Namibia tomorrow.

69. What is at stake in the debate which is going on
is obvious to everyone because freedom is a universal
value. Namibia wants to be free, independent in the
integrity of its territory and to govern itself, thanks to
its sons of a11 races and a11colours-because
no one
chooses the colour of his skin at birth.

76. SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of
the Namibian people, is struggling for majority rule and
for the equality of a11 the sons of Namibia, whether
they be black, white, mixed or other. It is struggling
for peace in the region. It sufficiently demonstrated
that by accepting the Western plan [S/f2636] even when
the whole world knows that the plan was an inadequate
one. At the time Africa showed its maturity by exerting
Pressure on SWAPO to accept that plan and resolution 435 (1978), which flowed from it. At the time,
Africa and peace-loving peoples thought that the
Western countries in their tut-n would be in a position
to exert similar pressure on their own nursling, South
Africa. Alas, how wrong they were. It would appear
that in those countries account must be taken of public
opinion! In reality, however, everyone is enslaved to

70. Togo, my country, a former German colony and
former Mandated Territory of France and the United
Kingdom, is today an independent country and is well
placed to talk of the Namibian tragedy. We have the
best possible relations with the Federal Republic of
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, the United
States and Canada.
7 1. But the anti-left reflex is far too convenient. How
cari one take refuge behind a reflex whereby the unsupportable must be sustained? The contrary may very
well be true: when the industrialized countries invariably choose the narrow path of refusing their support
to the majority which is struggling, it has no further
8

something there. Who has actually seen this so-called
public opinion? The power of the mass media is such
that the press manufactures what it wants and imposes
it on the consumer, thus depriving everyone, including
those who rule, of any room for manoeuvre. That is the
so-called free world. Some world and some morality!

Counci! should be made aware of the gravity of the
situation and that we should ask the Counci! to take
appropriate measures to remove the threat to peace
[S/14458, crt~nex, pcwr. 22 (fi].
83. The Secretary-General’s
report of 19 January
1981 [S//4333] is before the Counci!. It gives an
accurate account of the pre-implementation
meeting
at Geneva which marked the unhappy culmination of
a sincere effort by the international community to bring
about a negotiated settlement to the question of Namibia. The negotiations that followed the adoption of
Counci! resolution 435 (1978) clearly demonstrated
that South Africa was a!! along engaged in an exercise
of persistent procrastination
aimed primarily at perpetuating its illega! occupation of a Territory for which
the United Nations had assumed direct responsibility.
The talks held at Geneva in January were designed to
set a date for the commencement of the implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence
of Namibia, but South Africa virtually rejected the plan
by informing the meeting that implementation
of the
plan was premature. The responsibility for the failure
of the plan must fa!! squarely on South Africa, because
the only other party to the conflict, namely SWAPO,
has expressed its readiness to sign a cesse-tïre agreement without any conditions. The deplorable drama
that South Africa staged at Geneva, parading puppet
groups and hurling charges of partiality at the United
Nations, was obviously aimed at perpetuating the
colonial structure either by maintaining the status quo
or by imposing an interna! settlement in flagrant violation of Counci! resolution 439 (1978).

77. The countries members of the contact group are
today facing a choice. They must choose either the
sincere, lasting friendship of Africa today and tomorrow or sitting on the fente and in actua! practice allowing the crporth&l régime to find other opportunities
for its diabolica! manoeuvres.
78. On the one hand, there is the friendship of Africa;
on the other, there is Pretoria and crpcrrthd. That is
the choice that Africa is awaiting very calmly, just as
it is awaiting the advent-and
it Will corne, without a
doubt-of an independent, sovereign Namibia.
79. In any case, the Security Counci! must guarantee
a!! the responsibilities that properly belong to it and
take the decisions that are necessary to meet the
constant challenge to mankind posed by the racist
system of aprrrthd.
It Will thus be demonstrating
that
humanity should not despair of living in union, peace
and solidarity, to use an expression SO dear to the
President of the Togolese Republic, General Gnassingbé Eyadéma.
80. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister for Externa! Affairs of India, Mr. P.V. Narasimha
Rao. 1 welcome him here, and 1 invite him to take a
place at the Counci! table and to make his statement.

84. Thus, after two years. of patient negotiations
conducted by the Secretary-General and his Specia!
Representative
and severa! years of restraint on the
part of the international community, we have the sad
spectacle of the United Nations plan lying virtually
abandoned or, worse, deliberately sabotaged. The
destiny of an entire people is in danger because of
cynica! defiance by a régime which stands universally
condemned for its brutality towards its own people.
The process of decolonization
to which the United
Nations is committed has been halted just when it was
to be completed.

81. Mr. RAO (India): Mr. President, 1 am grateful to
you and your colleagues for giving me the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the critica! situation
in Namibia. It gives me great pleasure to see you presiding over these important meetings of the Security
Counci!. India has cordial relations with Ireland, and
1 reca!! that we have co-operated constructively
both
in the United Nations and otherwise. 1 have no doubt
that under your wise guidance the Counci! wi!! be able
to take positive action.
82. 1 have corne to New York directly from Algiers,
where the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries met in an extraordinary session at the leve!
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs to undertake an evaluation of the situation in Namibia.
The Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, after having considered the different
aspects of the problem, came to the unanimous conclusion that the continued illega! occupation of Namibia
by South Africa since 1966 in violation of numerous
resolutions of the United Nations, combined
with
South Africa’s brutal oppression of the people of
Namibia and its acts of aggression against the neighbouring independent African countries, constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. We decided
that charged, as it is, with the responsibility
of maintaining peace and security in the world, the Security

85. We had no il!usions about the chances of success
of the United Nations plan. History has taught us that
colonialist forces do not abandon their empires of their
own accord. Freedom is not handed over on a platter.
It was the intensity of the freedom struggle waged by
the Namibian people, under their sole and authentic
representative, SWAPO, that forces South Africa to
accept the United Nations plan, albeit only for tactica!
reasons, as has become very evident now. It is only
the constant prospect of the intensification of the
struggle and the increased pressure of the international
community that cari lead to the implementation
of the
plan. The struggle has continued unabated, but South
Africa is counting on its powerfu! patrons to stop the
avalanche of world opinion from forcing the United
9

ransom. Let us rise to the challenge :tnd rlo justice t0
the people of Namibia,
who look up tc? thc United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, fol’ slIPPort.

Nations to use the weapons available COit under the
Charter to enforce its Will. By a sad irony, South Africa
is expecting that some Members of the United Nations
Will themselves co-operate in frustrating the efforts
of the United Nations. Had it been made clear from
the beginning that failure to implement the plan would
invite the wrath of the Security Council, South Africa
might not have treated the United Nations with such
disdain and contempt.

88.

We are aware that the imposition of sanctions
South Africa is likely to creW
serious difticulties for the geographically
disndvantn~ed
nations
in Africa, whose economies are inextricahly ent~illgled
with the South African economy. But tlieir telllPOrarY
difficulties, for the alleviation of which met hods bave
to be found by the international
community,
cm-mot
be used as a pretext to encourage a racist t’&$ne t0
persist in its defiance of the United Nations.
lndependent African countries in southern Africn have
expressed their willingness to make sacrilïccs, IIOWever great, for their brethren in Nnmibia. “I’liere is no
price too great to pay for the emancipation
ol’ thc
majority community
in Namibia and the lihcration of
the African continent,
against

86. The time has now corne for a new response to the
challenge the attitude of South Africa poses to the
Security Council itself. The Council that approved a
plan of action barely two years ago and patiently
negotiated for its implementation
cannot abandon it
now as unworthy and impractical. The very fact that
the plan gained universal acceptance over a period of
time is sufficient testimony to its continuing validity.
The signing of a cesse-fire agreement, the establishment of a demilitarized
zone, the deployment
of
UNTAG, the holding of free and fair elections under
the supervision and control of the United Nations and
the rejection of any infernal settlement are the cardinal
elements of the plan, Those elements should not be
modified or diluted. The first step the Security Council
should take, following the failure of the Geneva talks,
is a reaffirmation of the plan accompanied by a determined effort to force South Africa to implement
it.

89. The struggle of the Namibian
people for theii
bisthright and the efforts of the United Nations to
complete the process of decolonization
must reinforcc
each other. 1 do not see how the imposition
of mandatory sanctions against South Africa cari be avoidcd
unless the Security Council succeeds in securing South
Africa’s compliance
with the United Nations plan
within a time-frame accepted by a11 parties and guaranteed by the permanent members of the Security
Council. If South Africa seeks to suhvert either the
United Nations plan or the approved lime-fratne, the
Council should be willing to impose mandatory sanctions without waiting for a fresh cal1 from thc rest of
the world. We remain convinced that thc time has
corne for the Council to act decisively in support of the
people of Namibia and to strengthen the United Nations, in whose continued existence lie the hopcs fol
the very survival of mankind.

87. The Council needs no advice on the concrete
measures it cari take to force South Africa to comply
with its resolutions. Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations contains provisions which are to be
applied by the Security Council in situations where
a Member nation refuses to give effect to Council decisions and thereby causes a threat to the peace and a
breach of the peace. Since there is no doubt that the
acts of genocide perpetrated by South Africa in Namibia and the acts of aggression committed
by it
against the neighbouring African States do attract the
provisions of Chapter VII, the non-aligned countries
have unanimously called upon the Security Council
to impose urgently comprehensive mandatory sanctions, including an oil embargo, against South Africa.
Such calls have indeed been made earlier by the non-’
aligned movement, but SOfar the Council, particularly
some of its permanent members, has preferred to stay
its hand SO as to give the negotiations a chance of
success. Now that those efforts have failed, it is incumbent upon the Council to consider the invocation
of the provisions of Chapter VII, which 1 have just
mentioned. It is the credibility of the United Nations
itself which is at stake here. If the Security Council
fails to act now with determination,
the strength of
the United Nations to play a crucial role in other crises
Will be considerably weakened. Let not the future
generations judge us wrong for having failed to give
sustenance to the peace-keeping ability of the United
Nations. Let us not be accused of having succumbed
to the pressures of selfïsh economic and strategic
considerations. Let it not be said that a racist minority
régime held the entire international
community
to

90. In conclusion, it is imperntive at tliis juncture fol
the Council to take resolute action, as follows: first, to
declare that South Africa, by its continuing violation
of the decisions and resolutions of the Unitcd Nations
on Namibia and its acts of aggression against neighbouring countries has committed a breach of the peace
and threatened
international
peace and security;
secondly, to cal1 for an immediate
end to the illegnl
occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the withdrawal of its forces from the territory of Namibia;
thirdly, to dernand the cessation by South Afric& of
a11acts of genocide against the people of Namibia and
of aggression against the front-line Stutcs: fourthly, to
reaffirm the continuing validity of the United Nations
plan contained in Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) for achieving the independence
of Namibia and to set up a time-frame for implementatien of the plan; and fïfthly, to decide to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa
with a view to securing the implementation
of the plan.
91. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Zaire. 1 invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
10

92. Mr. KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire) (interpctution .fionl French): Mr. President, 1 shouid iike
first of ail to thank you for this opportunity to participate in the present debate of the Security Councii on
Namibia.
93. 1 shouid iike aiso to convey to you my warm
congratulations
on your accession to the presidency
of the Councii for the month of Aprii. Your Weil-known
abiiities as a negotiator, coupied with the commitment
of the country you represent to the principies of iaw
and democracy, to the right of peopies to seif-determination and the preservation of their own identity, as
weii as your speciai responsiveness to questions of
decoionization,
are for us a guarantee of success for
these important Councii deiiberations on Namibia.
94. 1 shouid aiso iike to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Florin, representative of the
German Democratic Repubiic, for the quaiity of the
work he did as President of the Councii.
95. More than 60 years ago, Hitler and the Nazis,
inspired by the ideas of Gobineau on the superiority of
the Germanie race, ideas found in his ESSLI~ OIT the
Iwyrrdity
of the Hutnm Ru~s, by those of Chamberlain in his Fmtdmions
of the Ninetecnth Cetztwy,
by the notion of the super-man as deveioped by
Nietzsche, and by an oid tradition of anti-semitism
reinforced by 7%~)Pr~mcds of tlw Eidm qf’Zkm , by
the apoiogy for war, violence and the cuit of force
of Arndt-in
short, by ail the ideas of Fichte and Hegel
on the authoritarian, not to say totaiitarian, State; and
inspired aiso by the passionate nature of the man in
question-a
resuit of his temperament-were
putting
the finishing touches on German national sociaiism,
which was aimed at preserving and defending the
superior race: that of the ta11blond Aryans of the North,
we were toid.
96. National sociaiisrn was to be typified by an obsession with racism and the cuit of force and violence.
That absurd Nazi doctrine enguifed ail of Europe
-for Hitler tried to impose his iaw from the Atiantic
to the Urals-as well as other parts of the world.
97. Then we witnessed a formidable coalition, an
extraordinary alliance of Powers aimed at haiting the
Nazi adventure and at preserving the worid from such
pernicious notions of man, the State, relations among
peopies, and the races and their rights.

tbe rights
to them.

of the peoples

of Europe

n$$t

be resto&

99. What other system of government
today cornes
cioser than South Africa’s ftpat*lhfid
SyStem
t0 nC!kn~
which in its time, mobiiized
the whole of the internation;1 community
in a wave of universai
çondemnation?
100. But the impression tends to prevail today that ail
of us who participated
in the destruction
of Hitier’s
dream of domination,
based in particular
on race, seem
no longer to agree when it is a matter of restoring to
the African peopie of Namibia
its rights to self-determination,
freedom,
equaiity
and independcnce;
that
our co-operation
stops at the thresholcl
of Namibian
independence,
aithough as iate as 1966 we were unenimous in affirming
that South Africa had failed in its
obligations
with regard to the administration
of the
Territory and had not ensured the mortil and muterial
Weil-being of the peopie of Namibie
[Cctrtwl
Assc/nhly wsolution
2145 (XXf)] 1
101. 1 should iike the members of the Council-espcciaiiy the permanent
membcrs-in
the namc of cooperation
among nations and of international
pence
and security to wipe away that impression
by thc most
appropriate
means, means commensurate
with the
politicai
stakes, for the African
continent
is very
sensitive on the matter of southern
Afriçrt and the
independence
of Namibia.
102. Everyone knows that, when defeated, Gcrmany
was subjected to the iaw of the victors, und was stripped of the colonial possessions which it had heid since
the Berlin Conference
of 1884-1885, including
Namibia, the then Territory
of South West Africa.
103. TO punish the supporters of nazism and Gcrman
national sociaiism,
and aware, 1 think, of the dangers
and wrongs which could be brought about hy the transfer of those ideoiogies
to the colonies,
the victors
decided in the name of peace, international
securily
and civiiization
that Namibia
would he takcn from
Nazi Germany and placed undcr the authority
of the
League of Nations.
104. There was undoubtediy
an indication,
if not an
awareness, that fanatics of racism, violence and the
cuit of force were incapable of carrying out a mission
of civiiization
in the colonies and in Africa.

98. African soldiers joined the forces of the Aiiied
Powers to oppose the excesses of the Nazi racists and,
during the Second Worid War, as they had done during
the First, they died side by side with their European
brothers in arms, in defence of peace and international
security, human rights and the rights of peopies, in
defence of their cuitural identity, and of the territorial
integrity of States, to say “no” to the,dream of domination, to the Nazi desire for power and domination
based on racism and exploitation-in
short, SO that ail

105. On 17 December
1920, the Leaguc of Nations
entrusted to His Britannic
Majesty the Mandate ovet
Namibia,
to be carried out on his ‘behaif by the Government of South Africa.
106. In terms of the basic documents
of the League
ofNations,
especiaiiy of Article 22 of the Covcnant the
essence of the Mandates System flowed from the iden
of a sacred mission, dedicated and exclusiveiy
devoted
to a specific end: the Weil-being of peoples which had
11

112. In its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 MW 1967, the
General Assembly created the United Nations Council
for South WeSt Africa/Namibia,
which, as everyone
knows, was charged with the tusk of administering
Namibia
until its independence,
with the widest
possible participation
of the people of the Territory,
and of transferring a11 powers to the Namibian
people
after the proclamation
of independence.
That resolution stated that South Africa no longer hacl any right to
administer the Territory and set June 1968 as the deadline for Namibia’s accession to independence.

net yet reached the level of autonomous government
or acceded to independence.
107. in the case of Namibia, that mission implied that
a11political power was in the final analysis to be exercjsed for the benefit of the people of Namibia. And
this is where South Africa’s failure is to be noted, for
just after the First World War, it indulged in a savage
exploitation
of Namibia and a systematic despoilation
ofits resources to the detriment of the indigenons POPUlation. As early as 1923, that situation gave rise to the
outbreak of a spontaneous revolt by the Nama and
the Herero tribes, but it was suppressed in a bloodbath by South African troops.

113. Despite these positions which have been repeatedly affirmed and reaffirmed by the United Nations
and the international
community,
South Africa, as we
have seen, has proceeded to extend and apply to Namibia its policy of q~at*fhrirl and bantustanization,
as
well as its racist laws and racist juclicial procedures.
It has been carrying out arbitrary arrcsts and convictions, as well as summary executions of Namibians,
and continuing its illegal occupation of Namibia,
contemptuous of Security Council resolution 264 (19691,
which enjoined it to withdraw its administration
from
the Territory immediately.
It has nlso been systematically defying Council decisions in an obvious bid
to undermine United Nations authority.

108. Worse still, South Africa went about annexing
the Mandated Territory, making Namibia into its fifth
province
and exploiting the Territory for its exclusive
profit after the demise of the Mandates Commission of
the League of Nations in 1946, to which it reported on
the administration
of the Territory. Everyone knows
that, in its resolution 65 (1) of 14 December 1946, the
General Assembly, by 37 votes to none, with nine
abstentions, refused to permit the annexation of Namibia by South Africa as a fïfth province, and called
for the Territory to be placed under the International
Trusteeship System, inviting South Africa to propose
a trusteeship agreement for Namibia.

114. Thus 1968 ended without the wish of the General
Assembly being fulfilled, and without independence
for Namibia.
And here we are again today, in Aprit
1981, discussing this item in the Security Council.

109. South Africa, as could be expected, refused, and
maintained the stntus q~ro. On 11 July 1949, South
Africa informed the United Nations that it was no
longer in a position to submit reports on the administration of the Territory in the interest of effective administration and that, thenceforth, the Territory of Namibia would be represented in the South African
Parliament , l”

115. Understandably
exasperated,
the United Nations, through the Security Council, by its resolution
283 (1970), embarked upon the course of sanctions
-selective,
of course-in
the face of the serious
concern over the flagrant and persistent refusa1 of
South Africa to abide by the decisions of the Security
Council.

110. By its South West Africa Affairs Amendment
Act of 1949, South Africa, in defiance of the international community and in contempt of the United
Nations, unilaterally altered the international status of
Namibia to incorporate it purely and simply as a fifth
province.

116. South Africa replied by stepping up its repression of the Namibian
people and by persistently
violating human rights; by efforts to destroy the national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia and by
the aggressive strengthening of its military machine in
the Territory,
which it has since used as a base for
attacks against neighbouring
independent
African
countries.

II 1. Convinced that the administration
of the Mandated Territory by South Africa had been carried out in
a mariner contrary to the Mandate, to the Charter of
the United Nations and to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and prompted by successive advisory
opinions of the International
Court of Justice, the
General Assembly, by its resolution 2145 (XXI)
affirmed its right to revert to itself the administration
oi
the Mandated Territory, and reaffïrmed the inalienable right of the people of South West Africa to freedom and independence in accordance with the Charter
with resolution 1514 (XV) and with other relevani
resolutions Of the Assembly on South West Africa
That important resolution of 27 October 1966 estab:
lished in no uncertain terms the responsibilities of the
United Nations towards Namibia.

117. Thus, as everyone knows, by resolution 385
(1976), the Council took a series of measures to condemn the continued illegal occupation of the Territory
of Namibia
by South Africa-condemning
South
Africa’s illegal and arbitrar)
application
of racially
discriminatory
and repressive laws and practices in
Namibia,
condemning
the South African military
buildup in Namibia and any use of the Territory as a
base for attacks against neighbouring
countries. That
resolution called upon South Africa to put an immediate end to its policy of bantustans and so-called
homelands, the purpose of which is to violate Namibia’s national unity and territorial
integrity. It also
12

condemned South Africa’s attempts to evade the clear
demand of the United Nations for the holding of free
eleotions under United Nations supervision and control
in Namibia. It further declared that, in determining
the date, time-table and modalities for the elections
in accordance with paragraph 7 of that resolution, there
should be adequate time, to be decided upon by the
SecuritY Council, for the purpose of enabling the
United Nations to establish the necessary machinery
within Namibia to supervise and control such elections,
as well as to enable the people of Namibia to organize
PoliticallY for the purpose of such elections. Furthermore, that resolution fixed the deadline of 31 August
1976 for the purpose of considering the appropriate
measures to be taken under the Charter of the United
Nations is the event of non-compliance
by South
Africa.

123. The crucial question to which the Council has to
find an aPPropriate response is: what must be done and
how should it be done to induce South Africa to cooperate in the implementation of its resolutions and
those of the General Assembly on Namibia? And here
the question arises as to what effective pressure is to
be exerted on the Pretoria régime to prevail upon it to
co-operate in the implementation of the plan for the
settlement of the Namibian question adopted by the
United Nations,
124. We believe that we should neglect no initiative
that cari exert pressure. The international community,
through the United Nations system, governmental
and non-governmental organizations, Young people,
journalists, athletes, trade unions, the world of science
and the arts, must a11be constantly mobilized in order
increasingly to isolate the Pretoria régime as long as it
continues to pursue its criminal policy of crpcrr’theicl in
defiance of relevant United Nations resolutions.

118. It was only on 27 July 1978 that the Council, by
its resolution 431 (1978), took note of the proposed
settlement of the situation in Namibia, contained in
document S/12636, and requested the Secretary-General to submit at the earliest date possible a report
containing his recommendations for the implementation of the proposed settlement.

125. 1 might well stress here the exceptional role of
permanent members of the Security Council-particularly the members of the contact group-in exerting
pressure on South Africa to induce it to abide by United
Nations decisions.

119. Yet South Africa, despite the terms of resolution 435 (1978), would once again take unilateral measures in connexion with the electoral process-particularly the unilateral drawing-up of electoral rolls-in
order to ensure the illegal transfer of powers, in violation of relevant resolutions of the Council, thus safeguarding its interests in Namibia, in defïance of the
legitimate aspirations of the people concerned.

126. It would undoubtedly disturb the future of
relations of co-operation based on confidence and
mutual respect, if the permanent members of the
Security Council, in particular our friends the members
of the contact group, were to fa11short of the actions
we are entitled to expect of them in order to bring about
Namibia’s speedy accession to independence and the
restoration of a climate of peace and stability in southern Africa.

120. Thus, by its resolution 439 (1978), the Council
declared that the elections organized by South Africa,
and their results, were nul1 and void and that there
would be no recognition by the United Nations, or any
Member State, of any representative or organ established by that process, and called upon South Africa
immediately
to cancel the elections it had proposed to
hold in Namibia in December 1978.

127. In order to depart from the beaten path the Security Council must find the most appropriate form of
pressure or effective sanctions against South Africa.
In this context, and mindful of the effects of the selective sanctions adopted in the past against South Africa,
it becomes clear that consideration of recourse to the
comprehensive economic sanctions and other measures provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter is in
keeping with the scope of South Africa’s systematic
opposition to any suggestion of co-operation with the
United Nations and to any notion of a negotiated settlement of the Namibian problem, and with the resultant
profound concern in the world at large and in Africa in
particular.

12 1. Al1 that is very well known. 1 should like to stress
here the particular responsibility of the United Nations
-especially
that of the Security Council-to
lead Namibia to independence and to seek a11possible means
to ensure implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
-and to perform that task in spite of South Africa’s
persistent defiance.
122. We are convinced that even within the United
Nations framework it is possible-indeed
desirableto find original formulas that would allow a11 parties
concerned to try once again to corne to agreement on
universally recognized principles likely, once accepted
by all, to guarantee the independence of Namibia-if,
indeed, we are a11really committed to the emergence
of a democratic society in Namibia, to the principle of
multiracialism,
to the rights of the African majority and
t. protection ofthe rights and interests of the minority,
and of a11 minorities, in Namibia.

128. Today we must a11 realize that the persistent
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa in violation of the principles and purposes of the Charter, the
denial of the inalienable rights of the Namibian people
to self-determination,
freedom and independence
within a united Namibia and the maintenance of the
southern part of the African continent in a state of
insecurity and constant instability constitute a grave
threat to peace and international security in that part
of the world. In our view, South Africa alone must
13

mentation of Security Council resoiution 435 (1978)
and South Africa’s constant de8ance of the international community,
it aiso cannot to1erat.e the repeated acts of aggression of South Africa against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States in
the region at a time which is SOcritical and delicate in
international
relations.
Such behaviour,
which is
irresponsible in more than one aspect, wouid seem to
indicate the casualness with which that régime cari
lend itseif to a chain of events which may iead the
world to war.

assume the entire burden of responsibility
for this
ciimate of constant turbulence and instabiiity, which
couid give rise to an explosion at any moment.
129. The failure of the Geneva meeting on the preimpiementation
of the United Nations plan contained in
Councii resoiution 435 (1978) is further proof of the
determination
of the racist Pretoria régime to perpetuate its iilegai occupation of Namibia, thus defying the
international community, and at the same time adds a
new dimension to the possible aggravation of the situation in southern Africa.

136. 1 cannot end my statement without paying a
particular tribute to the Secretary-General
for his
remarkable contribution
to the efforts of the international community and the United Nations to bring the
peopie of Namibia to independence. 1 am convinced
that the international
community Will properly appreciate this invaiuable contribution.

130. This series of meetings of the Councii, which is
being held at a particuiarly criticai time in the history
of international relations based on trust and within a
context marked by uncertainty and the stepping up of
mistrust in international relations and the deliberate
maintenance of a climate of confrontation, is absolutely
crucial for the prestige of the United Nations and the
Council in particular.

137. 1 shouid like, on behalf of peace and the indispensable co-operation of nations, to express the hope
that the Security Council Will give the most appropriate
response to the expectations of millions of Africans
whose eyes are turned towards it for the restoration of a
ciimate of calm, security and stabiiity in southern
Africa, for an acceieration of the process of bringing
Namibia to independence and, above ail, for maintaining intact the prestige of this important organ of
the United Nations entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security.

131. For us the Namibian question is and must remain
essentially a question of decoionization.
Ail parties
should therefore refrain from approaching it in such a
way as to distort its true meaning and thus contribute
to deiaying the independence of the Territory.
132. 1 think that we are ail in favour of the emergence of a democratic society under the leadership
of the majority, a society mindful of human rights and
founded on respect for law and the protection of the
rights and interests of ail its citizens without distinction as to race, religion, philosophy or poiitical opinion.
We are convinced that, by ieaving it to the peopie of
Namibia themselves to decide freeiy on their future
by means of free elections under the control of the
United Nations, that peopie would prove to the world,
as others have proved in the recent past in that region,
their fuli degree of poiitical maturity and ability to
manage their affairs-in a Word, everything of which
a peopie is capable when it works in freedom.

138. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker for this
meeting is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, .Mr. Witness Mangwende, M.P. 1 welcome him
here and 1 invite him to take a place at the Councii table
and to make his statement.
139. Mr. MANGWENDE
(Zimbabwe): Mr. President, on behalf of the OAU, which 1 currently have
the honour to serve as Chairman of its Council of Ministers, 1 shouid like to take this opportunity to congratuiate you warmly on your assumption of the high
office of the presidency of the Council. 1 have no doubt
that your sagacity, experience and diplomatie
skiii,
which have already been amply demonstrated,
Will
give positive and constructive guidance to our deliberations on the question of Namibia.

133. On that basis the Security Council should be
abie to bring together ail the conditions likeiy to reopen
negotiations on the impiementation
of resolution 43.5
(1978), whiie maintaining an attitude of firmness and
not acquiescence with regard to South Africa. In our
view, the Council has no other choice if it wants to
see peace in the southern part of the black continent.

140. The United Nations has now been preoccupied
with the question of Namibiafor 35 years. The question
is a simple one of genuine self-determination
and independence for the Territory, which has the misfortune
of being under the illegai miiitary occupation of South
Africa in defiance of the international
community.
It is against that background that what was rega&xi
as the dawn of a new era for the peopie of Namibia
was proclaimed to us by the contact group of Western
States, which, aiso with a great deai of fanfare, informed the international
community that it had negotiated a settlement of the Namibian situation with South
Africa to enable the people of Namibia to exercise their

134. In soiidarity with a11thejust causes ofliberation,
the Republic of Zaire wishes to reaffirm its total support
for SWAPO, the authentic and legitimate representative of the people of Namibia, and for the legitimacy
of the struggie being waged by the valiant people of
Namibia for their independence and respect for their
territorial integrity.
135. While the Repubiic of Zaire condemns the persistent refusai of South Africa to co-operate with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations in the imple14

and committed itself to granting a fake independence
by way of an interna1 settlement à la Muzorewa. Despite these ominous developments,
the five Western
Powerscontinued
to assure us of the good faith of South
Africa and urged the need for continued negOtiatiOl1
on a settlement.

right to genuine self-determination
and independence
in a free and fair election under the supervision and
control of the United Nations,
141. On the basis of the Western proposa1 [5/12636],
the international
community,
through the Security
Council, proceeded to adopt resolution 435 (1978),
which established the United Nations plan to bring
Namibia to genuine self-determination
and independence within a period of 12 months. Thereafter the
OAU as well as SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the people of Namibia,
endorsed the
United Nations plan and requested the SecretaryGeneral to proceed expeditiously
to implement
that
plan.

146. TO tut a long story short, since the adoption of
Council resolution 435 (1978), the international
community has been engaged in three years of futile negotiations with South Africa regarding the question of
Namibia.
The limit of African endurance and the
patience of the Namibian
people was reached at the
Geneva meeting held in January to consider the modalities for the implementation
of the United Nations
plan, At that meeting, South Africa refused to agree
to a cesse-fire date and to a date for the emplacement
of UNTAG
in Namibia
to ensure independence
for
the Territory in 198 1, as had already been decided upon
by the Security Council.

142. Soon after the adoption of Council resolution
435 (1978), it became apparent, through exchanges of
correspondence
with the Secretary-General,
that
South Africa was, to say the least, not prepared to
proceed to the implementation
of the United Nations
plan. Accordingly,
the Council adopted resolution
439 (1978), by paragraphs 5 and 6 of which it demanded
that South Africa co-operate with the Security Council
and the Secretary-General
in the implementation
of
its resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978) and 435 (1978)
and warned South Africa that its failure to do SOwould
compel the Security Council to meet forthwith to
initiate appropriate actions under the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof, SO as
to ensure South Africa’s compliance with the aforementioned resolutions.

147. The OAU holds South Africa fully responsible
for the failure of the Geneva meeting to reach agreement on the implementation
of Council resolution 435
(1978). By its refusa1 at the Geneva meeting to cooperate with the Secretary-General
in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), South Africa, of its own
accord, placed itself within the ambit of paragraph 6 of
Council resolution 439 (1978). Accordingly,
the thirtysixth ordinary session of the OAU Council of Ministers,
meeting at Addis Ababa from 23 February to 1 March,
among other things endorsed the ca11 of the New Delhi
Ministerial
Conference of Non-Aligned
Countries for
the convening of the Security Council to meet to consider the situation in Namibia with a view to adopting
comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, including an
oil embargo, against racist South Africa in order to
ensure the implementation
of the United Nations decisiens and resolutions on Namibia
]S/f4390, CIIIIILJS,
paru. 101. On behalf of the OAU, I should like to urge
you, Mr. President, as well as a11member States of the
Security Council, to give serious consideration
to the
request of the Council of Ministers to which 1 have just
referred, with a view to reaching a speedy solution to
the Namibian question.

143. In the course of these developments,
the OAU
was made to believe that the five Western Powers were
in a position to use their political and economic leverage
with South Africa to ensure the full co-operation of
South Africa in the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978).
144. What cari we now say of this confidence reposed
in the Western group? We at the OAU are greatly
disappointed at the apparent unwillingness and halfhearted effort of the contact group of Western States
to exert concerted pressure on the Pretoria régime to
co-operate with the Secretary-General
in the implementation of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.

148. We are most concerned that the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia by racist South Africa in deflance of United Nations resolutions is posing a very
serious threat to international
peace sud security.
Nobody but the most complacent
observer cari fail
to see that the use of Namibia by apurfheid South
Africa to destabilize
the southern African region
seriously threatens world peace and security. This
Council cannot afford to be indifferent to such a situation. Also, the Council cannot afford to prevaricate
on an issue of principle and, indeed, on the subject of
enforcing its own resolutions.

145. Following the adoption of Council tesolutions
435 (1978) and 439 (1978), South Africa began to stall
and prevaricate, but continued to give the impression
that it was ever ready to co-operate with the United
Nations in the implementation
of resolution
435
(1978). However, it soon became obvious that South
Africa had its own plans for Namibia,
which were
completely contrary to the spirit and letter of that resolution. It demonstrated its bad faith by using the intervening period after the adoption of resolution 435
(1978) to consolidate its occupation of the Territory
and establish apuppet régime in the Territory, to which
it devolved administrative
and legislative authority
15

1 Ibid., 17th meeting, para. 182.
h Ibid., 27th meeting, para. 177.
7 Ml.,
9th meeting,
para. 176.
R I/d.,
4th meeting,
paras. 245 and 246.
‘) A/CONF.
IO7/1
“’ See Officid
R~wrrls
qf thc Fottrth
Swsiorr
qf thc Gemral
smh/y,
At~trex to the Ford1
Conmittre,
document
A/929.

NOTES
t A/36/116 and Corr. 1, annex.
1 OjJkial Records of thc General Assemhly,
9th meeting, para. 71.
.I fhid., 4th meeting, paras. 25-27.
4 UN., 33rd meeting, paras. 175 and 176.

Thirty#fth

Session,

16

As-
