UiVITED NATIONS

SECURITY

C.OU.NCI,L
REC,QRD.S

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

2081
st

MEETING: 16 JUNE 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/208 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/12723 and Add-l) . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2081

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securify Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2081st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
A&dent:

16 June 1978, at 3.30 p.m.

Mr. Mario ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia).

efforts to promote a just and durable solution of the
Cyprus problem in accordancewith United Nationsresolutions. His task is extremely difficult and subtle, but he has
been carrying it out with excellenceanddistinction.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United King
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

5. We would also commendthe significantcontribution in
this respect of the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr, Roberto
Guyer and Mr. Brian Urquhart, and that of their able
collaborators in the Secretariat.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2081)
6. I would also register our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,Mr. Galindo Pohl,
and his deputy, Mr. Remy Gorge, for pursuing their
difficult and delicate task in Cyprus with dedication and
devotion.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12723 and Add.1)

7. I wish also to express our appreciation and highly
commend the efforts of Major-General James Quinn,
Commander of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), and the officers and menservingunder
his command for the exemplary manner in which they
carry out their duties.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/12723 and Add.1)

8. Last but not least, we are indeed grateful to the
Governments which, through voluntary contributions of
personneland funds, enable the Forceto continuecarrying
out its important missionof advancingthe causeof peacein
Cyprus and, by projection, in the world.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
2080th meeting, I invite the representatives of Cyprus,
Greece and Turkey to take places at the Council table.

9. Of course, before concluding my thanks, I shouldlike
to express to all membersof the Council my appreciation
and my gratitude for staying so late last night until it was
possible to adopt a resolution on Cyprus [resozution

At the invitation of the hesident, Mr. Rolandis (Cyprus),
Mr. Papoulias (Greece) and Mr. TUrkmen (Turkey) took
places at the Security Council table.

430 (1978)].

10. The Security Council is meeting today, after having
adopted a resolution this morning, in order to considerthe
operation of the United Nations Peace-keepingForce in
Cyprus on the basisof the Secretary-General’s
report of 31
May. Thesesix-monthly meetingshavein practiceprovided
the occasion, apart from the renewalof the mandate as
proposed by the Secretary-Generaland as requiredby the
circumstances,for a review of the situation with regardto
the substantive aspectsof the Cyprusproblem in the light
of the developments set out in the report. While this
practice has been both useful and legitimate, certain
misgivingshave been expressedby membersof the Council
as to the appropriatenessof making the renewalof the
UNFICYP mandate dependenton the substantiveaspectsof
the Cyprus problem. For my part, I seethe validity of these
misgivings, I believe that these substantiveaspectsof the
Cyprus problem, which is in its essencean international

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation j?om Spanish): The
first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus,
Mr. Rolandis, and I now call on him.
3. Mr, ROLANDIS (Cyprus): Mr. President, first of all 1
should like warmly to congratulate you on the assumption
of the presidency of this augustbody. We are confident
that under your wise leadershipand guidancethe Council
will have fruitful deliberations. My delegation and I are
particularly happy to seethat the representativeof Bolivia,
a country with which Cyprus maintains closerelations, is
presidingover this debate.
4. I wish further to express,on behalf of my Government,
our
warm feelings of gratitude and appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr, Kurt Waldheim, for Ins tireless
1

would alsorecall that the mainaspectsof theseresolutions,
which haveremainedunimplementedasa result of Turkey’s
contemptuousdisregard,are the withdrawal of the foreign
troops, the return of all the refugeesto their homes,the
cessationof foreign intervention and the holding of free
negotiationsbetween the two communitieson the constitutional systemof the Republicof Cyprus.

problem constituting a threat to international peace and
security and therefore, under the Charter, fully within the
iurisdictjon of the Council, should be fully considered and
&alt with at a separate meeting of the Council.
During SUCll
;I meeting, decisions should be taken to meet the requirements of the situation in the light of the recommendation
of the General Assembly for the adoption of all practical
means to enforce the implementation of the United Nations
resolutions with regard to Cyprus. Provided that points of
substance are satisfactorily resolved by such a meeting, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter for the
effective implementation of the resolutions as stipulated
under Chapter VII, we may accept the above new procedures. Thus, in view of the fact that Turkey has been
treating those resolutions with defiance and contempt, my
Government reserves the right to come before the Council
at the appropriate time and to ask that effective measures
should be taken by it under the relevant provisions of the
Charter, including enforcement measures under Chapter
VII, for the implementation of its own resolutions.

17. The second development was the submissionby the
Turkish side [S/12723, annex/ of their already notorious
proposalsof 13 April 1978. Theselong anticipated proposals,that even countriesclosely connectedwith Turkey
have described as being equivalent to partition, which
constitute a clever but thinly-veiled attempt to Iegalizethe
faits accomplisof the invasion and which ignore the basic
rulesof international conduct and ethics, have servedonly
one purpose: to reveal the abyssseparatingthe two sidesto
the dispute, which is equal to the abyssseparatingjustice
from injustice. The “Turkish Cypriot side wants nothing
more in Cyprus than its right to exist as an equalpartner”
[2054th meeting, pm-a.95j. That was the modestmessage
of Mr. Celik on 15 December 1977 when he appeared
before the Council. In April 1978, this message
wasslightly
altered when the proposalswere handed over. The partnership this time wasa partitionist partnership. The sharewas
the samemodest share: 50 per cent for 18 per cent of the
population-a new system of modern mathematicswhere
I8 equals82.

11. In order to put the matter into perspective, I should
like to deal briefly with the main developments that have
occurred since 1974, and especially since the last renewal of
the UNFICYP mandate and immediately before, which
directly affect the issue now before the Security Council.
12. It may be recalled that, following the atrocious
invasion of my country by Turkey in July and August
1974, 40 per cent af the territory of Cyprus was occupied
and continues to be occupied by the Turkish army and
200,000
indigenous
Greek
Cypriot
inhabitantsapproximately one third of the island’s total populationbecame and still are refugees in their own country.

18. Weare at a point where the negotiationsbetweenthe
Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots have come to a
standstill as a result of the Turkish proposals.These
proposals, by running counter to the agreedbasisof a
federal constitution duly preservingthe sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of the Republic of Cyprus, have
led the intercommunal negotiations to an impasse.These
proposalshave necessarilyplacedin questionthe validity of
suchnegotiationswhen the two sidesare now obviously at
crosspurposes. They are sharply at cross purposeswhen
one side aims at the preservation of the independenceof
Cyprus as a State Member of the United Nationsand the
other sidelooks for its dismembermentand partition.

13., Fierce bombing of undefended cities and villages,
massive executions of unarmed civilians and prisoners,
desecration of places of worship, looting and usurpation of
properties, acts of rape, the colonization of the occupied
Brea by tens of thousands of Turks from Turkey and many
other crimes have characterized the Turkish invasion and
occupation.
14. I need not really enlarge on a subject whose tragic
dimensions have been brought to the Council’s attention on
many occasions in the past. I need not enlarge on the crimes
of invasion and occupation which have been repeatedly
condemned under the domes of this sacred shrine of justice.
I simply remind the Council, because we have to be
reminded of the past if we are to look forward to a better
Suture.

19. The Government and peopleof Cyprus asa whole will
never consentto the dismembermentof their islandand the
destruction of its independent existence and of their own
identity as a people.Wetherefore repeat here and now that
we cannot go into any form of talks and negotiationsbased
on partitionist proposals.
20. The intercommunal negotiations, as clearly provided
in General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), are for the
solution of the internal constitutional problemsof Cyprus.
By contrast, the international issue of the aggressive
occupation by Turkey of Cypriot territory is not a subject
of negotiation, nor do the United Nationsresolutionsrefer
to any negotiation regarding the territorial aspect. The
resolutions simply demandthe speedy withdrawal of the
foreign forces of occupation, the cessationof outside
intervention and the return of the refugeesto their homes
in safety. Negotiationsare placed by the resolutionswithin
their appropriate province, namely, the internal constitutional issue.As expressly stipulatedin the resolutions,such
negotiations shall be freely conducted, This would mean

1% Since the final part of last year, we have had three
main developments with regard to the Cyprus problem.
16. The first development was the adoption by the
General Assembly last November of resolution 32/15, by an
overwhelming majority. I ‘would remind the Council that in
this resolution the General Assembly, recognizing that the
situation in Cyprus endangers international peace and
security, recommended that the Security Council should
keep the question of Cyprus under constant review and
adopt all practical means to promote the effective implementation of its relevant resolutions in all their aspects. I
2

renewing the UNFJCYP mandatr, tis proposed by the
SecretaryGeneral and as done this morning, and teaffirm
ing its previous resolutions, to take into account also these
three important developments, namely, the need for measures to implement the [Jnited Nations resolutions, the fact
that the nature of the Turkish proposals, unless drastically
changed, makes impossible the resumption of intercommunal negotiations, and the bold new proposal for demilitarizatioa within the framework of the implementation of
the United Nations resolutions. At the same time, I should
like to underline the need for a full and substantive debate
on all the international aspects of the Cyprus problem at
the appropriate time and the taking by this body of all the
necessary measures to enforce its own decisions. The
Government of Cyprus firmly believes it is eminently
advisable and necessary, in the true interest of all concerned
and of world peace, that the resolutions of the Security
Council should be implemented through the coilecUve
action provided for in the Charter in Articles 41 to 43.

that Cyprus must first be relieved of the f’orcign occupation
army. Its very presence and its criminal activities in fails
accomplis-to change the demography of Cyprus-have all
along been undermining and destroying the very purpose nf
the negotiations.
21. The procedure and priorities adopted in resolution
3212 (XXIX) follow the Charter. Chapter VI of the Charter
speaks of negotiations for the pacific settlement of disputes, in order to forestall or prevent aggression. Once
aggression has taken place, the Charter no longer refers to
negotiations but calls, under Chapter VII, for decisions by
the Security Council and demands the implementation of
such decisions through appropriate action as provided in
the Charter. Aggression is not a subject of negotiations.
Aggression must be stopped by resolution and the situation
restored to its pre-aggression state.
22. Despite the foregoing very clear-cut positions, the
Government of Cyprus, showing flexibility and goodwill,
agreed to negotiate the future of the invaded and semioccupied country at gunpoint. But the gesture was not
appreciated, We were next asked to negotiate the sell-out of
our country. We were asked to negotiate our funeral. And
we were called intransigent when we refused to do SO. We
were called intransigent when we indicated that partition
cannot become unity by negotiations, in view of the
qualitative distance between these two concepts.

26. Before concluding, I should like to refer to paragraph
70 of the report now before us, which relates to enclaved
persons. It is stated:
“The situation in the north . . , improved during the
period under review. . . . There has been a relative
improvement in the living conditions and the economic
situation of the Greek Cypriots in the north”.
The reality, however, is that the situation in the north
remains essentially unchanged. Not only have none of the
conditions of the agreement of 2 August 1975 fS/ll789,
annex] been complied with by the Turkish side-which
completely reneged on its cotnmitments
after having
received its benefits from the agreement-.-but all tlw
harassment continues on the same pattern as previously.
This is shown by a series of detailed and authentic reports
and statements giving an accurate descrjption of the
situation in the north during the period in question. This
includes seizure of property, larceny, burglary, rape, arson,
looting, destruction of churches and cemeteries and that
exercise of all kinds of pressures, aside from the continuing:
withholding of all medical care and essential freedom of
movetnent, in violat.ion of the aforesaid agreement.

23. In this connexion, I think I should refer to the further
gesture of President Kyprianou: his expression of willing
ness to meet the Prime Minister of Turkey, Mr. Ecevit, in an
effort to explore the possibility of common ground for the
resumption of the negotiations. President Kyprianou, ~110
is recognized as the President of the Republic of Cyprus by
the United Nations and all the countries in the world, with
the solitary exception of Turkey, even agreed to meet
Mr. Ecevit as a private individllal, in an effort to make
things easier. This suggestion was rejected by Mr. Ecevit.
24. The third development was the proposals of the
President of Cyprus regarding steps within the framework
of the United Nations and on the basis of paragraph 6 of
the basic General Assembly resolution, 3212 (XXIX), to
take the Cyprus problem out of its present impasse-most
notably the proposal for the full demilitarization and
disarmament of the Republic of Cyprus, whereby internal
security would be the responsibility of a mixed Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot police force und.er the
permanent guidance and control of an international United
Nations police force. This proposal, which is fully reflected
in paragraph 57 of the Secretary-General’s report, constitutes a bold and imaginative initiative going beyond the
already established United Nations position for the withdrawal of the foreign troops from the Republic of Cyprus
and could prove to be not only a major development
towards the just solution of the Cyprus problem but also a
catalyst and an innovation of wider application in the
context of the establishment of peace zones within the
over-all objective of general and complete disarmament
currently being dealt with by the special session of the
General Assembly.

27. We the Government and the people of Cyprus place>
very high hopes in the Organization and in all it stands for..
We are not naive. We have first-hand experience of the
realities. We know that your voice and my voice and the
voice of all those in this building cannot be heard very far
outside the precincts of this chamber. We know that thr
muscles of this establishment are crippled by the arrogance
of those who have learned to defy its decisions. But we still
believe. If we abandoned our faith in the future of the
United Nations, we might as well lose faith in the future of
mankind.
28. We shall do our utmost and we shall co-operate very
closely with the Secretary-General in his starch for a just
and lasting solution of our problem. We shall exhibit
goodwill, good faith, flexibility, reason and fairness of
mind. But WC shall not abandon our principles or 0111
dignity. hi this building we have sought and found justice.
We wish that this kind of justice could become enforceable
in the whole world, and we trust that it will.

25. In our submission, it would have been appropriate for
the Security Council at this juncture, together with
3

29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): ‘l’h
next speaker is the representative of Greece, on whom I
now call.
30. Mr, PAPOULIAS (Greece): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to extend to you my warm and sincere
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Your authority and
prestige as weI1 as your high qualifications constitute the
best guarantee that the debate on this important item will
be concluded successfully. It is particularly gratifying to my
delegation that you represent a country which is linked
with my country by traditional ties of friendship and
culture. I would also thank you and the members of the
Council for having allowed me to participate in the
discussion.
31. The Security Council has, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General, decided to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for a further
period of six months. That resolution, to which the
Govermnent of Cyprus has agreed, has the support of mY
Government. We certainly agree with the statement contained in paragraph 81 of his report of 31 May, that the
continued presence of UNFICYP remains indispensable in
keeping the potentially dangerous situation in the island
under control and in facilitating the search for a peaceful
settlement.
32. I take this opportunity to express on behalf of the
Government of Greece our profound appreciation to the
Member States that are providing contingents to UNFICYP
at a considerable cost to themselves as well as to those
Governments that are making voluntary contributions for
the maintenance of the Force. Further, we express our
sincere thanks to the Commander, Major-General Quinn,
and to the officers and men of UNFICYP who are carrying
out with exemplary devotion and efficiency their difficult
responsibilities and their humanitarian task. Finally, I wish
to extend our warmest congratulations to the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus,
Mr. Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, who has recently taken up his
duties. I can assure him that he will have our full
co-operation and assistance for the success of his important
mission.
33. In considering the report of the Secretary-General, the
Foreign Minister of Cyprus, Mr. Rolandis, has so ably and
convincingly dealt with the tidcr implications and aspects
of the Cyprus problem that I do not think it is necessary
for me to elaborate at length on the question. I wish,
however, to put on record that the Greek Government
supports the proposal made by the President of the
Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, during the special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament1
and repeated today by the Foreign Minister of Cyprus as
regards the full demilitarization and disarmament of the
Republjc of Cyprus within the framework of the full
implementation of the United Nations resolutions on
Cyprus and of a just solution to the problem.
34. I shoufd now like to make a few observations on the
question under discussion: from the Secretary-General’s
1 Official
Records
of the General Assembly,
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2nd meeting.

Tenth

Special

report now before us, we have once again to note with
regret that no progresswhatsoeverhas beenmadeasregards
the implementation of the United Nations resolutionson
Cyprus.
35. Thus, a third of the island’spopulation, some200,000
people, are still refUgeeS
in their own COUntry andare kept
by force from returning to their ancestralhomes,which in
itself is a grossviolation of human rights. To that is added
the usurpation of their properties for the purpose of
facilitating the settlement of colonizers, which is againin
itself a flagrant violation of basicinternational legalnorms
and of the fourth Geneva Convention, concerning the
treatment of the inhabitants of occupied territories. Further, a substantialpart of the territory of the Republic of
Cyprus, about 40 per cent, continues to be under foreign
military occupation and control, in spite of the principles
of the Charter, General Assemblyresolution 3212 (XXIX),
Security Council resolution 365 (1974) endorsingresolution 3212 (XXIX), and subsequentCouncil and Assembly
resolutions,inter aZia, resolutions3395 (XXX), 31/12 and
32/l 5.
36. Concerning, specifically, the contents of the Secretary-General’sreport, we note once againwith regret that
the freedom of movement of UNFICYP is still limited
/S/12723, para. 151, that the situation in the north is still
not consonantwith the agreementsreached at Vienna on
2 August 1975 [ibid., para. 701, that appreciablequantities
of commodities and other movable properties have been
looted in the new town of Famagusta(Varosha) /ibid.,
para. 241 and that no progresshas been made on the
question of missing persons[ibid., para. 711, thus perpetuatingthe agony of their families.
37. The report reveals also that the Greek Cypriot
population in the north hasbeen further reducedto a mere
1,731 persons[ibid., para. 421. A comparisonwith the
Secretary-General’sreport of 7 June 1977, when the Greek
Cypriot population in the north was shown as 2,000
persons[S/12342, para. 201, proves that the actual level
representsa reduction of about 14 per cent in one year.
38. Chapter V of the report, on the good offices of the
Secretary-General,and Chapter VII, containinghis observations, are againa causeof disappointmentand of concern,
which I am surethe Council share.Indeed, despitethe great
and painstakingefforts of our esteemedSecretary-General
to reactivate-in pursuanceof his missionof good officesthe intercommunal talks, it has not proved possibleto
create the proper basis for meaningful negotiations.I
shouldlike on this occasionto convey to Mr. Waldheimas
well as to his collcagues,the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Roberto Guyer and MT. Bfian Urquhart, my Govern”
mcnt’ssincerethanks and deepappreciation.
39. The Security Council which, over the past four yew
has examined the Secretary-General’sreports on the outcomeof six roundsof intercommunaltalks at Vienna under
his auspices,is fully aware of the reasonsbehind the
stalemate. Under various pretexts, the other side has
persistently avoided coming forward with proposalsthat
would be in keeping with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutionsand would facilitate the resumptionof

bly and Security Council resolutions.
General rightly points out in his report:

a serious and meaningful dialogue. The latest efforts made
by the Secretary-General have unfortunately not spared
him from the frustrations of the past, as is eloquently
reflected in his observations.

As the Secretary-

‘Lthe status quo must not be assumed to constitute an
available viable alternative, since potentially dangerous
elements of instability are inherent in the prevailing
situation” [S/12723, para. 771.

40. Since much has been said recently on the Turkish
Cypriot proposals and a lot of confusion has been deliberately created, for purposes tl-15Council is fully aware of, I
should like to clarify, for the benefit of the Council, certain
important points.

46. There can be no doubt that a peaceful solution of the
Cyprus problem is most urgently needed, as only this would
eliminate the potentially explosive situation and the danger
that threatens international peace and security as stated in
General Assembly resolution 31/12. The Security Council
has a special responsibility in this regard.

41. As the Prime Minister of Greece has stated, it is not
enough for proposals to be concrete, they have also to be
reasonable in order to constitute the basis for a renewal of
the intercommunal dialogue leading to a just solution of the
problem. Certainly we do not wish to give our own
subjective interpretation as to what is reasonable. There is,
fortunately, in the Security Council, in the United Nations
and in world public opinion a common measure as to what
is just and reasonable that can objectively guide our
judgement.

47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fram Spanish): The
next speaker is Mr. Denktag, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
48.. Mr. DENKTA$: Mr. President, I am grateful to you
and to all the members of the Council for giving me this
opportunity to make a statement.

42. Is it reasonable that a minority community of 18 per
cent of the total population should insist on keeping for
itself a territory representing practically twice that percentage? Is it reasonable to deprive the refugees of any
hope of returning to their homes and to their properties? Is
it reasonable to ask the Secretary-General to preside over
the dismemberment of a Member State as would inevitably
result from proposals which provide for nothing other than
the constitutional partition of the island? Is it reasonable
to ask for negotiations to be carried out on the basis of
proposals that do not respect the elementary requirements
of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the non-aligned Republic of Cyprus, as the United Nations
has expressly demanded through all relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions?

49. The last time I made such a statement to the Council
in person was in February 1964 [1099th meeting]. I had
come from a bleeding Cyprus, where my community had
been attacked by secret armies formed by the Greek
Cypriot leaders in accordance with a plan which they had
prepared in advance and which aimed at the disruption of
the bi-communal Republic of Cyprus in order to unite the
island with Greece. My people had evacuated 103 villages in
order to find security in better areas; a quarter of the
Turkish community had become refugees and death was all
around; it was on the roads and it was in our houses;
everywhere we had to defend ourselves. There was no
UNFICYP in Cyprus, there was no one to help or protect
us, and the order of the day was that the attack which had
started on 21 December 1963 should culminate in victory
so that the Greek Cypriots could celebrate a double
Christmas, as stated by Archbishop Makarios, in view of
this victory.

43. We have time and again stated that the negotiating
process should not be used as a delaying tactic in order to
perpetuate faits accomplis or to create notorious irreversible situations which the aggrieved party would be called
upon to legalize. Such an attempt would in any case be
futile. The United Nations and mankind have bitter
experience of similar methods utilized in other parts of the
world.

50. I came here, and after great difficulty 1 was allowed to
speak. I explained the real position; I made no false
statements in what I said; I drew a picture of what was
happening in Cyprus, and even at that moment attacks were
continuing on my people and the Greek radio and Greek
information offices were circulating the news that a
rebellion within the Turkish community was being put
down by the security forces of the Government.

44. If, therefore, the other side is willing to arrive at a
negotiated settlement through intercommunal talks, instead
of simply talking about “flexibility”,
it should, rather,
respond with goodwill and reasonable proposals which
would constitute an acceptable basis for the Cyprus
Government.

51. When the Council adopted its resolution of 4 March
1964 [resolution 186 (1964/l, 1 left this room crying
because I knew how that resolution would be interpreted
by the other side, but we were assured by members of the
Council that its interpretation was in the hands of the
Council and that what we feared would not come about.
What we feared was that the Greek Cypriots-who
had
staged a coup against their own Government just because it
was a bi-communal Government, had ejected US ~3 toto
from the Government, had put us outside the protection of
the Constitution and the laws and were hunting us as rebels

4.5. I would assure the Council that the Greek Government
will continue as in the past to lend its full support to the
Secretary-General’s mission of good offices and will give
him every assistance in his efforts to clear the way for
genuine negotiations on all aspects of the Cyprus problem.
We believe that a peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem
can be found only through serious, sincere and meaningful
negotiations, in conformity with the basic principles of the
Charter and through the implementation of General Assem5

bring safety and security to the Turks, an arrangement
which was effected bilaterally, with the other side, is now
disregarded, and those who are doing this ask that it should
be done ln accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

not entitled to any rights in Cyprus-would
interpret that
resolution as a further authority for them to cleanse Cyprus
of the Turkish Cypriots. Unfortunately,
that attempt
continued, In spite of Security COUnCil RSOhtiOllS
t0 the
contrary, arms and armaments were brought into Cyprus.
In spite of Council resolutions to the contrary, Greek
soldiers from Greece were clandestinely imported into
Cyprus and joined 43,000 Greek Cypriots to rout US out,
Heavy arms and armaments from Greece were imported to
destroy the Turkish community, or at least to prevent its
salvation under the Treaty of Guarantee.

57. We have suffered a lot in a bi-communal country like
Cyprus, where one national community was aiming at
uniting the island with another country, and the other
national community refused to accept what it regarded as
recolonization; the latter defended its rights at the cost of
great sacrifices, the result of which was the establishment of
a bi-communal republic, and we are now asked to consider
the future in the light of majority and minority proportions.

52. We lived through those years. From month to month
the Security
Council received reports from the SecretaryGeneral which indicated the plight of the Turkish people.
IJNFICYP was sent there to prevent a blood-bath for the
Turks, and we are grateful for the impartial way in which
they defended us for 11 years until 1974.

58. Those arguments refer to the past. The Republic of
Cyprus is the creation, by agreement, of two national
communities. In the independence and sovereignty of
Cyprus the Turkish Cypriots have undeniable inalienable
rights, just as the Greeks have: no less and no more.

53. In the course of all those years repeated statements
were made by the Greek Cypriot leaders that the aim was
to unite Cyprus with Greece. Among the resolutions of the
Greek House of Representatives resolutions still stand
which indicate that the aim is union with Greece and that
no setback will prevent them from achieving that aim.

59. Today Mr. Rolandis said that one side is trying to
destroy the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus and he
pointed his finger at me, or at the Turkish community
which I represent, or at the Government of the Federated
State wltich they formed of their own will. This is untrue.
Turks of Cyprus died in order to save the independence and
sovereignty of Cyprus. They were killed by the Greek side,
who wanted to destroy that independence and unite with
Greece. The arrangement made at the third round of talks
at Vienna-namely, the exchange of population as a basis
for the formation of a bi-zonal republic-was in furtherance
of the saving of that independence and sovereignty.

54. My community lived in little clusters of villages called
Turkish areas, defending themselves against the unconstitutional rule of the Greek Cypriots. Thirty thousand Turks
continued to be refugees for 11 years. The Turkish
community continued to be one for which the budget of
Cyprus made no provision and its members were treated as
permanent tourists in Cyprus who had to import foreign
currency and spend all the money on the Greek market.
55. This is the background of the Cyprus problem. I had
to repeat it because I had to pinch myself to realize that I
had not come here from the moon and that the members of
the Council were not here from the moon. Having listened
to Mr. Rolandis, one would have to know nothing about
Cyprus in order to believe that he was telling the truth.

60. From 1963 to 1974, the top Greek leader refused to
meet and talk to his Turkish Cypriot counterpart. The lack
of such dialogue did not help to solve the Cyprus problem.
The intercommunal negotiations started in 19G8 at a lower
level. That dialogue led to near agreement several times, but
from 1968 to 1974 the Turkish Cypriot side was indicted
through propaganda for being intransigent and not wanting
to solve the problem. It took a coup and its aftermath to
reveal the truth. Mr. Clerides, who was the Greek Cypriot
negotiator, later disclosed that several times there had been
near agreement with the Turkish side but that the Greek
Cypriot Council had rejected it. Then Archbishop Makarios
had to speak, and he spoke in this room to the Council
after the coup, saying that there could be no agreement
through the intercommunal talks because the junta was
interfering all the time, a double-faced junta was not
allowing them to settle the Cyprus problem on the basis of
independence.

56. In consequence of my exertions here last time, in
1964, on my way back to Cyprus 1 was prevented from
entering my own country. Those who called themselves the
Government had decided that I had talked too much here,
that I had hurt them too much, and I was not wanted in
Cyprus; and like many other Turkish Cypriots I was
prevented from entering my country for four and a half
years. Today, when I address the Council, I have no feeling
of fear that I may be stopped again, thanks to our present
position, thanks to the liberation which came to my
community as a godsend after the terrible coup of 1974.
We have been liberated. Turkish Cypriots who were living in
clusters of villages spread all over Cyprus and were treated
relentlessly and mercilessly for years as political hostages,
after an agreement with the Greek Cypriots at the third
round of intercommunal talks at Vienna, were moved to
the north with the help of UNFICYP. Today we have heard
two speakers claim that all those Turks should go back to
being hostages again under Greek rule so that all the Greeks
who moved south in accordance with the agreement and
Prior to it can go back to their homes. An arrangement, an
exchange of population, which had to be made in order tn

61. In my view these two statements are in themseIves
sufficient to show that, through dialogue, through negotia
tions, the Cypriot people, Greek and Turkish, can find a
settlement. It has been said that while the Turkish army is
in Cyprus it will not be possible for negotiations to be
conducted freely. The presence of the Turkish army is
precisely for the purpose of providing the Turkish Cypriots
with security and equality so that negotiations can be
meaningful. When the Greek army of occupation, which
had been clandestinely imported into Cyprus in defiance of
6

the Security Council, was there from 1968 to 1974 and the
armed Greek Cypriots were there, the negotiations continued, but there was no balance between the two sides.

65. The Greek Cypriots speak about their 200,000 rofugees. That is a round figure which sounds very good when
used for propaganda purposes. The Greek Cypriots never
mention the fact that 65,000 Turkish Cypriots-nearly
half
of the Turkish community-had
to move in order to free
themselves from 11 years of misuse at the hands of the
Greeks. That, supposedly, is irrelevant. Those Turkish
Cypriots left valuable farms, lands and buildings in the
south. The Greeks, rightly, occupied that property and are
using it. But Greek propaganda refers only to the property
which the Turkish Cypriots have occupied in the north. The
oranges which we are cultivating proclaim their origin;
everyone who eats them knows that they are Greek
oranges. However, half of all the vineyards in Cyprus are in
the south; they are all exploited by the Greeks and their
produce is being exported by the Greeks. But our grapes
and wines seem to be incapable of proclaiming their origins.

62. Today I meant to speak only about our proposals for
the settlement of the Cyprus problem. Those proposals are
based on these realities, and their aim is to prevent a
recurrence of the tragedy of the past. However, the way in
which the Greek side has thrown them out indicates that
they are not willing to negotiate with us at this stage. IS
that really because, as they say, our proposals are not worth
considering at all? We have said that we are ready to meet
without an agenda. We are ready to consider counter
proposals. Indeed, we are ready to meet anywhere to start
the dialogue. However, the answer has been a deliberate
“no”.
63. The reason which the other side gave for not coming
to the table with us between 1974 and 1977 was that we
were not making concrete and substantial proposals. We
sought and, with the consent of the other side, obtained the
Secretary-General’s agreement to have a prior look at our
papers in order to establish whether our proposals were
concrete and substantial. We briefed the Secretary-General
for three days, and the meetings were not easy. He wanted
to satisfy himself that we were being flexible, and I am sure
he wanted to satisfy himself that he could take to the
Greeks something which was not futile. Having examined
our proposals, he said that he found them to be concrete
and substantial. He came from Vienna to Cyprus and spoke
to the Greek side, but the answer-and we have heard the
same argument today-was that, while the proposals might
be concrete and substantial, that was not enough. They
must be reasonable, and the philosophy behind them must
be such that the Greek side would regard them as being
reasonable.

66. I will not go into any more detail because I have no
right to do so. Yesterday I saw how much time was wasted
and with what good will and patience the Council responded. For what purpose? It was for the renewal of the
mandate of the peace-keeping force in Cyprus. It took
hours and hours to arrive at a solution on that issue. As I
stated last night, you have my sympathy. I hope that
members, having endured that gruelling exercise last night,
imposed for the sole purpose of breaking up the machinery
for intercommunal talks, and having seen how that end was
achieved, I hope that their sympathies will lie with us.
67. As I was saying, dialogue is a must if we are to settle
the Cyprus problem. After a period of 14 years, I had two
meetings with Archbishop Makarios. Those meetings resulted in a breakthrough and in the very full guidelines on
which our proposals are based, I regret to say that the
Greek Cypriot side is now doing its best to destroy those
guidelines. That is why they speak of minorities and
majorities. If minorities and majorities are going to play an
important part in the future of Cyprus, then Yugoslavia, to
refer only to one country, must break up into minoritymajority groups and must cease to be a federal system
composed of equal members irrespective of numerical
composition.

64. That was a new approach. I came to New York hoping
that Mr. Kyprianou and the Turkish and Greek Prime
Ministers would be here so that we would all have an
opportunity of meeting one another in order to probe and
investigate the situation and to conclude that dialogue was
possible. I saw this as an opportunity which no one in need
of peace would discard or disregard. The Turkish community is in need of peace. We do not have a governmental
tag here; we are not treated as members of the Organization
because we have not asked to be recognized as a separate
State, and our reason for not making such a request is that
we believe in unity; we believe in re-establishing, with the
Greeks, a bi-communal republic. However, because we do
not have a governmental tag, we are suffering economically,
socially and politically, The Greek Cypriots, who treat
themselves and are treated as the Government of Cyprus,
are misusing their authority and using it against us. They
are continuing their aggression against us in the international community and denying us our rights. Since 1963
one quarter of the population of Cyprus has been treated as
a stateless, gypsy community with no passports and no
right to anything. The Greek Cypriots think that they can
afford to allow this situation to continue indefinitely while,
a~ the Secretary-General has indicated in his report, looking
elsewhere for redemption, They do not need peace; they
have it.

68. Mr. Kyprianou is reported to have opposed Archbishop Makarios when the four guidelines were drawn up. It
is unfortunate that he carried his opposition to this extent.
We stand by those agreements. We are open to discussion
and counter-proposals. We aim at re-establishing a bi-zonal,
bi-communal federal republic with the Greeks. Every aspect
of our proposals is open to discussion, negotiation and
bargaining. Except for one thing: enosis will continue to be
prohibited as effectively as it was in the past. Otherwise, we
shall never trust them and the Cyprus problem will never be
settled. Greece can do a lot by telling the people in Cyprus
who look to Athens as the centre of Hellenism that it is in
the interest of Greece, Turkey, Cyprus and the area that
enosis should be effectively barred and not considered as an
opening to future adventures in the hands of the new
leaders.
69. I shall reverse the procedure so far followed here in
extending my thanks to you all, starting with you,
Mr. President, To the members of the Council I have
7

aIready extended my sympathy, and now I extend to them
my heartfelt thanks for the patient, impartial and understanding way in which they all tried to help us.

underline the satisfaction we feel in seeing as President of
the Council a representative of a country with which
Turkey has friendly relations. I would also add how grateful
we are to you for the discretion, objectivity and wisdom
you have displayed during the consultations.

70. On behalf of the government in the north, and on my
own behalf personally, I extend our sincere and deepest
appreciation
and warmest feelings of gratitude to the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his dedicated
and untiring efforts to achieve a just and lasting solution of
the Cyprus problem. I also thank him for trying to bring us
dI together in New York during the last few weeks, when
110so kindly offered a luncheon, a dinner or a tea party for
me, Mr, Kyprianou,
Mr. Ecevit and Mr. Katamanhs to attend. Unfortunately,
Mr. Kyprianou chose to reject the
invitation because my name was mentioned as one of the
participants.
I assure him that I would not have taken
anything of the beautiful meals that would
have been
supplied which was not on my plate. But we did not meet.
An opportunity
was lost. I regret it. I have nothing against
him. 1 am still willing to have a meeting and I hope the
Secretary-General
will manage to bring us together. I know
it will help, because I know there is no way other than a
dialogue for settling the Cyprus problem.

77. In the fulfilment of his mission of good offices, the
Secretary-General has been extremely active since the last
Council meeting in December. We deeply appreciate his
tireless and dedicated efforts to promote the negotiating
process. He has explained in his report the difficulties he
has encountered in this endeavour. But we maintain the
hope that he will be able to overcome the obstacles and give
a new impetus to the search for a just and peaceful solution
of the Cyprus problem. Such a solution has eluded us for
too long to the detriment of the genuine and long-term
interests of all the parties concerned, and primarily of the
Turkish and Greek Cypriots.
78. I wish to reiterate that we appreciate highly the efforts
of the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Urquhart
and
Mr. Guyer, and of the Force Commander, ‘Major-General
Quinn.

71. I should also like to take this opportunity
to welcome
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr.. Galindo Pohl, with whom my community is already on
very good terms. He has started to do a very good job. I
assure him that he will have our fullest co-operation in his
endeavours for peace.

79. My Government has welcomed the appointment of
Ambassador Galindo Pohl as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We know that he has distinguished
himself both as a diplomat and as a lawyer and we are
confident that he will fulfil his mission with success.
80. Finally, I wish to renew our gratitude to the officers
and men of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus and to all the contributing countries.

72. Our warm thanks and appreciation go also to the
Secretariat, in particular to Mr. Guyer, Mr. Urquhart and
Mr. Sherry,
for their untiring and dedicated efforts,
especially in connexion with the recent Cyprus question in
its latest form.

81. Concerning the intercommunal talks, we face an
incredible situation in which, because one of the parties has
been more forthcoming than ever, the other party adamantly refuses to come to the negotiating table. Only six
months ago, Ambassador Rossides had this to say in the
Security Council:

73. Finally, 1 should like to express our gratitude to the
Commander
of UNFICYP,
Major-General Quinn, to the
senior political adviser, Mr. GorgB, to all the officers and
members of UNFICYP and its civilian staff, and to all those
Governments
which have contributed men and funds for
UNFICYP.

“In the progress of negotiations there must, however,
be concrete proposals from both sides on the constitutional and territorial
aspects.” /2054th
meeting,
para. 37.1

74. I hope that within the next six months, when we come
here again, we shall be able to report the establishment of
the bi-zonal, bi-communal Republic of Cyprus, and that
your exercise will end and our exercise will begin-an
exercise for promoting trust between the two communities.
In view of the past history of the communities, this will not
be an easy task. It will need great leadership, magnanimous
hearts, courage and a lot of forgetting. But before we come
to that, let us not pretend, for heaven’s sake, that 1963 to
1974, the 1 I years during which my community suffered
hell, never happened, Let us not do that because that does
not show goodwill to the other side
75. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
now call on the representative of Turkey.

SPanisk):

At the same meeting, the representative of Greece said:
“For our part, we wish again to stress that, in order to
have a chance of success, these negotiations must be
carried out in a substantive way on the basis of concrete
proposals covering all major aspects of the problem,
including territorial and constitutional questions. I need
not remind the Council that the concrete proposals made
by the Greek Cypriot negotiator on those questions are
still awaiting a reply from the other side. . . . Therefore
we share the Secretary-General’s concern about the need
for him to obtain assurances that the parties are prepared
to negotiate concretely and substantively on all major
aspects of the problem before initiating a new round, cf
talks.” [Ibid., para. 72.1

1

76, Mr. TURKMEN
(Turkey): Mr. President, 1 should like
ta extend to you
the congratulations of my delegation
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June. In doing so, I wish to

82. The question we should now ask is: what has
happened since these expressions of concern? The reply is
8

that the Turkish Cypriots have done exactly what was
expected of them. They have submitted concrete and
substantial proposals covering both the territorial and
constitutional aspects of the problem. The prerequisite so
insistently requested by the Greek side was therefore met.
But, to our dismay, the Greek Cypriots took the position
that the proposals were not acceptable as a basis for the
resumption of the intercommunal talks. They are in fact
rejecting the negotiating process as established by the
Security Council resolution. Last night’s discussions before
the adoption of resolution 430 (1978) and the Greek
Cypriot insistence on the deletion of any reference to the
mission of good offices of the Secretary-General vividly
demonstrate this point.

would manage foreign policy and defence, a common
currency and the coordination of island-wide programs
and businesses like tourism; all other functions would be
left to the . . . federated states and each would retain a
veto over federal decisions through a process of equal
representation.
“Though they agree to federation in principle, it is this
veto, above all, that the Greek Cypriots find unacceptable. They still count on the weight of numbers. But it is
hard to see how a federation of only two elements could
work without a veto, at least while mistrust runs so deep.
If they are to work . . . at all, the two communities will
have to have political equality despite the great disparity
in their populations.

83. The Secretary-General in his report recapitulates the
numerous contacts which he has had with all the parties in
pursuance of his mission of good offices, In January he
visited Ankara, where he had extensive talks with Prime
Minister Ecevit, who assured him that he would encourage
the Turkish Cypriot community to submit concrete proposals regarding the territorial aspect and to revise its
previous constitutional proposals, On 13 April at Vienna,
the representatives of President Denktaa submitted to the
Secretary-General the document setting forth the main
aspects of the Turkish Cypriot negotiating position. The
Secretary-General
personally transmitted
the Turkish
Cypriot proposals to Mr. Kyprianou at Nicosia on 19 April.
The Secretary-General
described
the reaction of
Mr. Kyprianou in his report in these words:

“The Turkish Cypriots say that everything about their
proposal is negotiable. But it is unlikely that they can be
moved very far from the outlines of their proposed
constitution. Nor should they be. There is no reason,
however, why they should not be pressed to yield more
territory. The Greek Cypriots will never know how much
more until they engage the Turks in serious discussions.
Those discussions should proceed, and if the American
embargo now gets in the way, it should be removed.”
8G. Despite
the extremely
negative stand
of
Mr. Kyprianou, as recognized by the international press, the
Turkish Cypriot community continues to maintain a most
conciliatory attitude. President Denktaa came to New York
to reconfirm to the Secretary-General the position of the
Turkish Cypriot community regarding the intercommunal
talks. In a statement issued on 22 May [S/12715, arznex/,
he stressed that the Turkish Cypriot proposals represented a
negotiating position that could provide a starting point for
discussions, that the Turkish side had made a commitinent
to the Secretary-General to engage in negotiations with an
open mind and in a spirit of conciliation and flexibility. He
reiterated that the future political framework of Varosha
was open to negotiations. President Denkta?, in his moving
address which reminded the Council of the historical
perspective of the Cyprus tragedy, again elaborated on all
these points.

“He informed me that these proposals were not
acceptable as a basis for the resumption of the intercommunal talks. In the course of our conversation and also
publicly later the same day, Mr. Kyprianou emphasized
that, since the philosophy and concept of the Turkish
Cypriot proposals were ‘totally unacceptable’ to his side,
neither their substance nor their basis was capable of
being improved to the point of becoming negotiable.”
[S/12723, para. 53.1
84. Mr. Kyprianou has apparently discovered a new
method of negotiation. He wishes to be the sole judge of
the acceptability of the proposals submitted by the other
side and to act both as a negotiating party and arbiter at the
being
presumptuous,
same
time.
But,
besides
Mr. Kyprianou’s approach is also utterly irrational. How
can he indeed say that the philosophy and concept of the
Turkish Cypriots proposals are unacceptable, since they
merely reflect the guidelines agreed upon by Archbishop
Makarios and President Denktag at their meeting in February 1977 for the establishment in Cyprus of a sovereign,
Independent, b&communal and bi-zonal State.

87. That there is no alternative to intercommunal negotiations has been repeatedly stated by all members in ali the
debates on Cyprus at the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral underlines this point again in paragraph 76 of his
report: “As regards the procedural aspects, there may in
fact be no alternative to the negotiations between the
representatives of the two communities.”
88. Mr. Kyprianou, in an effort to divert attention from
his intransigent position has come up with the proposal to
meet Prime Minister Ecevit. But such a meetingwould be
both unnecessaryand meaningless.
The negotiatingParties
are the two communitiesand not Turkey and the Greek
Cypriot community. The Turkish Governmenthas repeatedly expressedits readinessto acceptwhatever agreement
emergedfrom the intercommunaltalks and pledgedthat as
soon asa settlementwasreachedall Turkish rrlilitary forces
would be withdrawn from the islandexcept those whose
continued presencewasauthorizedunder the terms of the
settlement. Turkey has already withdrawn 16,000 troops

85. The New York Times, in its editorial on 12 May, has
in particular underlined this inconsistency:
“That some kjnd of shared authority would be neccssary was recognized even by thd late Greek Cypriot
leader, Archbishop Makarios. He formally conceded a few
months before his death that Cyprus would have to
become both bi-communal and federal. The Turkish
proposal builds on this by proposing the maximum
amount of separateness. A minimal federal government
9

from Cyprus and indicated that it will make further
reductions as the intercommunal negotiations progress.A
meetingbetweenPrime Minister Ecevit and Mr. Kyprianou,
besidesbeing incompatible with the principled position of
l’urkey regardingthe constitutional situation in Cyprus,
will therefore serve no useful purpose. Nevertheless,the
Turkish Prime Minister, in his desireto explore all avenues
for the promotion of the intercommunal talks, has suggested a meeting or an informal gathering in which he
himself, the Prime Minister of Greece, Mr. Denkta? and
Mr. Kypdanou would take part. There were even suggestions, asMr. DenktaSremindedus, of somesocial functions
to make such an encounter possible. But Mr. Kyprianou
indicated that he could under no circumstancesparticipate
in a function with Mr. Denktaq.
89. This aversion to being together with Mr. Denkta$ is
surprisingsinceMr. Kyprianou and Mr. Denktay attended a
luncheon given by the Secretary-Generalat Nicosia on 15
January, In a more serious vein, it shows that
Mr, Kyprianou is determined to obstruct the intercommunal dialogue permanently by refusing to meet his
counterpart. He has apparently set his eyes on the
extraneousfactors to which the Secretary-Generalalludes
in paragraph 73 of his report. But he will be gravely
deludinghimselfif he thinks that theseextraneous factors,
in whatever direction they evolve, would in any way alter
the basic position of the Turkish Government or of the
Turkish Cypriot community. By delaying the searchfor a
solution on the basisof false and mischievoushopes, the
only result he will achieve will be further to erode the
atmosphereof mistrust between the two communities and
diminishthe chancesof a compromise.
90. I am deeply disappointed by the statement of the
representativeof Greece, I had expected that he would at
least discreetly urge the resumption of the intercommunal
talks, that he would do some justice to the spirit of
conciliation and accommodation of the Turkish Cypriot
community and of the Turkish Government. But he only
echoed the unfounded allegationsproferred by the Greek
Cypriot representative.Conveniently forgetting the responsibility assumed
by Greeceas a result of the military coup
initiated by its Government in 1974 in order to destroy the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus, he claimed the prerogative of decidingwhether the
proposalsput forward by the Turkish Cypriot side were
reasonableor not.
91. The report of the Secretary-Generalprovides us once
again with an assessmentof the situation prevailing in
Cyprus at the present time. The Secretary-Generalreports
that the situation among the cease-firelines has remained
quiet. In his previous two reports, presented in June
[S/125’42/ ‘and December 1977 [S/12463], he had also
described the situation as being quiet. It is obvious,
therefore, that the trend towards tranquillity appearsto be
an enduringone. In paragraph70 of the presentreport, the
Secretary-General, referring to UNFICYP movements reported:
“UNFICYP now enjoys increased freedom of movcmerit and UNFICYP personnel have been given the
oppot’lunity to speakin privacy to Greek Cypriots in the
10

area.There has been a relative improvement in the’living
conditions and the economic situation of the Greek
Cypriots in the north. I have every hope that this trend
will continue*”
In paragraph7 1, the Secretary-Generalpoints out:
“it hasnot . . . beenpossibleto establishthe investigatory
body for tracing and accounting for missingpersonsof
both communities”.
92. There has been a development in this respectwhich
shouldbe clarified. The Turkish side has recently accepted
the latest proposalssubmitted to it by third partieson this
question and indicated its readinessto meetthe Greek side
in order to finalize the necessaryarrangements.I have to
call the attention of the Council again to the fact that the
arrangementswhich were being negotiated on the stationing, deployment and functioning of UNFICYP in the
territory under the authority of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus have not been completed. The lack of an
agreement on the functions of UNFICYP in northern
Cyprus is a factor which has an important bearingon the
mandate of the Force as originally defined in resolution
186(1964).
93, 1 should like now to state briefly the position of my
Government on resolution 430 (1978) which the Council
adopted earlier this morning. In the third preambular
paragraphthere is, asin previous resolutions,the irrelevant
reference to a Government of Cyprus. Our position in that
respect is well known. This entity doesnot exist in law or
in practice. The events precipitated by the Greek military
coup in July 1974, for the purposeof annexingCyprus to
Greece, resulted in the setting up of two distinct adntinistrations in the island, This reality was recognizedby the
three guaranteeingPowers-Turkey, Greeceand the United
Kingdom--at the first Genevaconferencein July 1974, On
the other hand, the framework agreement worked out
between Archbishop Makariosand PresidentDenktay on 12
February 1977 establishedthe basis of a federal and
hi-communalrepublic and provided for the mergingof the
two separate Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot administrations. For these reasons, in view of the reference
contained in the third preambularparagraph,the Turkish
delegationis not in a position to accept the resolutionjust
adopted Irztoto.
94. The resolution contains two operative elements. In
paragraph1, the Council extends the mandateof the Force
for a further period of six months. We concur in that
extension, having heard President Denktq inform the
Council of the consent of the Turkish FederatedState of
Cyprus. In paragraph2, the Council reaffirms the mission
of good offices of the Secretary-Generalin the intercommunal negotiations, asestablishedby paragraph6 of resolution 367 (1975). I have already statedin detail the position
of my Government in that respect.We resolutely support
that missionand are determinedto do all we can to make a
resumption of intercommunaltalks possible.As a matter of
fact, we think that we did all that waspossible.The Turkish
community as well leasgiven ample proof of its willingness
to negotiate in a spirit of conciliation and compromise. If
the other l’al ty can reciprocate this spirit, a solution to the
tragit; problem of Cyprus will be within rea&,

95. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, first, I should
like to join others who have spoken in congratulating you
upon taking the high office of President of the Security
Council. I must say that you have been given a baptism of
fire that is not normally accorded to new presidents and
shown remarkable skill and diplomacy; I compliment you
on your distinguished chairmanship. Secondly, I should like
to acknowledge also the distinguished chairmanship of your
predecessor, the representative of Venezuela, who steered
us through the stormy month of May with equal success.

such admirable efficiency. A word of good wishes is also in
order for Ambassador Galindo Pohl, who, during May,
assumed the position of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative in Cyprus. My own Secretary of State for
External Affairs, Mr. Don Jamieson, is looking forward to
meeting Major-General Quinn and Ambassador Galindo
Polil in Cyprus next week when he visits the Canadian
contingent.
(France) (interprdatimz
from
101. Mr. LEPRETTE
Frenclz J: Mr. President, first of all I should like to convey
my congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. It is all the more
pleasant for me because you represent in the United
Nations a country with which France has always maintained friendly relations, and it is with confidence that I
can assure you of the total and whole-hearted support of
my delegation. You are discharging your functions as
President for the first time. The skill and talent that you
have already displayed in our consultations over the past
week are a guarantee, in our view, of the success
of our
future work. Permit me also, before dealing with the
subject of this meeting, to convey my congratulations to
Mr. Carpio Castillo, the representative of Venezuela, who
conducted our meetings most competently and effectively
in May, I ‘should like to thank him and also his delegation.

96. I suppose it is an indication of an incurable optimism,
but it had been our hope that conditions in Cyprus would
have made it possible for a substantial reduction of the
Force by now. We were, therefore, greatly disappointed to
read in the report of the Secretary-General that this was not
advisable and that his efforts to facilitate substantial
negotiation had not been successful.
97. As a troop contributor, we are of course particularly
concerned by the implications of this situation for the
possibilities of bringing to an end the need for the Force,
and I,might say in thisrespect that our concern would be in
some measure alleviated if we could point to an increase in
&e number and size of voluntary contributions to the
Special Account for maintaining the Force. But here, too,
there has been little progress.

102. The Secretary-General, in the detailed report that he
submitted to us on 31 May, highlighted the need to prolong
the mandate of the United Nations Force stationed in
Cyprus in order to contain the potentially dangerous’
situation which persists in the island. Having been consulted
by the Secretary-General and by you, Mr.. President, the
parties concerned have indicated for their part that they
agree to this prolongation. In deciding to renew the
mandate of the Force for a further six-month period, the
Security Council was thus giving a positive response to an
urgent recommendation that had been addressed to it. It
did so by adopting a brief resolution. Because of the delay
in the taking of this decision, we wish to stress the great
importance that we should attach in future to respecting
the time-limits established for the renewal of the mandates
of peace-keeping forces, Failure to respect those time-limits
is a matter of concern that should receive the attention of
us all.

98. However, we have noted in the report several positive
aspects of the operational situation over the last six
months. The Secretary-General has noted that the situatibn
is quiet and that there have been no serious breaches of the
cease-fire. There has been improved freedom of movement
for UNFICYP in the Karpas peninsula. Co-operation and
clear channels of communication continue to exist between
the Commander of UNFICYP and both the National Guard
and the Turkish forces.
99. The Secretary-General has noted two areas where
there may be some prospect of dealing with the existing
stalemate on the ground, in order to create an opening for
further significant steps. These are at Varosha, where the
United Nations may be able to provide assistance so that it
need not remain empty, and at the Nicosia International
Airport, which is under UNFICYP control but not yet open
for traffic. We hope that progress may be possible in both
those areas.

103. Furthermore, the fact that France finally agreed to
the consensus that emerged on this point does not mean
that the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus can be allowed to become a mere technical
operation or an automatic decision to prolong every six
months a situation that it would be wrong for certain
parties to believe could take the place of a solution. The
decision of the Council, let us not forget, is designed 10
create conditions favourable for the search for a settlement,
in the light of the positions and the conduct of the parties
involved, as well as in the light of analyses and assessments
made by the Secretary-General in his report on events that
have occurred since our last meeting on the subject.

100. In closing, I should like to express our appreciation
of the distinguished efforts of the Secretary-General to
extend his good offices in an effort to assist the peace
process. During the past six months he has been called upon
to devote a very considerable amount of time to the
subject. We commend his determination to continue his
efforts to bring the parties closer together. In this connexion, I wish to reiterate our conviction that a just and
peaceful solution can be achieved only by negotiations
between the two communities. We call upon both parties to
make the effort necessary to resolve their differences and to
resume negotiations to achieve that solution. I also wish at
this lime to extend our appreciation to the Secretariat, to
the Force Commander, Major-Ctineral Quinn and to all
UNFICYP personnel for persevering in carrying out the
functions entrusted to them and for doing so much wilh

104. Among these comments, we should particLIlarly like
to higldigllt that, short of recourse to vioIence and force,
there is no approach to the search for a Settlement other
than through the organization of negotiations be twecn tile
11

representatives of the two communities. This requirement is
a matter of urgency because we cannot accept, even in a
period of relative calm, the ordeals that the present
situation inflicts on the peoples. It also means, as was quite
r$htly
pointed out by the Secretary-General, that each
Party must be ready to conduct serious negotiations on a
basis acceptable to the other. If none of the developments
that have occurred over the last few months has fallen
within this definition, our disappointment at this should
not, however, cause us to call into question the very
principle of negotiation. This principle does not prevent
certain parties from seeking new approaches that may
Promote the resumption of contacts. President Kyprianou,
in the statement that he recently made in the General
Assembly,2 indicated a few such approaches.

renewing the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus for another period of six months,All of us
who have cast an affirmative vote have done so, ason
previous occasions, in the common conviction that
UNFICYP’s objective is by no means restricted to mere
peace-keeping-that is, the prevention of armedbostilitjes.
We are, on the contrary, firmly convinced that UNFlCYP’s
objective is directed, even more importantly, to peace.
making-that is, to the process of finding a just and
peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem.
110. The Secretary-Generalhas pointed out that during
the 14 years that UNFICYP hasbeen with us, it hasbeen
able to fulfil only the objective of peace-keepingwhereas,
for reasonsoutsideits control, it has failed to advancethe
progressof peace-makingin any significant way. Thisisall
the more disappointingasnumerousefforts havebeenmade
and various kinds of encouragementhave beengivento the
parties to advanceon the path of seriousnegotiations,This
is true especiallyof the Secretary-General,who hasdonehis
utmost, within his mission of good offices, ‘to bringthe
parties together for concrete and substantivenegotiations,
Unfortunately, the parties have so far not availedthemselvesfully of the opportunities offered to them by the
international community. They have insteadcontinuedto
blame each other for their common failure, an attitude
clearly not conducive to bridging existing gapsandestablishing a climate of mutual goodwill and confidenceso
necessaryfor any negotiationsto be successful.

10.5. I should now like very briefly to make a few
comments on the report of the Secretary-General.
106.

We have noted with satisfaction that no serious
occurred during the period under review and that
the cease-fire was respected. My delegation also realizes the
improvements
that have been made in the conditions in
which the officers of the Force discharge their humanitarian and social functions. It is a positive fact, in
particular, that their freedom of movement has increased in
the north of the island. We hope that the many efforts that
have been made with regard to missing persons will make it
possible finally to cotne to an agreement.

incident

107. III expressing once again our confidence in the
Secretary-General,
who has devoted so much time and
effort over the last six months in the attempt to bring
about a rapprochement between the two parties, we should
like to include in our expressions of gratitude to him his
Special Representative, Mr. Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, whom
WC wish every success in the performance of his task. We
should also like Lo thank Major-General James Quinn, as
well as the officers, soldiers and civilian personnel of the
Force. All have been contributing with outstanding devotion to the work of peace of the United Nations.

111. My delegationholds that the Security Counciland
the international community, which is paying heavilynot
only in financial but alsoin political termsfor this failure,
have a right to ask both sides for more seriousand
committed efforts to overcome their mutual enmity and
distrust by adopting a conciliatory attitude that would
include the willingnessto reach an agreementthrough
mutual concessions.The Council has indeeda right to urge
the parties, in the words of the Secretary-General,to show
a willingness“to acknowledgethe reality of the needsand
aspirations of the other [side], and the necessityfor
concessions”[S/12723, para. 801. Only in that way canan
agreed basisfor the resumption of meaningfulintercommunal talks be found. Suchan agreedbasiswould-againin
the words of the Secretary-General-“have to encompass
the positions and fundamental interests of both parties”
[ibid., pura. 77f.

108. Mr. VON HAS,SELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr, President, before I address myself to the item on our
agenda, 1 should like to say how pleased my delegation is to
see you presiding over the deliberations of the Security
Council this month. You have picked-as we are all acutely
aware-a
month
with a rather difficult question on the
Council’s agenda. Having witnessed your tireless and diligent efforts during these past few days, I can only
congratulate you on your having discharged your difficult
task in the most sovereign and impartial manner, worthy
indeed of the great tradition of your country. I shouldlike
also on this occasion to congratulate the representativeof
Venezuela on his term last month as your predecessorin
presiding over the Council-an office which he performed in
an outstanding manner, bringing into the limelight another
important country of the Latin American region.

112. The lack of progressin this direction is all the more
astounding, if not incomprehensible, as the respective
leaders of both parties were able, as a result of the
dedicated and imaginativeefforts of the Secretary-General,
not only to sit together in February 1977 and talk to each
other, but alsoto agreeon “Substantive guidelines”[ibid.,
para. 751 for the further conduct of intercommunaltalks
by their representatives.The Secretary-General,whom I
have just quoted again,is correct in callingtheseguidelines
“substantive”. They not only include arrangementson
procedure but also deal with questionsof basicconstltutional importance. In the opinion of my delegation,it is on
this basis that the parties should renew their endeavours.
My delegation finds itself encouragedin this respectby the
observation of the Secretary-General that “both parties
have stressedthat they continue to accept this procedure”

109. Following the rccommcndation of the SecretaryGoneral, contained in his detailed and thoughtful report of
31 May, my delegation has once again voted in favour of
2 Ibid.

12

[ibid., para. 761. It seems to me that there is indeed no
alternative to direct negotiations between the parties
concerned. We therefore completely agree with the Secretary-General when he states:

enhanced during our struggle for independence and
strengthened by understanding and growing solidarity, I
should aho like to congratulate you as you begin your
presidency for the month of June. I am confident that you
will conduct our debate with great wisdom, exercising your
characteristic good judgement and bringing to bear your
long experience which I am sure will be of great benefit to
US in the course of our deliberations. The very difficult and
delicate representations which you have made in such a
short period of time confirm your good judgement and
your status as an experienced diplomat.

“Whatever the format or venue, the same substantive
decisions will eventually have to be faced by the same
parties, since they are the ones that will have to live with
whatever solutions to these problems may be devised,,”
[Ibid.]
113. To recreate the momentum apparently so much
needed for a resumption of the intercommunal talks on a
sound and constructive basis, my delegation fully supports
the suggestion of the Secretary-General that an attempt
should be made to achieve progress at least on “some
important aspects of the existing stalemate . . ., thus creating an opening for further significant steps” [ibid.,
para. 781. The situation at Varosha and at Nicosia International Airport may indeed lend itself to such steps. My
delegation has, in this respect, taken careful note of some
encouraging remarks of both Prime Minister Ecevit and the
leader of the Turkish Cypriot community, Mr. Denktag.
The Federal Republic of Germany is ready to assist in any
such steps, if called upon to do so by both parties.

118. We have read document S/12723 with interest. Once
again we wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
and the detailed description which it contains of the
situation in Cyprus, as well as for his tireless efforts to bring
about an agreement on the complex problem of the island.
It is our hope that the problem of Cyprus will be solved
once and for all, that each side will be prepared to yield in
whatever way it can in order to offer the Cypriot people
the minimal stability which is required if they are to
develop properly. If no one makes any concessions then it
will be the Cypriot people themselves who will lose out.
119. The new report before us and the characteristics of
this debate have reinforced our belief that the measures and
recommendations set forth in earlier resolutions continue
to offer general guidelines for a solution to the problem. We
repeat our belief that the factors which can lead to a
settlement of the problem once again under consideration
have already been defined and reiterated in various resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
Any solution must be based on the maintenance of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus, Peace and security for the Cypriot people must be
the primary aim of any solution, Any alteration in or
departure from the course of action laid down in the
relevant provisions of those resolutions would make the
possibility of an agreement much more remote.

114. Having said that, I should like to add the following
remarks. While fully recognizing the concerns and preoccupations of the parties in a matter of prime importance to
them, my delegation feels also that the Security Council
should not be subjected every six months to the kind of
procedure that has almost become an unsalutary tradition.
We have noted that the parties concerned share these
misgivings. The course of events that the Council witnessed
last night and early this morning clearly jeopardizes the
proper continuity of the mandate and puts an undue strain
on the Council members. We all have to give thought to
this. In this connexion, I should like to add a few words of
appreciation to the members of the Council, and in
particular to the representative of the United Kingdom for
the assistance he provided the Council in finally arriving at
an agreed text for the extension of the UNFICYP mandate.

120. Consistent with our position we wish to help the two
communities on the island come together and we wish to
make an appeal that unilateral acts should be eschewed and
efforts continued to achieve a final solution based on
mutual respect for the fundamental and legitimate rights of
the parties living together in Cyprus. Should the opportunity present itself, we shall be prepared to promote a
more detailed consideration of the problem in the Security
Council, with a view to clarifying the complex aspects of
the conflict in Cyprus and helping to bring about a just
settlement.

115. I should like to conclude my statement by again
extending my country’s appreciation and gratitude to the
Force Commander, Major-General Quinn of Ireland, as well
as to the officers and men of UNFICYP and its civilian staff
for their outstanding efficiency and dedication in discharging an important and difficult task. In this connexion, I
should like also to express again our special thanks to the
countries which continue to provide troops to UNFICYI’.
My delegation’s particular tribute goes to the SecretaryGeneral and his representative in Cyprus, Ambassador
Galindo Pohl, and to his deputy, Mr.. Gorge, as well as to
Under-Secretaries-General Urquhart and Guyer and their
excellent staff for their persistent and skilful work.
116. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, I should like to express to
you and to other members of the Council my gratitude for
your very kind words to me in the course of this debate.

121. The delegation of Venezuela considers that the
meetings of the Council devoted to merely renewing the
mandate of the United Nations forces, both in Cyprus and
in other areas of the world where peace and security are
affected, make the Council lose credibility and we hope
that in the future problems which constitute a genuine
threat to peace and security will be dealt with in this body
in greater depth, We also hope that effective measures will
be adopted to condemn the guilty and induce them to
adopt a more rational approach.

117. My country is bound to Bolivia by fraternal ties and
by a common history of more than four centuries,

122. We should like to take this opportunity to say that
we regard as very constructive the proposal by the President
13
... I”_

_-

of Cyprus to demilitarize the country, which would
doubtless contribute tora peaceful and lasting settlement Of
the problem and also represent progress in the very field of
disarmament to which Latin America, and in particular,
Venezuela, attributes vital importance.
123. I do not wish to conclude my statement without
mentioning Mr, Reynaldo ,Galindo Pohl, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, who has
recently taken up his functions. We know him and we are
familiar with his proven diplomatic skill. We wish him every
success as he assumes the difficult responsibilities of his
mission in Cyprus.
124. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interprefation
from
fiinese):
With regard to the question of Cyprus, the
Chinese delegation has expounded its consistent position at
a number of meetings of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. The Chinese Government and people
cherish profound friendly feelings towards the people of
Cyprus and we are deeply concerned about the development of the situation there, We firmly maintain that the
national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus must be respected; we strongly condemn the
super-Powers’ interference in the affairs of Cyprus; we are
in favour of a settlement of the Cyprus question through
the intercommunal talks between the Greek and Turkish
Cypriots. It is our sincere hope that the two Cypriot
communities and the States directly concerned will take
into account the over-all situation, bear in mind the
fundamental interests of the people of Cyprus and the
region, strengthen their unity, heighten their vigilance and
gradually eliminate their differences through patient negotiations in a spirit of mutual understanding and mutual
accommodation, that they will do away with the superPowers’ interference and meddling and, in particular, will
avoid giving any openings for exploitation by that superPower which is fickle and changeable and is bent on playing
fast and loose in a deliberate attempt to aggravate the
situation to its own benefit. It is our hope that, by SO
doing, a fair and reasonable solution to the Cyprus question
may be attained at an early date, thus contributing to the
common cause of the world people against imperialism and
hegemonism.
125. In view of the fact that the draft resolution contained in document S/12739 mainly concerns the question
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force, the Chinese
delegation, based on its oft-repeated consistent position on
the matter, did not participate in the vote on the draft.

unflagging efforts towards the attainment of a just and
peaceful settlement of the problem of Cyprus. We note
with concern that, in his report, he stated that the results of
his efforts had remained disappointing and that he was
deeply concerned about the situation. We share his concern.
The situation in Cyprus remains fraught with danger not
only to the area of the Mediterranean but also to Europe, the
Middle East and the world at large. Without going into
details, we believe that the problem will remain unresolved
as long as the parties concerned remain captives of their
public positions. For the solution of the problem, there is
no alternative to flexibility and accommodation, without
which positions will harden with the passage of time.
128. There are fundamental elements which my Government thinks are indispensable to the solution of the
problem in Cyprus, all of which, incidentally, are embodied
in Security Council resolution 365 (1974). Any solution
must be based on the preservation of the territorial
integrity, sovereignty, unity and non-alignment of Cyprus.
We also think that the withdrawal of foreign troops and the
dismantling of military bases have to be undertaken so as to
maintain the non-aligned character of Cyprus.
129. We note with approval the remark of the SecretaryGeneral that
“the cause of a just and peaceful settlement in Cyprus
cannot be served by calling for talks when there is no
agreement on the negotiating basis and when one or other
party is not willing to proceed with meaningful negotiations” [S/12723, para. 73).
The Secretary-General then mentioned that he was “undertaking further consultations in an effort to establish a basis
of negotiations acceptable to both sides”[ibid./.
We praise
his drive to sumlount the obstacles, but we also believe that
the Council should not be satisfied with the role of a
spectator in resolving this problem and must use its political
and moral authority to prevail on the parties concerned,
acting as a catalyst in bringing their views closer to each
other. There is a lot of suspicion and mistrust and there are
many old bruises in Cyprus. None of those destructive
elements will be eliminated by the continuation of the
status quo. The Secretary-General warned the Council
against being under any illusion about the nature of the
present situation when he said:
“the status qua must not be assumed to constitute an
available viable alternative, since potentiahy dangerous
elements of instability are inherent in the prevailing
situation” [ibid., para. 771.

126. Mr. BKHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, the delegation of Kuwait derives great pleasure from seeing you as
President of the Council for the month of June. 1 should
like to place on record the appreciation of the Government
of Kuwait and its delegation for the manner in which you
have conducted the proceedings of the Council, particularly
during the last gruelling 24 hours. I should also like to
thank the representative of Venezuela, the retiring President, for the efforts which he made during the period when
he was President last month.

130. The problem of Cyprus arises from the fact that
there are two communities; one seeks protection from the
outside while the other feels secure by virtue of being in the
majority in the island. Co-existence is indispensable to the
attainment of a peaceful settlement, but this very ccexistence will remain elusive as long as the minority has no
faith in the assurances of the majority, and as long as the
Greek majority believes that the Turkish minority will
always turn to Turkey for protection.

127. The delegation of Kuwait would like to express its
most sincere thanks to the Secretary-General for his

131. It is a human tragedy and, in the present circumstances, it is necessary to encourage negotiations among the

,

parties concerned. The danger becomes greater if any side
assumes that it can get what it wants by sheer reliance on
military force, whether it comes from within or without.
The role of the Council is to encourage the Greek Cypriots
to accept that their interests will be better ensured if the
Turkish minority is given assurances on equality and
participation in the development of the island commensurate with its number. It is also true to say that Greek
Cypriots should be given guarantees that they will not be
subjected to military operations from outside and that
accommodation between the two communities is essential
for a peaceful settlement of the issue.

basedon all the relevant resolutionsof the Security Council
and the GeneralAssembly.
13.5. My delegationis heartened by the observationof the
Secretary-Generalthat he is undertaking further consultations in an effort to establish a basis of negotiations
acceptable to both sides.The Secretary-Generalintends to
pursue this coursewith vigour because,in his own words,
“potentially dangerouselementsof, instability are inherent
in the prevailing situation”. We wishhim good luck in his
efforts to bring the parties closer together with a view to
working out an approach to negotiationsthat would make
it possible to convene another round of intercommunal
talks. We should also like to join the Secretary-Generalin
his appeal to eachside to show willingnessto acknowledge
the reality of the needsand aspirationsof the other.

132. The Government of Kuwait agrees with the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the Council should
extend the mandate of UNFICYP for a further period of six
months. My Government hopes that this period will be
employed for fruitful negotiations between the parties
concerned. Kuwait is a regular contributor to UNFICYP.
However, we share the view that United Nations troops
sometimes unwittingly provide a shelter behind which the
parties concerned find comfort; instead of providing a
catalyst for negotiation and for peaceful settlement of
disputes, the United Nations troops introduce a sense of
pomplacency which is temporarily satisfactory but inherently dangerous. There is undeniable truth in the argument
that United Nations troops tend to perpetuate the status
quo in dangeroussituations. The case of Cyprus is no
different. In Cyprus one party found protection in the
presenceof United Nations troops while the other found
another type of comfort in the continuation of privileges.
Therefore, the situation of Cyprus has becomepainfully
tragic.Without the political will of both partiesto negotiate
on behalf of their respective communities, the Security
Council cannot effectively contribute to the solution of the
problem,

136. Finally, Kuwait’s concern is to see peace-making
replace peace-keepingand amity supersedeconflict and
strife. The outcome, however, must be a just and peaceful
settlement based on the legitimate interests of both
communities.
137. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council. As we all
reahze, you have already found the challengesthat lie in
that office and we are very pleasedwith the manner in
which you have already, in the brief tie you have
occupied the position, met thosechallenges.Weparticularly
admire the diplomatic skill and patience-I might even say
extreme patience-with which you havehandledour affairs
over the past severaldays. I shouldlike alsoto congratulate
your predecessoron his conduct of the presidency during
the preceding month. He also took us through some
difficult momentsin a very skilful and successfulfashion,
and we are grateful to him aswell

133. It is distressingthat the Council could not reach an
agreementbefore midnight last night on the extension of
the mandateof the Force. It is more than distressingthat
the Council, after hours of agony, adopted a resolutionfor
the extension of the mandate five hours after its expiry.. It’
was an unpleasantexperience, yet that unpleasantexperiencehasadvantages.It hasunderlined the futility of being
caughtin a linguistic entanglementwhich hasno bearingon
the substance.It brings home to me how sometimeswe
tend to lose sight of the fundamentals when we unduly
stressnew linguistic answersthat cater for the satisfaction
of the local constituencies.

138. The Council’srenewal of the mandateof the United
Nations Force for another six-month period testifies to our
firm belief that the maintenance of peaceand stability in
Cyprus will enable the two communities to resume the
negotiating processon a constructive basis in the near
future.

134. Our major concern on this occasionis to emphasize
the fact that the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYI’ is
not a periodic ritual or seasonalroutine which must
automatically take place once every six months.It is vitally
necessaryto reaffirm that UNFICYP is merely a temporary
measuredesignedto give the parties the opportunity to
settle their differences in an atmosphereof calm and free
Frompressureor coercion. Our attention will continue to
be focusedon the processof negotiation andreconciliation
which shouldlead to a settlement that safeguards
the basic
rights and legitimate interests of the two communities.
Neither party should use UNFICYP as a pretext for
perpetuating the status quo or thwarting the craving and
yearnings of the other for harmony and reconciliation
15

139. Over the past six months, UNFICYP hascontinued
to carry out its mandate with quiet efficiency. With the
United Nationsoperations in the Middle East, it sharesthe
reputation for impartiality and integrity which has made
United Nations peace-keepingthe major force for world
peacethat it is today.
140. In recent weeks, the Secretary-Generaland others
have met separately with President Kyprianou, Prime
Minister Ecevit and Mr. Denktag, the leader of the Turkish
Cypriot community. Those discussionshave not yet resulted in sufficient progressto permit the Secretary-General
to resume the intercommunal talks. He has nevertheless
stated in his lucid report that he is determinedto continue
his efforts to bring the parties closer together so that
negotiations looking towards a permanent settlement can
be resumed. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
efforts.

to the officers and men of UNFICYP for the highly
professionalmanner in which they have dischargedtheir
duties.

141. On 22 May [S/12715, annex/ Mr. Denktas issueda
statement which clarified and to a certain extent reformulated the Turkish Cypriot position. It Was in many respects
a positive andencouragingstatement. Wethink it should be
possibleto build on the ideas he expressedand on the
prop&s put forward by the two sidesto move towards an
early resumption of the talks and the resolution of the
Cyprus problem.
142, It is my Government’sconviction that this is a crucial
moment in the history of Cyprus. If talks are not resumed
at an early date, opportunities for progresson this issue
may well be delayed for some time to come and, as a
consequence,the unfortunate de facto division of the island
could furthersolidify. If is for this reasonthat every effort
must be made now to bring the parties together for
sustainedand productive negotiations carried out in good
faith.
143. I wish to emphasizethat the Secretary-Generalhas
specialauthority and responsibility for helping the parties
reach an agreedsettlement.Under Security Council resolution 367 (1975), he is requested,amongother things:
“to undertake a new missionof good offices and to that
end to convenethe partiesunder new agreedprocedures
and placehimselfpersonallyat their disposal”.
Mr. Waldheimhasscrupulouslyimplementedthis resolution
and we have no doubt that he will continue his mission
sinceit remainsthe will of the Council.

j
I

144.. The connexion between peace-keepingand peacemakingis perhapscloserand more intentional in the Cyprus
question than in any other area of United Nations
involvement. In my Government’sview this connexion is
inextricable. The United States bears a heavy burden in
support of the United Nations Force in Cyprus, along with
one other permanentmember and severalnon-permanent
membersof the Council. Only the demonstratedwill and
determination of the parties to engagein serious, constructive intercommunalnegotiations under the auspicesof
the Secretary-Generalcanjustify this burden.
145. We note with satisfactionthat there hasbeen a slight
decline in the deficit of UNFICYP to $53.6 million. The
reduction, however, is largely due to a reduction in costs
and not to a more equitable sharingof the costs of the
Force. The troop-contributing countries bear a particularly
heavy burden. We regret that more countries have not
heeded the appeal of the Secretary-General of 23 March
[S/12624/ to contribute to UNFICYP and thereby give
concrete evidence of their commitment to international
peaceand security.
340, In closing,I shouldlike to expressto the SecretaryGeneral my Government’s sincere appreciation of his
continuing efforts to promote a lasting settlement of the
Cyprus dispute. We welcome his appointing Ambassador
Reynaldo Galindo Pohl his Special Representative in
Cyprus. I wish, finally, to extend our thanks and admiralion to Under-Secretaries-General
Urquhart and Guyer and
their
able
Staff,
to Mr. Remy Gorge, who served fOT a
considerableperiod as Acting Special Representative, and
16

147. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): There is an air, I
supposeinevitably, of somnolent, almost soporific, reluctance about the Security Council this afternoon, and I
supposewe are all reluctant at still beinghere consideringa
matter which we should have finished at midnight last
night, and we areall a bit somnolentbecauseof the hour at
which we actually adopted the resolution this morning.I
must say that as I was sitting here I was remindedof an
incident in the courseof an all-night session
in the Houseof
Commonswhen an older and wiser Member of Parliament
than I, as we sat watching the sun come up over the
Thames, looked at me and said, “You know, there is
nothing like stayingup all night to concentratethe mindon
ways to avoid having to repeat the experience”. It may be
that that will be one of the desirableeffects of last night’s
efforts.
148. Mr. President,althoughthe Council hasmet in closed
sessionunder your presidency already this month, I have
not had the occasion previously to congratulate you
publicly on your assumptionof the office of the presidency, Having admired the firmness and wisdom with
which you have handledthis particularly thorny problem,I
am confident that the Council’sbusinessthis month will be
conducted with efficiency and skill, I would alsotake this
opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,the listinguishedrepresentativeof Venezuela,for hishandlingof last
month’sCouncil affairs.
149. Turning now to today’s agenda, I should like to
thank the Secretary-Generaland his staff for yet another
comprehensiveand lucid report covering the six-month
period which concludes today. My Government accepts
without reservation the Secretary-General’srecommendation that the UNFICYP mandateshould be extendedby
a further six months, and I was happy-not to say
relieved-to vote for resolution 430 (1978) earlier today. I
think perhaps I should say a little about the delay in
renewing the mandate. It is of no small concern that the
Force was on the island of Cyprus for five hours today
without the necessarylegal authority for its being there. I
am sure that all troop contributors would agreethat sucha
situation is unacceptableand must not be allowedto occur
again. Let us hope that the new form of resolution will
enableus to avoid such delays in future renewals,should
they prove necessary.
150. The British Government hopes to maintain its con
tingenl of the Force at its present strength for the next six
months, and we shallcontinue to meet its full cost, aswell
asthe cost of the logistic support we supply to UNFICYP.
151. Mention of costs reminds me yet again of the
disproportionateburdenborne by relatively few countriesin
supporting a force which, it is generally agreedI believe,
plays an essentialpart in maintaining peacein Cyprus. In
paragraph 82 of his report, the Secretary-Generalhas
pointed out that the troop-contributing Governmentslook
to the United Nations for much lessthan the actualcost of
maintaining their contingents, and in somecases-myown

1
country is only one example-for only a fraction of their
actual costs. Yet despite this, the UNFICYP deficit continues to run at more than $50 million. I make no apology
for drawing attention again to the fact that many countries,
some of which are closely concerned with the Cyprus
problem, continue to fail to respond to the SecretaryGeneral’s appeals for voluntary contributions. In my view,
it is a reflection on the collective reputation of the
Members of the Organization that sufficient funds cannot
be provided to match the splendid efforts in the field of
Major-General Quinn and the officers and men of
UNFICYP.

resolve the crisis, it is important to comply strictly with the
letter and the spirit of Security Council resolution
365 (1974), as well as of resolution 3212 (XXIX)
and
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly, including
that of the last session. As is well known, those resohrtions
also call for respect for the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and policy of non-alignment of the
Republic of Cyprus, the immediate withdrawal
of ‘all
foreign troops and foreign military staff from the territory
and the cessation of any interference whatsoever in the
island’s internal affairs.
157. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has always
emphasized the need to resolve the Cyprus problem’ by
peaceful means. Today, as four years ago, we state that a
just solution can be achieved only if the fate of Cyprus is
charted not by foreign interests but by the people of
Cyprus themselves. The Cyprus crisis has more far-reaching
causes and interrelationships than just the internal problems
of Cyprus itself. One such problem is that of nationalities.
We have never underestimated the complexity of Cyprus’s
nationality problem. We are firmly convinced that the
people of Cyprus will be able to resoIve that problem on
the basis of the equality of both nationalities, Greek and
Turkish. If, throughout this protracted crisis, the problem
has remained unresolved, despite all the efforts of the
Government of the Republic of Cyprus, it is mainly because
the powers which, in the summer of 1974, hoped to take
advantage of the Fascist puts& of the Athens Colonels in
an effort to alter not only the situation in the island but
also the strategic situation in the eastern Mediterranean,
have not renounced their plans to gain control over Cyprus
and its key position in relation to the Middle East in order
to turn it into a NATO military base.

152. In last December’s debate I paid tribute to the
retiring Mr. Perez de Cuellar. Today I should like publicly
to congratulate and welcome his replacement as the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative in CYPS,
Mr. Galindo Pohl. Our thanks are due also to Mr. R&my
Gorge, the Deputy Special Representative, who bore the
whole burden prior to Mr. Galindo Pohl’s arrival.
153, Finally, I should like, on behalf of my Government,
to express gratitude to and sympathy with the SecretaryGeneral in his untiring efforts to achieve progress in what
must be one of his most frustrating tasks. We agree
wholeheartedly with his view that the problems are not
inherently insoluble but that their resolution does require a
willingness from each side to make concessions and to
acknowledge the needs and aspirations of the other. For
this reason, my Government continues to urge the parties
to adopt a constructive and flexible approach to the
intercommunal negotiations, which we consider to be the
most likely vehicle for arriving at a satisfactory outcome.
154. Mr. HULINSKY
(Czechoslovakia)
(interpretation
from Russian): I should like, first of all, to thank the
representative of Venezuela, Mr. Carpio Castillo, for his
effective and impartial guidance of the work of the Security
Council last month. I wish also to congratulate you,
Mr. President, the distinguished representative of friendly
Bolivia. on vour assumotion of that post for the month of
June, Relations between your country and mine are based
on a rich tradition of many years. They began to develop in
a particularly favourable manner in the 197Os, and are
based on mutually beneficial economic links, as was
demonstrated by the visit to Czechoslovakia of your
country’s Minister for Mining and Metallurgy, General Jose
Zelaya Salinas.

158. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has in all
circumstances resolutely opposed any encroachment on the
Republic of Cyprus from any quarter. It has done so in the
face of the efforts to divide and annex the island. The
Cyprus question can be resolved in a just manner only when
conditions are created in the island which will allow both
communities to act realistically, making possible the
creation of a peaceful situation in which all questions
concerning the constitutional organization of the State can
be resolved compatibly, with reasonable consideration for
the interests and rights of the two nationalities in a united
Republic of Cyprus.
159. A prerequisite for the positive internal political
development of the country remains the elimination of all
foreign military bases and the withdrawal
of all foreign
troops, without exception. In passing, we would note in
this respect the important statement made by the President
of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, on 24 May last,
to the tenth special session of the General Assembly3 in
which, in particular, he said he was in favour of the
complete demilitarhation and disarmament of the Republic
of Cyprus and also of the implementation of United
Nations resolutions.

155. The Czechoslovak delegation associated itself with
other Council members in voting in favour of extending the
mandate of the United Nations troops in Cyprus for a
further six months, An important factor in that decision
was agreement to the extension by the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus, on whose territory the troops are
stationed.
156. We have taken note of the report which the
Secretary-General submitted ta us. It characterizes the
situation in the island as being difficult and as causing deep
concern. Since the very beginning of the Cyprus crisis, the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has advocated that nonaligned State’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We have stressed consistently that, in order to

160. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic consistently
favours the implementation of United Nations resolutions,
3 Ihid.

17

which contain all the necessary elements for a solution of
the crisis. However, there are constant attempts to conduct
negoliations on the fate of Cyprus without the participation of the United Nations. These attempts circumvent the
we&known decisions of the United Nations and are not
aimed at resolving the problem in accordance with the
interests of peace and security in the eastern Mediterranean.
The legitimate Government of Cyprus has stated several
times that it cannot agree with a solution which runs
counter to United Nations resolutions.
161, The Czechoslovak delegation once again emphasizes
that any negotiations for a really reliable settlement of the
problem of Cyprus can be held only on the basis of the
well-known resolutions of the United Nations and only
within their framework. In this respect, the Czechoslovak
delegation expressesits conviction that the proposal to fall
for an international conference within the framework of
the United Nations to discuss the problems connected with
the strengthening of the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus remains valid.

165. The Soviet Union resolutely supports the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of
the Republic of Cyprus and its status as a non-aligned State,
The Soviet Union is a consistent champion of a peaceful
and just settlement of the Cyprus problem, taking into
account the interests of the entire Cyprus people and
with due consideration for the interests and rights both of
the Greek and Turkish communities. We consider that the
inalienable right must be ensured for the Cyprus people,
both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, to resolve the
problems of the internal organization of their State
themselves. It is important, in this respect, to make further
efforts aimed at restoring the spirit of mutual trust and
co-operation between the two communities in Cyprus, It is
a matter of great urgency to put an end to any foreign
interference in the internal affairs of Cyprus, to remove all
foreign troops from the island and to eliminate the foreign
military bases.
166, The Soviet Union advocates the immediate and
comprehensive implementation of United Nations resolutions on Cyprus. Resolving the Cyprus problem on the basis
of these resolutions would be furthered, we feel, by
convening a representative international conference on
Cyprus within the framework of the United Nations.

162. The settlement of the international aspects of the
Cyprus crisis corresponds to the urgent interests in strengthening peace and international security. It would doubtless
help the citizens of the Republic of Cyprus also in their
attempts to resolve the internal aspects of that problem by
political means. On behalf of my delegation, 1 should like
to express the sincere hope that the parties directly
concerned will make use of the renewed mandate of
UNFICYP and will show their devotion to the principles of
a settlement which could be endorsed and supported by the
international community.

167. The delegation of the USSR voted in favour of the
Council resolution on extending the stationing of the Force
in Cyprus for another six months, bearing in mind that the
Government of the Republic of Cyprus endorsed such an
extension. The delegation of the USSR believes that the
financing of the Force will be carried out on a voluntary
basis as heretofore.
168. In conclusion, the delegation of the USSR would like
to stress that the extension of the stationing of United
Nations troops in Cyprus should not be used to postpone a
just and peaceful solution of the problem of Cyprus.

163. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian/: Sir, first of all,
on behalf of the delegation of the USSR, I should like
sincerely to welcome you, an eminent diplomat from
Bolivia, and wish you every success in fulfilling the lofty
and responsible functions of President of the Security
Council. My delegation also expresses its gratitude to your
predecessor, the representative of Venezuela, Ambassador
Carpio Castillo, under whose able guidance in May the
Council discussed a number of important questions connected with the situation in the Middle East.

169. Mr. GEORGE (Nigeria): Mr. President, my delegation
would like to place on record our good wishes to you on
your assumption of the office of President of the Council
for the month of June. In the same breath, I wish to offer
my delegation’s gratitude to Ambassador Carpio Castillo of
Venezuela, the President of the Council during the month
of May, for the excellent way in which he conducted the
affairs of the Council.

164. A few hours ago the Council adopted a resolution on
a further extension of the stationing of United Nations
troops in Cyprus. But it is obvious to all, however, that this
question cannot be examined in isolation from the nature
of the present situation which remains in Cyprus and in the
area. Unfortunately, we must take note of the fact that,
despite all attempts made by the United Nations, the
Security Council and the General Assembly to resolve that
important and acute international problem, no real progress
has been made. A tense situation still prevails in Cyprus, the
basic elements of the Cyprus problem remain unresolved
and the basic resolutions of the United Nations on the
Cyprus question remain unfulfilled. The strivings of certain
circles to resolve the Cyprus problem within a narrow circle
of States members of NATO and to try to turn Cyprus into
a military bridgehead of that bloc in the eastern Mediterranean, are becoming even more obvious.

170. My delegation has noted the efforts being made by
the Secretary-General, particularly the skilful consultations
he has been carrying out, and the use of his good offices in
the search for an agreeable accommodation for the resolution of the problem of Cyprus. These have been fully
reflected in the report before the Council. We very much
appreciate the dedicated interest of the Secretary-General
in the cause of peace in the world.
171. Council members in the past few days have gone
through numerous hours of painful consultations before
arriving at the adoption of resolution 430 (1978) at about
5 o’clock this morning. In voting in favour of the resolution, my delegation was mindful of the history of the
problem of Cyprus, the plight of the people of Cyprus and
the portent of the prolonged process of consultations and
18

negotiations which we have just gone through for the future
of the Republic of Cyprus and the welfare of all its people.
It is our hope that due and judicious advantage will be
taken by all parties to the dispute in Cyprus of the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Force,
with the result that more vigorous efforts will be made
towards finding a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the
problem of Cyprus, a problem which is recognized by all
for what it actually is-a constitutional problem.

national peace and security. The failure of the Council to
resoIve any issueaffects the credibility of the Council and,
by implication, that of the United Nations itself. We have
now witnessed a full 15 years of maintaining United
Nations forces in Cyprus, which, until June 1971,had cost
the Organization the staggeringsumof $128.5 million. And
I am very sure that, taking into consideration the
armament-industry-fueled inflation in the world today, the
cost of this operation must have gone up quite considerably.

172. The problem facing Cyprus, a Member of the United
Nations since 1960, is a reflection of how seriously we take
the Charter of the United Nations and how the Charter is
disregarded when the so-called national interests of certain
Powers are considered by them to be at stake. The key
question of mutual respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Member States, in order to avoid war and
maintain international peace and security, is well enshrined
in the Charter. It is therefore a matter of deep regret to my
delegation that the Security Council, as the world’s
custodian of international peace and security, seems powerless in the face of such brazen violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a Member State, Is it because
Cyprus has no minerals and raw materials and the economy
of the Western world is not threatened and those who shore
up certain other regimes have not found it necessary to
prevent the dismemberment of Cyprus?

176. The United Nations cannot stand idly by and see
much needed money for development wasted on peacekeeping operations whilst political leaders fail to take or
shy away from the requisite political decisionsto resolve
the problems that have plagued the international community for solong. Furthermore, my delegationwould like
to place on record that peace-keepingoperations are not
supposedto be a permanent feature in an areaof conflict
and should therefore not be a substitute for durable
political solutions. We should work assiduouslyto nurse
enduring peacebetween peoplesin the spirit of the Charter.
177. In the recent General Assembly debate on disarmament, the President of Cyprus proposed that Cyprus
should be demilitarized and disarmed. This is a very
significant statement from the leaderof a nation which, we
are told, is at war and wants to subjugateor oppresspeople.
The Cypriots are a peace-lovingpeople; they deservepeace
and should be allowed to have it. But peace will never be
attained solong asoutside partieschooseto meddlein their
internal affairs.

173. If.the fear, expressed in 1965 by the United Nations
Mediator on Cyprus, that “the geographical separation of
the two communities under a federal system of government . . . would , . . inevitably lead to partition and thus
risk creating a new national frontier between Greece and
Turkey . . . of a highly provocative nature” (see S/6253 of
26 March 1965, par. 1541 is justified, the support being
given to the Turkish Cypriots by Turkey might be looked
upon as an attempt to break Cyprus into two separate
States based on ethnic lines. My Government cannot but
deplore such a plot. We oppose secession and secessionist
movements under any cover. The Turkish and Greek
Governments are active parties in this problem. They are
not geographically contiguous. And in all the wars that have
ensued over Cyprus, it is the people of Cyprus who have
suffered the brunt of war and worn its scars. But the
Governments that supply arms to these Governments reap
the profits.

178. In my delegation’sview, the Security Council should
act further. The aggressorState must be bluntly told to
remove its army of occupation. The territorial integrity of
Cyprus must be restored and respected. The people of
Cyprus have suffered, and enoughisindeed enough.
179. My delegation and my Government, while repr+
sented on the Council, will continue to give support to the
Secretary-General in his mission of good offices in the
search for a durable and lasting peacefor the Republic of
Cyprus.
180. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, my delegation
congratulatesyou on your assumptionof the high office of
President of the Council for this month and assures
you of
our co-operation. We gave you practical evjdence of such
co-operation last night.

174. In the recent meeting of the NATO countries in
Washington, tile Prime Ministers of both Turkey and Greece
were present. It is inauspicious that those Powers responsible for the creation of the problem of Cyprus and those
that profess every day to be peace-lovers were unable to
make use of their political leverage to bring about a
political solution to this problem. Instead, they devoted
their energy to the formulation of strategy for recolonizing
and subjugating the continent of Africa and its people with
a view to serving their self-centred economic interest, and
all this with an arrogant disregard of the sovereign
Governments of Africa and their regional organization.

181. We are glad also to welcome among us the new
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus and Mr. Denktag,the
leader of the community of Cypriots of Turkish origin.
182, The question before the Council is “The situation in
Cyprus”. We have before us the comprehensivereport of
the Secretary-Generalcovering the last six months, in which
he has recommendedthat we shouldextend the mandateof
the United Nations Peace-keepingForce in Cyprus by
another six months. This we have done by adopting a
resolution which contains the basicelementsnecessaryfor
that purpose, and they are the concurrence of the parties
concerned, especially the consent of the Government of

175. The Security Council is a very important arm of the
United Nations. It is the organ. which has the power and the
machinery to act and which can act decisively to defuse
situations that are considered to be dangerous to inter19

of the Force, stipulated in paragraph 5 of resolution
186 (1964) is clearly no longer relevant in terms of the
present situation. We have grave doubts also about United
Nations involvement in the internal problems of any
Member State.

Cyprus, on whose territory
the Force is stationed and
operates, reaffirmation of the relevant resolutions of the
Council and, lastly, a request to the Secretary-General to
persist in his mission of good offices.
183. It is a simple resolution devoid of controversial
elements so far as the Council members are concerned, and
it should prove to be a good precedent. And yet the 15
members of the Council took some 17 hours to reach that
simple conclusion at 5 o’clock this morning. This extraordinary demonstration of ineptitude must have undoubtedly diminished the Council’s prestige and authority.
The reason for this, of course, is the fact that the Council
was the virtual hostage of the parties concerned, which,
having agreed to the extension of the mandate of the Force,
insisted on prior approval of every single word and
punctuation mark in the draft resolution.

189. Lastly, my delegation congratulates the President of
Cyprus for his far-reaching and imaginative proposal to
demilitarize his country. This is a unique proposal and 1
should have thought that it was worthy of being taken note
of by the Council, an action which, unfortunately, the
Council has failed to take.
190. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spunishj:
There are no further speakers on the list. I should like to
convey to my colleagues my heartfelt thanks for the great
assistance given me by each and all in the very difficult
hours we have just passed through and especially to the
representatives of the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union
and France.

184. It is not clear to me why or how the Council
surrendered its authority and its powers in this manner to
the parties concerned, In such a situation, why should not
the parties concerned draft a consensus resolution themselves and bring it to the Council for rubber-stamping?
Even that was not possible, because the parties concerned
are apparently not on speaking terms.

191. Speaking now in my capacity as representative of
BOLIVIA, 1 should like to express my heartfelt thanks to
the Secretary-Genera1 not only for his tireless work of
peace in Cyprus, recognized by all my colleagues, but also
for his very valuable assistance and constant encouragement
in our recent long hours of work. 1 should like to
congratulate Mr. Galindo Pohl, who assumed the role of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus. 1
should also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Guyer,
Major-General James Joseph Quinn, the Commander of
UNFICYP, and the Secretariat personnel, for their valuable
contribution during the negotiations.

185. And so the Council had to resort to strange procedures and work through the night like the veritable
mountain labouring long and hard to produce the proverbial mouse. Before that mouse appeared in the early
hours of this morning, one delegation was asked to
withdraw its draft resolution in order to facilitate the
arrival of the mouse. Another ancient draft resolution was
updated, but was rejected because it was patently out of
date. Finally, the present draft resolution was born, largely
due to the efforts of a French midwife and the threat of a
possible Russian veto which somehow hastened the labours
of the mountain. My delegation takes this opportunity to
record its thanks to the representatives of France and the
Soviet Union for their helpful and objective role.

192. The urgent search for a non-aggressive and reasonable
means of extending the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, through the resolution just
adopted, has left us with a feeling of uneasiness. We felt
ourselves somewhat weary, finding that we were unable to
deal with the substantive problem because of the lack of
time. In order to help lay the groundwork for a lasting.
solution, beyond the provisional measures necessary to
preserve the peace in an important region of the world, 1
should like to stress three aspects which in the view of the
Bolivian delegation are important.

186. Surely, there is a moral in all of this and in our view
it is simply that the Council should resume the power that
it seems to have surrendered to the parties concerned and
live up to the ‘rightful role entrusted to it by the Charter, If
it does not do so, it should throw open its informal
meetings to the public in the expectation that public
exposure might improve its performance. So much for the
extension of the mandate of the Force.

193. First, that my country has a firm position of
principle in favour of the integration of peoples, as a means
of achieving development, in keeping with one of the tnajor
present-day objectives of Latin America.

187. The Secretary-General’s report has also made it
abundantly clear that the intercommunal talks are now
hopelessly deadlocked and that the time may be ripe for
dealing with the present stalemate. We believe that the time
is ripe for the Council itself to examine the deadlock and
the situation in Cyprus in depth. If the stalemate should be
of a permanent character, there is no valid reason, in our
opinion, for indefinitely continuing the stationing of a
United Nations Force in Cyprus at enormous cost.

194. We are deeply disturbed at the contrast between the
dispersion of peoples and human communities still affected
by age-old regional injustices which form part of a
colonialism which has not yet disappeared, in contrast to
the great supranational concentration of ever more powerful entities such as the so-called transnational corporations,
whose hypertrophy, which leaves on the sidelines the small
and poor nations of the world, increasingly weakened and
dispersed, has quite rightly been of concern to the United
Nations.

188. It is unrealistic to keep on calling for resumption of
negotiations between the two communities without first
discovering and establishing an appropriate and realistic
basis for the negotiations. May I also say that the mandate

195. There is a universal enemy of peace-which is not
highiy visible but which is evcrywhcre--sometimes
pre20

venting practical progress towards the establishment of a
new international economic order, sometimes providing
those weapons which, as we learned at the tenth special
session of the General Assembly, are not produced by
anyone but which nevertheless inundate the world, sometimes acting as the direct or indirect cause of regional and
local conflicts, many of which have been smouldering for
centuries without a solution in sight.

he said, resolution 430 (1978), made some references to my
country. I wish to place on record that I, too, reject in toto
what he said about the Government of Greece and about
recognition of the Government of Cyprus. The Government
of Cyprus is recognized by all Member States. The fact that
Turkey is the only country that makes an exception to this
general rule makes it entirely unnecessary for me to answer
in detail, at this late hour, the arguments advanced by
Ambassador Tiirkmen.

196. Because of this, my delegation is strongly in favour
of any form of political unity and social integration of
communities and of nations as a means to achieve the
development of the peoples of the third world. Those who
cause divisions and pit people against people, even in the
belief that they serve their own cause of freedom, are doing
what is counterproductive, apart from being anti-human.

203. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I am indeed very grateful
to all the members of the Council for having devoted so
much time last night, so much energy and loss of sleep over
the question of Cyprus. I know that most of them must
have felt that they were wasting their time on small details
of something that could have been resolved in a very short
time, and they must have been placing the blame on one
side or the other and probably were getting excited over
that blame. I apologize to them all for whatever responsibility we bear for having kept them so late.

197. Secondly, in respect of negotiations hedged about
with inflexible preconditions which make any negotiation
impossible, Bolivia has very recently had bitter experience
of this in its search for peaceful means for the restoration
of its original natural outlet to the sea, which is absolutely
vital for its development within a framework of peace and
integration which we shall not renounce.

204. I must also thank all the members for the interest
they showed by their statements in this hall, and I wish, in
particular, to mention the statements of the representatives
of Nigeria, the Soviet Union and India, as well as all the
others who have spoken. I wish, in particular, to address
you, Mr. President, and to thank you for having brought to
the fore certain aspects that should not be overlooked in
the Security Council.

198. Any genuine agreement, in order to deserve that
name, must be reached through reciprocal concessions and
not decisions imposed unilaterally. Faithful to the doctrine
of peace of the Charter of the United Nations, the Bolivian
delegation firmly believes in the fruitfulness of understanding reached through mutual concessions in order to
overcome long-standing problems of the developing countries, and by so doing to make it possible, together and
united, to overcome the backwardness and poverty which
stem from dependence. That is why we are so concerned by
the disunity of communities affected by the same situation
which, rather than dividing them, should unite them in a
common struggle against the same economic and social ills.

205. Now we have heard Mr. Denktag speak in dramatic
tones and say that he has not come from the moon and that
the people here are not from the moon. But I would merely
say this: what he said was entirely “moonshine” and
contains no particle of truth. I do not want to offend him
at all, because he is carrying out a mission in doing this, and
the mission is to try to cover up, as the agent of Ankara,
the atrocious crimes committed and still being committed
by Turkey against Cyprus in full view of the international
community and with the full knowledge, in particular, of
the Security Council, which had adopted unanimously
resolutions calling for a halt to the aggression against
Cyprus and to the expulsion of its population after an
aggression and invasion unprecedented in recent times. TWO
hundred thousand refugeesare the result of a genocidal
expulsion. Over 2,000 personsarc missingwho were in the
handsof the Turkish army, who were seenand heard,even
from radios in Turkey, who were transported to Turkey
bound up as prisonersand then disappeared.NOW we are
told that “there is no information about them; we can give
you no information about thesemissingpersons”.Attempts
were made to establishcommitteeswith representativeson
both the Turkish sideand the Greek Cypriot sideto try to
trace them, but at every stepbeforethosecommitteeswere
formed there was obstruction-surely understandablebecauseany effort would showthat those peoplehave been
massacredor are in slavecampswhere they remainunseen.

199. Thirdly, I should like to highlight the resolute
contemporary defeat of an isolated, individualistically medieval approach to the problems of the peoples of the world
in this era in which we all aspire to a universal and even
ecumenical human race.
200. A striking lesson at this time, among the many that
can be taught by the United Nations, is that there are no
longer problems of concern only to one country or even
exclusively to two countries as though they were isolated
from the rest of the world. The fate of each country is of
interest to all. Thus, we should all work sincerely and
resolutely to provide a better destiny for mankind within
the peace and security so painstakingly sought by the
United Nations. Bolivia sincerely hopes that, as soon as
possibIe, a lasting solution will be found for Cyprus,
protecting its sovereignty, its territorial integrity and its
human rights.

206. Now Mr. DenktaS-andI do not want to offend him
at all-spoke of the great violationsof humanrightsduring
the 11 years before the invasionand saidthat the invasion
that causedthe genocidalexpulsionof 200,000personswas
really a benevolent invasion,In fact, the Prime Minister of
Turkey, Mr. Ecevit, who alsohappensto be PrimeMinister

201. Acting again in my capacity as PRESIDENT of the
Council, I shall give the floor to those representatives who
have asked to speak in exercise of their right of reply.
202. Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece): The representative of
Turkey, in giving his explanations for rejecting irr loto, as
21

211.. When did Turkey become involved in the problem of
Cyprus? I shall tell you when it became involved-in the
middle 1950s. I do not need to say why it became involved,
Since that time, Turkey’s very thinly veiled aim has been
the partition of the island with an eye to annexation. The
indications of that are numerous and now they are more
and more open and manifest. The Turks tried to promote a
far-fetched objective at the time of partition in an island
whose population lived mixed together in all parts and
could not be separated. That was stated in the report of the
constitutional authority, Lord Radcliffe, in 1956, the same
authority that went to India and arranged for the partition
between India and Pakistan. That same authority wasasked
to deal with the situation in Cyprus and Turkey waseagerly
looking to see if it would get a share of Cyprus. But
regrettably for Turkey, and perhaps for subsequent developments, Lord Radcliffe’s report said that partition was
excluded from Cyprus because the population was so
scattered that it could not be properly partitioned. Then, a
suggestion was made for a federation but it was said that a
federation was impossible because again that required a
geographic separation and there could not be a federation
without a geographic separation. What happened then? The
report said that Cyprus should be a unitary State. The
British Government which sent Lord Radcliffe said that
that was what should be done and that Cyprus should be a
unitary State.

today, had broadcast to the world on 20 July that he WAS
going to carry out a peaceful operation in Cyprus for the
good of both the Greek and the Turkish peoples. But,
hardly one hour after that announcement, there took place
the napalm bombing of open cities and villages, bringing
agonizmg death to hundreds of people, for no reason, and
creating forest fires, in order to terrorise the people and get
them out of a part of Cyprus that the Turks wanted to
occupy and make part of Turkey.
207. I am sorry if I have to keep the Council members on
a night which will not result in a resolution, but jt is
necessary to do so, particularly after what Mr. Denktaq said
here. And why did he speak after the Foreign Minister of
Cypr& The latter made a charge against Turkey for its
invasion of Cyprus and continuing occupation of 40 per
cent of its territory as well as for the crimes committed
there, and instead of a representative of Turkey coming to
answer-if Turkey had an answer-that country tries to put
forth Mr. Denktaq to answer, in order to cover up the
situation and to present it as being merely a difference
between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.
208. It is well known that the problem of Cyprus is one of
the most serious problems today. This was stated first by
President Carter of the United States, who said that there
were three most serious problems today: the problem of
the Middle East, the problem of southern Africa and the
problem of Cyprus. The same was stated and written also
by the Secretary-General. Before the invasion, we never
heard that, although there was a Cyprus problem, it was a
problem of such serious dimensions as to be one of the
gravest problems, and that problem is one not only of
Cyprus but also of the whole international community and
of the United Nations: it is the problem of a small country
that is invaded by a bigger country with defensive weapons
in its hands used for aggression. And what happened after
the invasion? It was not merely an invasion, but the
destruction of the country and its people, and, as I said, the
creation of 200,000 refugees. Mr. Denktag, speaking on
behalf of Turkey, as its agent-and asI said before it should
have been the representative of Ankara who spoke-tried
to speak as if it were not true that there were 200,000
refugees. But the last report of the Secretary-General gives
an accurate account and says that there are 182,000. We
have other more accurate statements which say 186,000,
and I think there are figures arriving at 196,000 or 200,000.
However, the figure of 182,000 appears in the report of the
Secretary-General. Therefore Mr. Denktas has no cause to
come and say, “Nonsense, there is no such thing as 200,000
refugees”.

212. But Turkey wanted to continue its idea and from
that time on it has tried by all means-legal, illegal and now
by aggression-to divide the population. Hence the expulsion of the 200,000 refugees in order to create an area
where the population would be Turkish. Hence also the fact
that they have been feverishly transporting all kinds of
people from Turkey-crude, uncouth, uncivilized, Anatolian or whatever it was-and putting them into Cyprus to
fill the gap that was created by the expulsion of the
200,000 Cypriots. Those 200,000 represent one third of
the total population of Cyprus, Turks and Greeks included.
One third have been uprooted from their homes, expelled
and they are still in tents. Mr. Denktag puts on dramatic airs
and calls himself the President of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus. But what is the territory of this audacious
claim of a State within a State? It is a territory from which
the population has been genocidally expelled within the last
two or three years, a territory which has been invaded and
is still under the heel of the occupation army. That is his
State and he is very proud of it. He is the President.
213. Here then we have a State with that territory. The
original population in that area totals 18 per cent. The
other 82 per cent was thrown out and 50,000 or so have
been imported to fii that gap and to make it a State. Of
course, no Member of the United Nations nor the United
Nations itself recognizes that State. Yet, the representative
of Turkey speaks without any qualms again of the President
of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. If those words
“Turkish Federated State” are a lie how can one expect
there to be no lies in what he says? Where is the
Federation? Ask him if the territory of which he claims
now to be President is not the territory which wasinvaded
and is still under the occupation of the invasion army? IS
he siding with the aggressor? Is he a Cypriot or what is he?
Ask him. I asked him that question when he spoke here in

209. In the same tone he denies the truth and takes an air
of such persuasivenessthat, as it were, he does not need to
produce evidence. In fact he has produced no evidence
about anything he has said here.
210. I shall take a little of your time to produce concrete
evidence that everything he said is false But why should
Mr. Denktag come here and tell untruths? After all, why
should Turkey take this trouble caused to itself by invading
Cyprus? There must be some cause and reason for it, Let
US100k at the situation and we shall find the cause and
perhaps once and for all we will deal with this problem
effectively.
22

1964. I asked him in a letter I sent to him at the time. The
letter is here. I asked him why he was siding with the
aggressor if he was a Cypriot. Here is the letter and you can
see how old it is. It is as old as the wounds of Cyprus. He
came here and he was crying. This is a letter of 2 March
1964 circulated by the Secretary-General:

216. The cause of all these troubles, the reason we have a
United Nations force, and the reason for last night’s vigil, is
the partitionist policy of Ankara, which goes on relentlessly. That is the situation. It started with troubles in the
1950s. The Turks would go-as they do now-into
the
buffer zone and set alight Greek Cypriot property; friction
ensued, which brought about fighting. This was before
independence. Eventually, them was an agreement to form
an independent Cyprus. But in the London and Zurich
agreements, Anakara insisted on such divisive provisions
that the State could not function. It functioned for three
years, but with great difficulty because the Turkish
Cypriots, acting under the direction of Ankara, were
obstructing its functioning. How were they obstructing it?
They already had certain rights and privileges in excess of
the normal rights and they used them to obstruct the State.
As a result, the income tax law could not be made to work
and there was an economic crisis; and all that was in the
hope of disrupting the State and creating a reason for the
invasion. So things went on for two years or so until 1962.
Then there was trouble, which was systematically promoted
by Ankara, and only five days after the trouble began the
ships were ready to invade Cyprus from Turkey. The
invasion was prevented by the Security Council, but in a
few months they started again and then on 5 June 1964
President Johnson sent a letter-and it is very characteristic-to the then Prime Minister, Mr. Inijnii, telling him:

“The voice the Council has heard from Mr. Denktas was
not the voice of the Turkish Cypriots. It was the voice of
Ankara through another channel, but with the same
concepts and even in identical words. His statement has in
this sense been revealing in its implications. He has
confirmed in a vivid way that he does not think or feel as
a Cypriot at all, but as a Turk from Turkey ‘projected
into Cyprus’, to USC his own words. He has made it
apparent that his allegiance is not to the country of which
he is a citizen, but to a foreign State, Turkey; and that
when his country of citizenship is threatened from
Turkey with aggression and invasion, he sides with the
aggressor.” [See S/5573./
214. I need not enter into what else he said. But he did
say that he was thrown out of Cyprus and that he could not
return, although he was not truthful enough to say why he
was sent out of Cyprus-because
of rebellious activities.
However, we will leave that alone. It raises a question to
which he would reply in the negative, but why does he not
say that he came to Cyprus armed, illegally and clandestinely, and was found by the police, arrested and put into
prison? He was in terrible fear for his life, but he did not
know that the mentality of those who had him under arrest
was not the same as some other mentalities. He was not
hurt at all, He was there under a charge punishable by very
heavy punishment and imprisonment-the
charge of coming
clandestinely into the country, which he will not deny-but
he was forgiven. He was given every attention and sent back
to his beloved Turkey in complete safety. Why is he not
sincere enough to thank us for saving his life, or at least for
saving him years of imprisonment? Why does he simply
come here pointing an accusing finger and citing all the evils
they have suffered?

“It is my impression that you believe that such
intervention by Turkey is permissible under the provisions of the Treaty of Guarantee of 1960.”
-the same excuse that they give today for their actual
invasion“I must call your attention, however, to our understanding that the proposed invasion by Turkey would be
not for the protection of the Turkish Cypriots but for the
purpose of effecting a formal partition of the island.”
217. So in 1964 President Johnson had warned of what
happened now. Now it has come into full bloom in the
partition proposal made for the solution of the problem of
Cyprus, in which it is suggested that almost 40 per cent of
the island should remain in the hands of its present
“government”. They call it an administration, They have
set up a bogus administration and, with a population made
up of imported Turks and an army to whom they have
given Cypriot citizenship illegally, they propose that this
“population”
and this “country”
should now become
recognized and legitimized by our signature. They want
negotiations for that purpose, and they say that we are
intransigent in not entering into negotiations aimed at
legitimizing the invasion, the occupation, the expulsions
and the transportation of the population from Turkey.

215. These matters cannot be left there. It may be late,
but since he comes here and uses such language then I must
say-with
all due respect, because as a man I respect
him-that he is carrying out a mission which he should not
have accepted. He says that they were suffering. Let US,see
how much they were suffering. The trouble be,gan on 23
December 1963, And why did the trouble begin? I will tell
the Council immediately why it began. In trying to
promote the far-fetched objective of partition in the island,
Turkey adopted a systematic policy of increasing the
division of the people by breaking by force and through
underground Turkish organizations the existing links of
harmony between the two communities. That was attested
to here in this chamber by Lord Caradon, the then
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, who was
the Governor in Cyprus for a number of years and also
previously the Colonial Secretary there, when he said that
he knew very well that the people of Cyprus, Greeks and
Turks, had lived over the years in the country in peace,
harmony and amity. What broke up that relationship? The
intervention of Ankara. For what purpose? To partition
the island.

218. Because of that situation this problem is recurring in
the Security Council and, because it continues to recur, the
Council has the trouble of renewing the mandate. Therefore
it is very pertinent to the whole question of the mandate to
ask why it is necessary and who is responsible. But the
effort is to conceal everything. Mr. Denktag said that, for
no reason, we refused to attend negotiations, although they
had made concrete and substantial proposals. He did not
23

papers that where
“Mersin, Turkey”.

dare to tell the truth and say that the reason that had been
given was that the proposals were not for a united State,
although he spoke of unity, and not for a State with a
single structure, but for division and partition. Mr. Denktag
does not say that. Why should he not be sincere enough to
say: “The President of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, says that
our proposals are for partition, but I shall prove that they
are not”? He avoids the issue. He says that Mr. Kyprianou
says the proposals are unacceptable, but he does not say
why. Again the truth is not allowed to come out, but is
hidden.

222. So we have ample proof from their own acts that the
purpose was and continues to be partition, because Cyprus
is not partitioned yet. That is what we are struggling for
here, to save Cyprus from partition. And the purpose of
partition is annexation. That is the reality.
223. Let us look at the facts here. Why is there so much
about our not wanting these negotiations? There was the
meeting of President Makarios and Mr. Denktas in 1977,
when they came to agree on a federation with. a functioning
central government, with the unity of the State. The word
“unity” has been used here by Mr. Denktag. He says that
they want a State with unity. He says that here, but what
does he present? Partition. So he admits that unity was the
purpose, and he destroys that unity-not he, it is not his
fault at aI1, but Ankara. The proposals were made at Ankara
by Professor Soysal; Mr. Denkta$ and the rest of the
so-called Turkish Cypriot leadership were merely the
messengers of Ankara, and here he is the messenger of
Ankara. For that reason the representative of Turkey says
Mr. Den&as will speak, because he speaks with the voice of
Ankara, of course, and it is very much better to let him
speak to show that this is a problem between the Greeks
and the Turks.

219. We see in the latest report that the Secretary-General
says:
“My
talks at Nicosia with Mr. Kyprianou
Mr. Denktag centred on the negotiating process.”
12723, pura. 49.1

they are is Cyprus; they must put

and
[5’/

Mr. Denktag says that Mr. Kyprianou

does not want to
was the
consequence? The Council will see why he does not want
to meet him again:

meet him, but he did meet him, and what

“It was agreed that the Turkish Cypriot proposals on
the main aspects of the problem would be submitted to
the Secretary-General so that I might study them and
consult the parties on . . . resuming the intercommunal
talks in a meaningful and effective way.” [Ibid.]
220. Then, Mr. Denktas says that the reason we gave for
not accepting the proposals as a basis was that they were
not reasonable. But it was not because they were not
reasonable; it was because they were at CIOSSpurposes; they
were for partition, and I will prove to the Council
immediately that they were for partition by many things.
Mr. Denktaa mentioned Yugoslavia. If Yugoslavia-or
even
Mr. Denktas-is asked, is there a central government, the
answer wiIl be yes. Does it function in Yugoslavia? Yes. Is
a citizen a citizen of Yugoslavia and does he have a passport
issued by the Yugoslav central Government? Yes. But the
proposal of Ankara is for two separate States each issuing
completely separate passports, with separate registers, and
everything separate. Is there any federation in the world
where there is no central authority which gives citizenship
and the federation’s passport? No.

224. There had been a constitutional problem in Cyprus,
but it was not a world problem. It arose from the
difficulties of the functioning of the Zurich and London
agreements, which were divisive because of the influence of
Ankara. That is where the trouble began, and they could
not function, and then the President of Cyprus invited the
Turkish Vice-President to find ways and means of making
them function and making them viable. The offer was that
more rights should be given in the normal sense to the
Turkish community and that the divisive ones should be
taken away. For instance, it was proposed to abolish the
right of separate majority, which meant a veto by the
Turkish minority on the functioning of the State, and allow
the Turkish Vice-President to substitute for and succeed the
President if he was ill or absent, whereas under the divisive
constitution it was a Greek who would take the place of the
President if he was away, absent, ill, and so on. The
proposal was to abolish that and give the Turkish VicePresident all the rights of a Vice-President.

221. I cannot go into all the details-there
are too
many-of the division of sovereignty in every respect, with
the central government having no authority at all but being
admitted in the constitution to be merely ceremonial. The
representative of Turkey does not say these things. Why try
to conceal everything and present a situation which is
unnatural and untrue? Because the crimes in Cyprus have
to be concealed. And the crimes are there for what
purpose? To make way for partition. And what is the
purpose of partition? It is annexation. Why da I say
annexation? Because already they forbid anyone in the
territory which has been occupied to say it is Cyprus; they
call it Turkey, the province of Mersin in Turkey. That is
what they call the north of Cyprus now. The currency says
Turkey, the stamps say Turkey and the address of the new
bank which was established in Cyprus is the Turkish Bank,
Mersin, Turkey. The citizens are forbidden to say on their

225. The Vice-President at the time was thinking about
this and studying it, but Ankara intervened immediately
and said it was not acceptable, which meant they did not
want to conciliate and get people to work together, or to
have the Turks given rights that would conciliate them.
They wanted division. From that moment the trouble
started. Immediately after the proposals were made to the
Turkish side, the fighting began. It was, of course, fighting
between the two sides, in which no doubt there were
excesses, but that was nothing. It was stopped immediateIy;
we had the United Nations Force and it is well known that
with the presence of the Force the human rights of the
Turkish Cypriots were fully protected. If they were not and
they were suffering in any way, why is it that the Turkish
Cypriots, or Ankara, did not go to the Commission on
Human Rights of the United Nations or the European
Commission of Human Rights?
24

226. On the other hand, with regard to the violation of
human rights in Cyprus by Ankara, we have the report of
the European Commission of Human Bights, which has
now been circulated in full. It was described by The Sutz&y
Times of London as a “massive indictment of the Ankara
Government [which] could result in the withdrawal or
expulsion of Turkey from the Council of Europe”. Why is
there no report about the violation of the human rights of
the Turkish Cypriots? There is none; they never went to
the Commission on Human Rights because there had been
no violations.

community. Permits have to be obtained by Turkish
Cypriots who wish to travel outside the Walled City of
Nicosia . . .”
-and they must return within a certain time6‘. . .
Turkish. Cypriots are likely to find themselves in
serious difficulty with members of their community if
they fail to confine contacts with their Greek Cypriot
compatriots to a strict minimum.” /Ibid., pm. 115.1
230. In other words, the whole effort was aimed at
dividing the two communities and making them strangers to
one another. Mr. Denktag said that the houses of Turkish
Cypriots had been taken. That is not the case at all. They
left their houses, which then fell into a state of ruin. The
Government offered to rebuild them and invited the people
back but they refused to come, not because they did not
want to, but because their leaders, inspired from Ankara,
would not allow them to do so. The Secretary-General’s
report of 8 December 1967 states:

227. What do the reports of the Secretary-General say
about this situation? There is a whole volume of these
reports starting in 1964 and continuing through 1965,
1966, 1970 and so on. I shall not take the time to go
through them all, but there they are with all the dates, and
I shall give the Council some examples.
228. They said they were put in enclaves and deprived of
their freedom of movement, and that they became refugees.
Let us look at what is stated in the Secretary-General’s
report of 15 June 1964: “lack of movement of Turkish
Cypriots outside of their areas is also believed to be
dictated by a political purpose”[S/5764,
para. 1131. They
were put in enclaves in order to create a pattern of
separation. It is true that 40 or 50 or 1,000-I do not know
how many-were put in enclaves, but by whom? By their
own leadership, to make a pattern of separation. Taking
advantage of the troubles, they said, they are in danger, let
us put them in enclaves. But there was a political purpose,
as the report says, namely “to reinforce the claim that the
two main communities of Cyprus cannot live peacefully
together in the island without some sort of geographical
separation” [ibid. J. This was the geographical separation
that Turkey wanted for the purpose of partition, while
pretending that it was necessary for security purposes. Then
the report goes on:

“For a considerable time, the Government has urged
the refugees to return to their homes. . ., it has repaired
or rebuilt abandoned Turkish Cypriot houses, , . . It is
known that the Turkish Cypriot leadership does not
favour the return of the refugees to their former homes
located in Government-controlled areas at present. To
justify this position, the Turkish Cypriot leadership
stresses considerations of security and safety of the
refugees, although there can be little doubt that one of
the major reasons for its attitude is a political one.”
[S/8286, para. 127.1
Therefore this pretence that the Turkish Cypriots were
suffering and that they had lost their security, as I have said
from the very beginning, was a political pretence for the
purpose of partitioning and eventually, annexing the island.
The report continues:

“The Force has provided a degree of security by
temporarily escorting Turkish Cypriots and their goods to
their destinations, a practice which has been recently
replaced by increased UNFICYP patrols and check-points
in sensitive areas.” [Ibid.]

“the maximum possible number of Turkish Cypriots must
remain outside the Government’s authority” [ibid.].

229. The Secretary-General’s report of 10 June 1965 says:

That was the political purpose and the political policy, yet
they are now lamenting the loss of their freedom and their
security.

“The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adhered to a rigid
stand against any measures which might involve having
members of the two communities live and work together.” (S/6426, para. l&5./

23 1. The Secretary-General, in his report of 10 June 1965,
said:
“The Turkish Cypriots continue rigidly to deny freedom of movement to Greek Cypriots in the Turkish
Cypriot sector of Nicosia.” [S/6426, paw. 112.1

SO the fact that they were in enclaves was not because they
were suffering from danger to their security, or suffering in
any other way, but because they had to adhere to rigid
orders from their leaders, who wanted to keep them from
associating with the Greek Cypriots. The SecretaryGeneral’s report continues:

That was said despite the fact that Turkish Cypriots had
complete freedom of movement all over the island. In many
areas the Greek Cypriots were denied freedom of movement. They were held in enclaves by Turkish Cypriots who
had received arms from Turkey and were in rebellion, Yet
the Turkish Cypriots were regarded as the poor Victim
Durillg the negotiations concerning the establishment of the
republic, a caique from Turkey was taken into custody by
&e British authorities while it was illegally unloading
quantities of arms, In other words, the Turkish Cypriots

“The result has been a seemingly deliberate policy of
self-segregation by the Turkish Cypriots.” [Ibid.]
It goes on to say:
“Turkish Cypriot leaders continue to exercise effective
control over the free movement of members of their own
25

By Allah, this hate will not leave me.
A thousandheadsof Greekswill not washaway thishate,
I’ll crushwith a stonethe headsof 10,000of them,
I’ll pull out the teeth of 20,000 of them with my hare
hands,
I will throw the corpsesof 30,000 of them into the water,
By Allah, this hatred will not leave me . . . A thousand
headsof Greekswill not washaway this hate,”

were getting arms from Turkey in preparation for a war of
rebellion, a war of partition. All this is reported in
document AISPCIPV.923.4
232. Mr. Denktaa has spoken about the need for concilia
tion. It is we who yearn for conciliation. The SecretaryGeneral says that the rank and file of the Turkish Cypriot
community yearns for conciliation and for the resumption
of harmonious relations. But the agents of Ankara will not
permit it. I am sorry to have to speak in these terms, but
the truth must be told. This discussion is merely an
introduction; the matter will have to be discussed in full.
Our Foreign Minister has given notice to that effect.
233. On 8 December 1966 the Secretary-General reported
in the following terms:
“Except in rare and special cases, the Turkish Cypriot
leadership denies entry into areas under its control to all
Greek Cypriots, whether government officials or private
individuals. This ban appears to be enforced as a matter
of political principle”

and this was published and circulated under authority,
recited and sung in the presenceof the Vice-President
ef
Turkey, I continue now With the poem:
“AS long as120,000heartscan beat together,”
-the Turkish Cypriot population is 120,000, and theyarc
taught this from Ankara“AS long as40 million hearts”
-these are the heartsof Turkey‘cBeatwith mine,
By Allah, this hate will not leaveme,
A thousandheadsof the Greekswill not washawaythis
hate.”

-the political principle behind all the acts of the Turkish
Cypriot leadership is inspired in and directed from Ankara“with little attempt at justification on practical grounds,
and, with the exception of the Kyrenia road convoy . . .,
entry is usually firmly denied even where Greek Cypriots
would be escorted by UNFICYP personnel and security
factors could not possibly be at stake.” [S/7611,
para. 109.1

Now, this poem was circulated three days prior to the
third phaseof the intercommunal talks at Vienna, Three
days after this official gathering, they went to the inter.
communaltalks at Vienna.
235. That bringsme to what happenedin the third phase,
Mr. Denktasmentionedit and I must say a few wordsabout
it. He saidthat we made an agreementfor an exchange
of
population. Not at all. The agreement was not for an
exchangeof population. Of course, one can distort reality
without the documents, but I can offer proof with
documents. The agreement which was reached in the
presenceof the Secretary-General,on 2 August 1975,was
asfollows:

In other words, the other side disallowed anything which
would bring the two communities together. We want
conciliation. Our hearts reach out to the Turkish Cypriots,
with whom we have lived over the ages, but a wall has been
erected by those who adopt the partitionist policy.
234. There is another sad thing which I have to do, but I
must do it and be finished with it. In his letter and in his
remarks. at this meeting, Mr. Denktaa referred to conciliation. Mr. Ecevit spoke of love. He is a poet, and I greatly
appreciate his writings about love. Let us consider how love
is regarded in Cyprus, On 20 July 1975, there was a Turkish
victory parade to celebrate the first anniversary of the
invasion of Cyprus. That was a great victory by a strong
country against a little country. Among the officials present
at the celebration-and I should like this to be noted-was
the then Vice-President of the Ankara Government,
Mr. Turhan Feyzioglu. Leaflets were distributed at that
gathering, and they were lavishly published in the Turkish
press. In those leaflets was a poem, The poem was entitled
not “Love” but “Hate” and it was recited at that gathering
and sung by the Turkish soldiers, ejz masse. The actual
wording of the poemisasfollows-forgive me for readingit
here in an atmosphere
like this, but it mustbe read:

“1. The Turkish Cypriots at present in the southof
the island will be allowed, if they want to do SO,to
proceednorth with their belongingsunder an organized
programmeand with the assistance
of the UnitedNations
Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus.”
Now, that wasthe advantagethat they wanted to get.
“2. Mr. Denktagreaffirmed, and it wasagreed,that the
Greek Cypriots at present in the north of the islandare
free to stay and that they will be given every helpto lead
a normallife, including facilities for educationandfor the
practice of their religion, aswell as medicalcareby their
own doctorsand freedomof movement in the north.
“3. The Greek Cypriots at presentin the north who,st
their own request and without having been subjected
to
any kind of pressure,wish to move to the south,will be
permitted to do so.

“As long asvengeancefills my veins,
As long asmy heart beatsfor Turkism,
As long asthe word ‘Greek’ existsin dictionaries,

“4. The United Nations will have free and normal
accessto Greek Cypriot villages and habitationsin the
north.” /S/l 1789, annex.]

4 Ibid., Twetzty-ninth Session, Special PoliticM Committee, 923rd

meeting,

26

236, This involved 15,000 Greek Cypriots. As soon as
8,000 went to the north the harassment and atrocities
irgaiust the Greek Cypriots began and the 15,000 were
reduced to 1,700. They had to leave, Others were killed.
Those who were not killed had to leave and became
destitute refugees, abandoning their property and their
houses. That was the agreement, and Mr. Denktag talks
about an exchange of population. Where is the exchange of
population? Can one abandon one’s property and leave?
4nd now even these 1,700 are sending an SOS: “We want
to stay but we cannot. They are killing us.”

violation of the Charter. In Articles 41, 42 and 43, the
Charter provides that the decisions of the Council must be
implemented. They are not being implemented in Cyprus
and, because they are not being implemented, the situation
in Cyprus is deteriorating, and the situation generally in the
world is deteriorating, because there is no legal order and
no security. Therefore, the problem of Cyprus becomes an
important problem from this aspect, too.
241. I apologize for keeping the Council so long, and
members will not hear my voice for a very long time, in any
case.

237. This is the situation today and this explains why we
have such difficulties. I am afraid I have to come to the
proposals again. As I said, the proposals cannot be a basis
for negotiation because they amount to partition. But
beyond that, from the moment the proposals came out, it
became apparent that we were at cross purposes. You
cannot negotiate when you are at cross purposes. One side
wants an independent State and the other side wants
partition. Therefore, if you are at cross purposes you
cannot negotiate. These proposals affect the whole process
of the negotiations. If the Greek Cypriot side and the
Government are justified, we are not going into negotiations as long as the basis of the negotiations is the
partition proposal,

242. Mr. AKIMAN (Turkey): I merely wish to say the
following in reply to two points made by the representative
of Greece.
243. Ambassador Tiirkrnen did not say that he rejected in
toto the resolution adopted early this morning. He said that
he did not accept it in toto. I am sure that this nuance will
not escape Ambassador Papoulias. As a matter of fact,
Ambassador Tiirkmen did not only accept the extension of
the mandate of UNFICYP but also supported the continuation of the good offices of the Secretary-General, which are
the two main elements in the resolution.
244. As for the rejection by Turkey of the existence of a
Government of Cyprus, I am sure that the representative of
Greece will allow us to be entitled to our own views on this
point.

238. The proposal of the President of Cyprus for demilitarization is consistent with the policy of conciliation and
understanding. The Turkish Cypriots are willing. If Ankara
would allow the Turkish Cypriots to negotiate freely and
express their own wishes and feelings, if they were allowed
to work together, they would be conciliatory and the
problem would be solved. We know very well that the
feelings of the rank and fde are for conciliation. We have
seen it in the many statements of those who are suffering
from the invasion from Turkey. To this end, the proposal
of the President for demilitarization is a way towards
solving the problem too, and it is also an incentive for other
small countries to proceed to their demilitarization.

245. Mr. PAPOUIJAS (Greece): What I want mainly to
clarify is that I objected to the misinterpretation attributed
to Greece with regard to the first Geneva conference, in
July, 1974. Turkey may have its opinion on this; we reject
its opinion and its inference as regards the existence of the
Government of Cyprus.
246. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
am informed that Mr. Denktag, who was invited by the
Council under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,
would like to make a further statement. 1 call on
Mr. Denktaa to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.

239. Therefore, in order to have fruitful negotiations,
there must be good faith and common purpose. For the
time being, as I have shown, there is no good faith, judging
by what happened with the invasion of Cyprus, proclaimed
as being for peaceful purposes, when it was the opposite,
judging by what happened with the agreement of 2 August,
when contrary to the agreement they made proposals for
partition. The moment they express good faith, we are
ready for negotiations. The moment we arrive at a common
purpose, we are ready for negotiations. But we are not
going to have negotiations which are intended to cover
crimes, and not to offer any chance of success.

247. Mr. DENKTAS: All I intended to do when I asked to
speak at this time was to thank you, Mr. President, and all
the other members of the Council for having supported the
continuation of the intercommunal talks. But, soon afterwards, I heard Mr. Rossides explain why the Greek Cypriots
do not want to continue the intercommunal talks. I hope
that in the time which the extension of the mandate has
now given us they will find new ground, new reasons for
changing their minds, because there is no other way. Our
flexibility is there; we want to talk; we want peace quickly;
and we shall be available when the Secretary-General calls
us to start the negotiations.

240. Meanwhile, the attitude of Ankara is not only
injurious to the people of Cyprus as a whole, the Greeks
and the Turks. We know the genuine Turkish Cypriots are
suffering from this situation. They have expressed their
suffering. But I say that it is an evil to the whole
international community which tolerates a situation of
aggression and invasion in such a State, because Security
Council resolutions are not implemented. We come to the
sum total of it. What is responsible for this situation in
Cyprus is the failure to implement Council resolutions in

248. The point was made here that, in the special session
devoted to disarmament, Mr. Kyprianou had said that he
was ready to have Cyprus disarmed. Our view has been
sought. It is this. When we had a dialogue with the Greek
Cypriot leader, the late Archbishop Makarios, there were
certain factors in the four guidelines on which we agreed to
27

revolver; but, becauseof my political position, I was
permitted by their own Minister of the Interior in the old
days to carry a revolver. I wascaught. He saidthat I should
be glad that I wasnot killed. Well, of course,I amgladthat
I was not killed. But 1 cannot forget thosewho werekilled
on arrest; there were many and they are mentionedin the
Secretary-General’sreports.

the future of Cyprus settled. One of them was the
non-alignment of Cyprus. If Cyprus as a whole is to be
disarmed, naturally, when the Greek Cypriot leader meets
US and we discuss and dialogue begins, and when he brings
this question before us, I can assure him that the Turkish
co-founder community of Cyprus, the co-founder of the
Republic of Cyprus, the co-founder of the independence
and sovereignty of Cyprus will not hesitate to agree with
the Greek Cypriots if the question is put fairly and
reasonably to us. It is a question which the future Republic
of Cyprus, when it is constituted in its bi-communal form,
will take up and decide. We might even decide it before, if
the dialogue between the two leaders stands. But
Mr. Kyprianou cannot decide on his own for the whole of
Cyprus.

have

254. He has referred-and I shaII end my speechat this
late hour-to a poemwhich wasread, he says,at oneof our
celebrations.Yes, the poem waswritten by a youngmanin
1963 who had seenhiswhole family massacred
at Limassol.
That poem, from 1963 to 1968, unfortunately, wasthe
literature of the Turkish youth who were surrounded,
who
were attacked, whoserights were denied, and for a great
number of whom returning to Cyprus was prohibited.It
may look odd to the Council, but there is now in the
Turkish sector a martyr children’s association-veryunfortunate. That associationchoseto circulate and to readthis
poem at that parade. Since then we have talked to
them-we cannot do more. Wehave saidto them that this is
not a good thing, that we shouldnot live on hatred,that we
should try to live by normal standards.But the poemis
there and it only. reflects what I have said here is a
fact-that Turks have suffered so much, that this kind of
poetry has been forced into the minds of their literary
young men. It is unfortunate that it has happened.I can
cite a lot of poetry publishedby the Cyprus broadcasting
station-it is even in the reports of the Secretary-Generalto which we have complained.

249. I shall not try to answer Mr. Rossides on all the
points which he raised. I shall not deign to answer him
when he chooses to refer to me as the agent of Ankara.
Ankara is the centre of the Turkish community in Cyprus,
just as Athens is referred to by the Greek Cypriots as the
centre of Hellenism. There is no shame in that. The Greek
Cypriots, together with the centre of Hellenism, tried to
grab Cyprus and to unite it with Greece. That is how the
two communities were drawn into conflict, and it was only
natural that the centre of our national being, Turkey,
would help us. Let us put all that aside. What they tried to
do to Cyprus and our resistance to it have brought Cyprus
to its present state. Turkey has, by intervening in Cyprus,
saved the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus; it is still
there. We are ready, extending our hands, to restart the
process by agreeing.

255. But how will all this help us? I look on Mr. Rossides
asa wise man. I cannothelp the fact that he is stillliving in
the past. As a good diplomat, he can help his leadersto
come to the negotiatingtable by talking, not ashedid here
today but the way he talks to me when we arefaceto face
in the corridors. I ask him to do that, to have the courage
and to have the big-heartedness
to say here that they have
also been wrong and that we can only do right by coming
together. That is what I expect of him, the Mr. Rossides
that I know, and expect of him at his age. It is the last
service he can do for Cyprus-not to accumulateoldpapers,
pick up the onesthat suit him and, from a seaof wrongs
that Greeks have done to us, to pick up a few pointsand
try to prove that Turks have beenwrong. Let ussaythat we
want to settle, let us say that we have the courageandthe
determination to overcome the impediments-then and
only then shallwe arrive at peace.

250. I shall not, I repeat, take up the Council’s time on
the questions of refugees, missing persons and of what the
Cyprus problem is, because all of that is in the reports.
251. I have known Mr. Rossides for a long time. We have
faced each other in court, Whenever he had a case which he
saw he was going to lose, he had a tactic. He used to
“lullaby” the judges to sleep by referring to all the books
available in his library-relevant
or irrelevant, new or
old-and he would usually get away with it. But this is not a
court of law. I see that he has surpassed himself in his
tactics, but I am not going to thrust upon the Council old
reports of the Secretary-General, old reports of journalists
who have witnessed the suffering in Cyprus. That is not the
purpose of my being here.
252. He asked: What is the territory
on which the
so-called Federated State of Cyprus is based? I shall tell
him It is the northern part of Cyprus, where Turks had
their properties-and
the Turks who had properties in the
southern part have left their properties in the south to the
Greeks and have come up to the north. We shall discuss all
this in the negotiations. We are ready to discuss all
this-exchange of populations, exchange of property, compensation. Everything will be discussed. But they must
come to the table, It is no usejust talking here and making
accusations.

256. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish}:I
call on the representativeof Cyprus.
257. Mr. ROSSIDES(Cyprus): I do not want to make a
long statement, of course,but I wish to say to the Turkish
Cypriot leader, Mr. Denktag,that I wish what lie saidwere
true-but it is not, unfortunately. Becausehe saysthat they
are ready to conciliate. He saysthat that poemwasmerely
the anger of a man. But it waspublicized; it waspromoted
by the organization; it wasdistributed in leaflets;it wasnot
a poem that was found on the table of a young boy who
wrote it; it was taken up as a policy. And that is the
trouble-they try all the time to poison the goodfeelings
between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots.

253. He referred to my arrest when I tried to go back to
my home, to which I was prohibited from returning for
four and a half years. He said that I was armed. I had a
28

258. The World Council of Churches sent representatives
to Cyprus after the invasion; they came out with a report
which I circulated. They were astonished to find that, after
the invasion and the presence of the Turkish army, Greek
Cypriots were seeking to be protected by the Turkish
Cypriots from the evils of the army. And what is more
astonishing, they said that the Turkish Cypriots were
seeking consolidation and protection from Greek Cypriots.

him: will he be allowed by Ankara or in co-operation with
Ankara-I know otherwise, it cannot be done-to make
proposals that will make for the unity of Cyprus, not for its
partition? And then he will seeimmediately that there will
be a great desire for negotiation. But for this to be done,
Ihe Turkish Cypriots must be able freely to act. They are
not free agents; they cannot act freely when there is the
heel of the Turkish army on the island.

259. This goes to show how much evil comes from a
foreign army of invasion. They may be of the same race as
the Turkish Cypriots, but a foreign army of invasion is an
army of invasion; and a foreign army of occupation is an
army of occupation at the expense of the civilian population, whether Greeks or Turks. Of course, the Greeks
were the tragic victims to a very great extent. But the
Turkish Cypriots are also suffering and I am sure that, in his
heart, Mr. Denktq knows it because so much has come out
in the papers, although news was restricted, although those
who wrote in the papers were threatened with their very
lives if they divulged the secret that the Turkish Cypriots
were suffering; and if thev are not to suffer, they must be
free to negotiate with us.

262. The Turkish army affects us as well, because they
confront us with faits accomplis and they expel populations. But they cannot affect our feelings, as long as we
are on the other side. But the Turkish army in the occupied
area rules the occupied area. The people cannot have a
voice that is contrary to the Turkish army of occupation-an unofficial voice. You can hear remonstrances,
you can hear complaints by the Turkish Cypriots who
suffer, but they cannot negotiate.
263. Therefore, it is vitally important that the resolutions
of the Security Council and of the General Assembly
should be implemented. The proposals on. which
Mr. Denktas is ready to negotiate, let them be proposals
within the framework of the Security Council resolutionsnot against them-not by partitionist positions which are
against the territorial integrity, independence and unity of
Cyprus on which the resolutions are based. They have to
make proposals within the concept of the resolutions and
within the concept of a federation, uniting the country, not
destroying it.

260. Let Mr. Denktag follow the line of those who do not
favour the invasion and come and conciliate and solve the
problems of Cyprus in a spirit of love and understanding.
You cannot have love and understanding side by side with
guns and fighting. That is why demilitarization is important.

264. Let us hope that new counsel will prevail and
probably one day we could meet with Mr. Denktag, if I am
alive, in a new spirit of understanding and love, but in
unity, not in division.

261. Mr. Denkta? thinks that 1 talk too much-it may be.
But that does not mean that what I say is not true. He may
not talk as much, but if what he says is not true, it does not
become true because he does not talk too much. He says
that he will not bother the Council with documents. Where
arc the documents that prove any of these things? I ask

The meeting rose at 8.40 p. m.

‘I
I

29

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
thraughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: Unitecl
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d6positaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adresseJ-vous
B : Nations
Wnies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gem&.

COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
ConsuIte
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S. 2.00

(or equivalent

currencies)

7~-7oOoS--February

1980-2,:
