A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/12
18 November 1999

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 27
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.9 and Add.1)]
54/12.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/13 of 28 October 1998, in which it looked forward to continued close
cooperation between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 that describes the recent enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union in pursuance of the 1996 cooperation
Agreement2 concluded between the two organizations,
Taking note with appreciation of the resolutions adopted and activities carried out by the InterParliamentary Union during the past year in support of United Nations actions in the fields of peace and
security, economic and social development, international law and human rights, democracy, good governance
and gender issues,
1. Welcomes the support provided to the United Nations by national parliaments through their world
organization, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and expresses the wish that the cooperation between the two
organizations will be further strengthened and enhanced in the third millennium;

1

A/54/379.

2

A/51/402, annex.

99-77527

/...

A/RES/54/12
Page 2

2. Also welcomes the information contained in the report of the Secretary-General1 regarding
preparations made with his support by the Inter-Parliamentary Union to hold a conference of presiding
officers of national parliaments in conjunction with the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
designated the Millennium Assembly of the United Nations, in the General Assembly hall from 30 August
to 1 September 2000;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to examine the possibilities of inviting the Inter-Parliamentary
Union to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session (Millennium Assembly) on the outcome of
the conference of presiding officers of national parliaments, and to report thereon before the end of the fiftyfourth session of the General Assembly;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth
session on the various aspects of cooperation between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
41st plenary meeting
27 October 1999
