S/PV.8602

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8602nd meeting

Thursday, 22 August 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26010 (E)
*1926010*

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, to participate in today’s meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: I have been asked to brief the
Security Council today on the issues of missiles.
Missiles have constituted an acute concern for
international peace, security and stability ever since
the first V-2 rockets were fired indiscriminately at
cities in England during the Second World War. Indeed,
it was the movement of nuclear-capable missiles in the
Caribbean that sparked the most serious crisis of the
Cold War, almost 57 years ago.
Since that time, the acquisition, proliferation,
deployment and use of missiles have continued to
play destabilizing — even escalatory — roles in
international relations, with concerning implications
for crisis management, including between nucleararmed States, and, in some instances, causing serious
civilian harm. Today missiles add a dangerous and
destabilizing element to regional flashpoints from
North-East Asia to South Asia, the Middle East and
Europe. They directly contribute to renewed strategicarms competition and hamper the achievement of
broader disarmament objectives.
For decades, the role of ballistic missiles as a
means of delivering weapons of mass destruction has
been a central concern for the nuclear-disarmament
process. For example, the preamble to the Treaty on
the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons states that
its purpose is
“to facilitate ... the elimination from national
arsenals of nuclear weapons and the means of
their delivery”.
That is why they have been the focus of bilaterally
agreed limitations and reductions of strategic arms for
over four decades.
2/16

22/08/2019

Yet today more than 20 countries possess ballistic
missiles with capabilities that exceed the threshold
for “nuclear-capable”, as defined in the guidelines of
the Missile Technology Control Regime. And nucleararmed States are actively pursuing novel missile
and missile-defence capabilities, with unclear and
potentially negative consequences for international
peace and security.
We have also seen increased use of ballistic missiles
in armed conflict over recent decades, most notably their
indiscriminate use against cities during the Iran-Iraq
war in the 1980s. Following the subsequent discovery
of the extent of Iraq’s weapons-of-mass-destruction
programme in the 1990s, the Security Council
prohibited that country from producing, acquiring or
stockpiling ballistic missiles with a range greater than
150 kilometres. And resolution 1540 (2004) required all
States to prevent the proliferation to non-State actors
not only of weapons of mass destruction but also of
their means of delivery.
Moreover,
conventionally
armed
missiles
today feature in the arsenals of many States and
some non-State actors and have been used as areabombardment weapons, often aimed at cities. Advances
in technology are enabling conventional missiles
to become more accurate at longer ranges, thereby
facilitating their increased development, transfer
and use. The development of weapons systems using
missile technology that can manoeuvre at hypersonic
speeds could further undermine security and spark a
destabilizing arms race.
The launch of ballistic missiles into Saudi
Arabia by Houthis in Yemen has been particularly
troublesome. And concerns regarding ballistic missiles
remain unresolved in connection with resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action.
Terrestrial-based and air-launched missiles have
been used to destroy satellites in Earth orbit, including
three times over the last decade, the most recent having
occurred earlier this year.
The recent collapse of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty removed one of the few
constraints on the development and deployment of
destabilizing and dangerous classes of missiles. As the
Secretary-General rightly noted, that Treaty played an
important role in reducing risk, building confidence
and helping to bring the Cold War to an end.
19-26010

22/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8602

The INF Treaty’s ending should not be the catalyst
for renewed and unconstrained competition in missile
development, acquisition and proliferation. I echo
the Secretary-General’s call for all States to avoid
destabilizing developments and deployments and to
urgently seek agreement on a new common path for
international arms control.

aspects of missiles. The Council’s increased attention
to those challenges can give impetus to those efforts.

It is important to note that despite the various
alarming developments I have mentioned, there remains
no universal norm, treaty or agreement regulating
missiles. Today only the Russian Federation and the
United States are subject to legally binding restrictions
on the number of certain missiles they may possess.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Nakamitsu, Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her very informative and valuable briefing.

Measures such as the Missile Technology Control
Regime and The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation, while of clear value, are
not sufficient to deal with every aspect of the threat that
missiles and their proliferation pose to international
peace and security.
The three United Nations panels of experts on
missiles that met in the 2000s provided useful syntheses
of the various security issues related to missiles, as they
attempted to deal with the matter in a comprehensive
manner. However, the First Committee has not adopted
a resolution on the issue since 2008.
More and more countries, including those outside
of existing multilateral arrangements, continue to
acquire and develop their ballistic-missile capabilities.
The Security Council has been seized in particular of
activities in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which is actively augmenting its missile capabilities,
contrary to the Council’s resolutions.
As the Secretary-General made clear in his agenda
for disarmament, published last year, measures for
arms control and disarmament, including in relation to
missiles, played a crucial role in conflict prevention,
risk mitigation, de-escalation and tension reduction at
the height of the Cold War.
Preventing the spread and emergence of
destabilizing weapons remains a vital unfinished
task for the international community in our shared
endeavour to preserve international peace, security and
stability. Moving forward, there is an urgent need for
new international approaches, potentially including
legally binding multilateral approaches, consensus
and agreement in dealing with the various problematic

The President: I thank Ms. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

On 2 August, a very sad and important event
took place — the United States withdrew from the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty,
which, in no small measure, played a key role in building
both the regional and global security architecture.
Talks on the Treaty were held during the Cold War
in a context of complex international relations.
Nevertheless, at that time the leaders of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States were
able to reach an agreement. The INF Treaty was crucial
for international détente. Along with other steps taken
at that time, it greatly contributed to creating a climate
of trust that led to global changes that the international
community now deems essential. For the first time in
decades, humankind had the opportunity to move away
from confrontation and to address pressing development
issues whose resolution would make life better for all.
For a time, the INF Treaty was conscientiously
implemented by both Russia and the United States.
However, with time, it became increasingly clear that
the Treaty, like other disarmament and arms-control
agreements, had become inconvenient for our American
partners, who were convinced of their exceptionalism
and became increasingly determined to impose their
inequitable unilateral schemes of international relations
on others. The first victim of Washington’s ambitions,
in 2003, was the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems
(ABM Treaty), which Russia had actively fought
to maintain since the late 1990s. Immediately after
that, the Americans announced plans to deploy ABM
launchers in eastern Europe, allegedly to counter the
Iranian threat. In response to our concerns, we were
told that those facilities could never be used against
Russia. However, when the first launcher was deployed
in Romania, it became clear that it could easily be
converted to launch Tomahawk missiles, which is not

19-260103/16

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

allowed under the INF Treaty. We immediately drew
attention to that. It is now absolutely clear that we were
right. On 18 August, just two weeks after withdrawing
from the INF Treaty, Washington carried out a test
launch of a medium-range missile using an MK-41
launch system
Since August, there are no restrictions on the
development and deployment of such systems. Thus,
following the denunciation of the ABM Treaty, yet
another pillar of the arms-control architecture was
toppled — an architecture that enabled the drafting and
signature of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
(New START), which will expire in February 2021
and is also at risk. Key figures in the current United
States Administration have repeatedly, both publicly
and privately, made it clear that they have no interest in
maintaining the New START in its current form.
In parallel, almost from the very first day after their
withdrawal from the INF Treaty, American officials
began making threats and statements that leave no doubt
that Washington had intended to do exactly this and had
been consistently and deliberately violating the Treaty
for a long time. Otherwise, how could the Secretary
of Defense, Mark Esper, have announced, in early
August, the possibility of deploying intermediate-range
and shorter-range ground-launched missiles in just a
few months? It would be impossible to produce such
weapons in such a short period of time.
We did not convene this meeting to accuse our
American colleagues of hypocrisy. Today it is obvious
to any non-biased disarmament expert that what we
have presented is incontrovertible fact. No matter
how much Washington insists today on the old mantra
that it was Russia’s actions that undermined the INF
Treaty, its most recent steps are eloquent evidence
to the contrary. But that is no longer the issue. To be
frank, today it is not our American partners that we
are primarily addressing, because their views are clear.
But we are very surprised by the stubborn position that
is being adopted by our European colleagues, as their
stubbornness would be much more helpful if applied in
a different way.
The Council may recall that, as recently as last
December, Russia proposed a General Assembly draft
resolution supporting the INF Treaty. It contained no
criticism of the United States but only urged support
for diplomatic efforts to address challenges affecting
the security and national interests of all States
4/16

22/08/2019

Members of the United Nations, without exception.
We unequivocally warned them then that the demise
of the INF Treaty would not only undermine the
implementation of article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons but would also
lead to a new nuclear arms race. Many partners listened
closely to us, but Washington’s European allies did not.
Here I have a question for them: are they happy today
that in December they chose to press the red button? Do
they not understand that their playing along with the
Americans at every step is bringing back that bygone
era when missiles could target European cities from
various sides?
We will not be the first to do that. However, given
that our American colleagues are clearly itching to and
want to flex their muscles, the situation that I have
just described may be at hand. Are they aware that,
because of the geopolitical ambitions of the United
States of America, we are all just one step away from
an uncontrolled, unregulated arms race? For our
part, unlike our American colleagues, we are deeply
concerned at this state of affairs. In any case, according
to President Trump, America is prepared for an arms
race, as it is supposedly capable of surpassing any of
its potential rivals in terms of finance and technology.
That rationale, inspired by the best American
westerns, is backed up by the numbers: according to
publicly available data, the United States military
budget is about $700 billion, while the budget of NATO
amounts to $1.4 trillion. These are just approximate
figures. For reference, the military budget of Russia,
which is allegedly a threat to us all, is about $60 billion,
that is, more than 20 times lower than that of NATO.
Obviously, following the risky undertakings by
the United States of America, all these figures may
increase; the United States President has already made
that very point. We would note here that expenditures
on the development of weapons prohibited by the INF
Treaty had been included in the United States military
budget long before the Treaty was sentenced to death.
And, as always, Russia is to blame.
Just think about how much we could have done
if the money that our Western colleagues have been
allocating for military purposes had been spent to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and help
less developed and developing countries. Moreover, our
American partners continue to bargain on the budget of
peacekeeping operations and to follow their established
19-26010

22/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security

practice of postponing until the very last moment their
contributions to the United Nations budget, the total
amount of which is less than $10 billion this year. All
that seems not just petty but also disrespectful to all the
Members of our world Organization. We are not afraid
to say it to their faces. What about other members? Are
they going to deny that they are partly responsible for
what is happening, echoing Washington and pointing to
a perceived threat from Russia and from China as well?
Will future generations forgive them for this?
Despite everything I have said, we continue
to believe that, as concerns our Western partners,
common sense and the instinct of self-preservation
will eventually prevail. After all, the very existence of
humankind is at stake. The only question is how much
money and effort will have been wasted by then and
how many opportunities for progress and cooperation
we will have missed.
For our part, we have always been ready to engage
in any serious dialogue aimed at ensuring strategic
stability and security. If it were up to us only, we would
never have come close to a line so dangerous as the one
the world is approaching now.
However, we remain realistic. It is easier to
dismantle than to build. As history has shown, it can
take years, if not decades, to launch a more or less
sustainable and effective new format for discussing
issues of strategic stability and arms control. However,
there are some problems, including those arising from
the irresponsible actions taken by Washington, that
must be resolved today.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I want to
thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
briefing today.
We should be crystal-clear about why we are
here today. The United States entered into the
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty with
the Soviet Union in the late 1980s, but more than a decade
ago, the Russian Federation decided that it would break
its Treaty obligations and pursue a missile system with
a range expressly prohibited by the Treaty. Over the
last several years, Russia developed, produced, flighttested and now has fielded multiple battalions of its
INF-non-compliant 9M729 missile system. In response,
earlier this month and after six years of United States
diplomacy to return Russia to compliance and preserve
the Treaty, our Secretary of State affirmed the United
States withdrawal from the INF Treaty.

S/PV. 8602

As the Secretary said in his statement, the United
States will not remain a party to a Treaty that is being
deliberately violated by Russia. The other NATO allies
also concluded that Russia had materially breached
the INF Treaty. Let me repeat: Russia had materially
breached the INF Treaty, and the NATO allies fully
supported the United States withdrawal due to
Russia’s intransigence.
We are here today because the Russian Federation
preferred a world in which the United States continued
to fulfil its INF Treaty obligations while the Russian
Federation did not. Indeed, the Russian Federation and
China would still like a world where the United States
exercises self-restraint while they continue their arms
build-ups, unabated and unabashed.
Russia now threatens to reciprocate if the United
States positions intermediate-range missiles in Europe,
but Russia had already fielded such missiles in Europe
while the INF Treaty was still in effect. What we and
our NATO allies know is that Russia has produced and
fielded multiple battalions of 9M729 ground-launched
cruise missiles throughout Russia, in violation of the
now-terminated INF Treaty, including in western
Russia, with the ability to strike critical European
targets. Likewise, China threatens to target United
States allies that host any United States missiles,
even though China has already deployed thousands of
intermediate-range missiles with the purpose of holding
the United States and our allies and partners at risk.
Now that the INF Treaty no longer exists due to
the Russian Federation, the United States is taking
the steps necessary to address the threat posed by
the intermediate-range missile forces being deployed
in ever-larger numbers by Russia and China, which
the INF Treaty failed to hinder. Today there are no
United States ground-launched intermediate-range
missiles — zero. In contrast, Russia has developed and
deployed multiple battalions of such missiles. China
possesses approximately 2,000 missiles that would
have been prohibited under the INF Treaty had China
been a party to it.
Furthermore, United States flight tests to
develop a ground-launched conventional capability
are neither provocative nor destabilizing. They are a
prudent response to ensure that the United States has
the capabilities to defend our interests in the postINF-Treaty world that Russia created and are the
culmination of Treaty-compliant United States research

19-260105/16

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

and development efforts dating back to December 2017.
Those efforts were never a secret, and, again, they were
not prohibited by the Treaty.
We have heard a narrative today that the United
States had itself been in violation of the INF Treaty
because of our recent flight test, which used the MK
41 launcher, which is also found in our Aegis Ashore
missile defence system. This is categorically false. The
Aegis Ashore system does not have an offensive groundlaunched ballistic- or cruise-missile capability, although
it utilizes some of the same structural components as
the sea-based MK 41 vertical launch system installed
on ships. The Aegis Ashore vertical launching system is
not the same launcher as the sea-based MK 41 vertical
launch system, and the Aegis Ashore system did not
violate our INF Treaty obligations.
A more relevant discussion today about threats to
international peace and security would focus on the
fact that, while the United States works to reduce the
number and salience of nuclear weapons, the Russian
Federation and China did not follow the United States
lead in this regard. To the contrary, they have moved in
the opposite direction by developing and fielding new
nuclear and missile capabilities over the last decade.
The Russian Federation is upgrading and
diversifying its nuclear-weapons capabilities, and its
total nuclear stockpile is likely to grow significantly
over the next decade. That growth will be driven
primarily by a projected increase in the Russian
Federation’s non-strategic nuclear weapons.
The INF Treaty-violating 9M729 missile system
is only one in a series of ground-, sea- and air-based
Russian systems being modernized and developed
with greater accuracy, longer ranges and lower nuclear
yields in order to enable Russian nuclear strategy
and doctrine, including limited first use of nuclear
weapons. We believe the Russian Federation has up to
2,000 non-strategic nuclear warheads of various types.
In comparison, the United States currently has a single
non-strategic nuclear weapon: the B61 gravity bomb.
The Russian Federation is also pursuing novel
strategic nuclear weapons. Those include a nucleararmed and powered underwater drone designed
to destroy adversary coastal cities and ports in a
radioactive tidal wave; a nuclear-armed and powered,
ground-launched, intercontinental-range cruise missile;
and a nuclear-armed, air-launched ballistic missile.
6/16

22/08/2019

Perhaps a better use of the Council’s time would
be to ask the Russian Federation to address the threats
it poses to international peace and security. How many
9M729 missiles has it produced, and where are they?
What exactly happened on 8 August in Russia? What
caused the explosion? What system was it? And what
purpose does that system serve?
Meanwhile, China continues to rapidly increase the
size of its nuclear stockpile through a rapid expansion
and diversification of its nuclear arsenal. That includes
new delivery systems as China works to establish a new
nuclear triad. China is also examining how hypersonic
systems, air-launched ballistic missiles and low-yield
nuclear weapons fit into its expanding nuclear arsenal.
Those developments by the Russian Federation
and China, coupled with their aggressive and coercive
behaviours, are key drivers behind a deteriorating
security environment. The United States will not and
cannot ignore that reality. We will not stand idle. We
will take the necessary steps to ensure our security and
that of our allies and partners, and that includes testing
and developing systems to respond to the challenges
that we face, as well as being prepared to engage in
what our President has described as a new era of
arms control.
The United States remains open to effective
and verifiable arms control. Contrary to our Russian
colleagues’ outrageous assertions, we have made clear
our interest in serious arms control that includes the
Russian Federation and China, and it goes beyond
treaties focused on limited types of nuclear weapons or
missile ranges. We think that would be a more effective
approach to addressing threats to international peace
and security.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty, signed by the United States and the Soviet Union
in 1987, eliminated an entire category of missiles, those
capable of travelling 500 to 5,500 kilometres. It was
one of the key achievements of the post-Cold War arms
control in Europe and delivered greater security and
stability, not just for Europe but for the entire world.
Over a long period, Russia violated the INF Treaty
by secretly developing and deploying non-compliant
missiles, specifically a mobile-launch missile system,
the 9M729. Those missiles are hard to find, rapidly
19-26010

22/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security

deployable and can target European cities with
conventional or nuclear warheads. Russia refused to
acknowledge their existence until the United States
identified the missile using its Russian designation.
Russia’s only subsequent attempt at openness was
a stage-managed offer to demonstrate the missile’s
alleged compliance. That would have taken place under
contrived conditions, and it would have been impossible
to assess the range of the missile.
On 1 February, the United States announced its
intention to suspend its obligations under the INF
Treaty, thereby triggering a six-month withdrawal
process, which concluded on 2 August with the lapse of
the Treaty. Russia bears the sole responsibility for the
Treaty’s demise. The United Kingdom and NATO allies
fully supported the United States decision to withdraw.
In the last five years, many diplomatic efforts have
been made to persuade Russia to return to compliance.
The United States raised this issue with Russia over
30 times, and NATO allies reached out unsuccessfully
via the NATO-Russia Council. Russia, however, has
remained defiant, focusing its narrative on denial of
the facts and counter-accusations, the likes of which we
have heard once again today.
On 2 August, when the INF Treaty lapsed, NATO
Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg stated that
“[w]e will not mirror what Russia does, we
do not want a new arms race, and we have no
intention to deploy new land-based nuclear missiles
in Europe”.
He explained that NATO will respond to Russia’s
aggressive actions, but
“everything we do will be balanced, coordinated
and defensive”.
We support the United States explanation of the
timeline for the development of its recently tested
ground-launched cruise missile and do not believe
that the United States was non-compliant with the INF
Treaty at any time.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia has the responsibility to play a vital role in
promoting international stability. However, this
behaviour once again undermines Russia’s claim that
it is a responsible international partner upholding
international peace and security. Russia’s present actions

S/PV. 8602

are in line with a pattern of aggression that represents a
clear threat to international peace and security.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs for
her briefing.
Appeals are regularly made from this organ to
preserve and strengthen the security system for which
the Security Council is the guarantor. It is a common
priority and objective, and arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation are its pillars. As the President
of the French Republic recalled in this Chamber
last September:
[o]ur responsibility ... is that we owe it to those
who came before us and to those for whom we
are responsible is to preserve and strengthen that
regime at a time when it is being seriously tested.”
(S/PV.8362, p. 3).
The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty was a central element of that. France regrets that
no solution could be reached to maintain it in force.
The end of that Treaty increases the risks for instability
in Europe and erodes the international arms control
system. I would like to underscore that France’s position
is clear and consistent, and there is nothing surprising
about it.
The viability and effectiveness of disarmament
and non-proliferation instruments require that those
agreements be fully respected and implemented. Russia
bears responsibility for the termination of the Treaty,
which it has continued to violate despite our calls for
the consistent implementation of the INF Treaty. The
development of a new intermediate-range missile
system by Russia increases the threat to European
security interests. We regret that it has again not
shown any willingness to comply with its international
obligations and has not taken any concrete steps in
that direction.
In the current context, we wish to maintain a
measured, balanced and responsible commitment to
ensure the security of our populations and to preserve
peace and regional and international stability. However,
that imperative also requires restoring mutual trust and
dialogue and giving us the means to do so.
The world cannot engage in a new arms race,
the price of which we would all pay; that would be a
dangerous step backwards, to the detriment of the

19-260107/16

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

gains that underpin our security. Supporting and
strengthening disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control processes is essential, taking into account
the deterioration of our security environment.
We must redouble our efforts to preserve existing
conventional and nuclear arms control instruments and
rebuild a robust international framework. It must be
based on real and verifiable instruments and the law to
preserve and build on the achievements of recent decades
and respond to the strategic challenges of tomorrow.
France will continue to work towards strengthening it
and encourages all other actors to follow suit.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes this holding of this briefing
and thanks Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her very
informative briefing.
As the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) enters its fiftieth year, the disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation architecture, which
was implemented following difficult negotiations and
through bold compromises, is now threatened by the
gradual retreat from the commitments made by certain
signatory States. That multilateral framework, which
was brought about by the realization of the possible
disastrous consequences of nuclear weapons, allowed
for providing humankind with security guarantees that
have shielded it from nuclear danger to this day.
The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty, negotiated in the late 1980s, gave us reason to
be optimistic. In a context in which the international
community is struggling to ease tensions emanating
from the Iranian and North Korean nuclear issues,
the demise of the INF Treaty is now raising fears of
a renewed arms race that could undermine the gains
made in the area of nuclear non-proliferation. If we are
not careful, the end of the INF Treaty risks becoming
the first in a series of steps that will further complicate
controlling ballistic missiles and weapons of mass
destruction. The recent initiatives taken by the two
signatories tend to demonstrate this last point.
Given that risk, the position of Côte d’Ivoire is in
fully in line with that of the Secretary-General, who
expressed his regret concerning the termination of the
INF Treaty on 2 August. In the light of the current
exacerbation of security threats, my country believes
that any initiative that threatens the current arms
control and disarmament frameworks could contribute
8/16

22/08/2019

to undermining the gains made in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urgently appeals to the
Russian and American parties, as stakeholders and
guarantors vis-à-vis the INF Treaty, to resume dialogue
in order to save this shining example of cooperation
between the two major nuclear Powers. My country,
which moreover was one of the first signatories to the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted
in 2017, would like to take the opportunity afforded
by this Council meeting to urge all States parties to
bilateral and multilateral non-proliferation frameworks
to step up efforts to safeguard the current gains through
continued dialogue.
Côte d’Ivoire also calls on those countries that have
yet to do so to accede to the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in order to accelerate its entry
into force, as we are convinced that safeguarding the
international non-proliferation architecture is above
all a matter of collective responsibility, Similarly, my
delegation strongly hopes that the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty, which is set to expire in February
2021, will be extended.
The success of our joint action in the area
of non-proliferation is inextricably linked to
confidence-building measures among States parties
to the relevant treaties. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire
believes that it is incumbent upon the nuclear-weapon
States to provide guarantees on the non-use of such
weapons for non-nuclear-weapon States by adopting
an international legally binding instrument. That is a
necessary condition for dispelling the slightest doubt
or suspicion motivating the reluctance of some States
to join the international effort to ban weapons of mass
destruction with resolve.
Human consciousness continues to bear the
indelible marks caused by the use of nuclear weapons.
Any further use of that type of weapon would reflect
the moral bankruptcy of our civilization. Côte d’Ivoire
considers that the maintenance of international peace
and security is our collective responsibility, but States
with nuclear capabilities have a crucial role to play
in safeguarding the stability that was achieved at the
end of the Second World War within the framework of
multilateral and bilateral instruments for controlling
weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the presidency of Poland for
19-26010

22/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8602

convening this meeting. We also thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing.

of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and the
North Korean issue are all worrisome.

First, we regret the formal termination, at the
beginning of the month, of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty between Russia and the United
States due to alleged violations of the Treaty by one of
the parties. In that regard, we note with great concern
the escalation of tensions caused by this situation.

Those recent developments reflect the increased
polarization within the international community,
wherein trust and cooperation among States have taken
a major step backwards. This environment is presenting
a daunting challenge to the global non-proliferation
and disarmament architecture and makes achieving the
progress urgently required at a time of increasing risks
of proliferation even more difficult.

We understand that the disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture is facing a major threat,
with the actual possibility of a resumption of the arms
race that we thought had been relegated to the era of the
Cold War. The Dominican Republic reiterates its firm
commitment to the obligations outlined in the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and its three fundamental pillars — disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
In that regard, we believe that the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty served as an excellent complement
to the NPT, which led to significant progress in the
elimination of conventional and nuclear missiles, as
well as in reducing the great danger of a then perceived
imminent nuclear confrontation.
We believe that humankind and the planet cannot
be allowed to be exposed once again to the catastrophic
humanitarian and environmental damage caused by
the use, development and testing of those weapons.
We therefore call on the parties to give careful thought
to their decisions and refrain from aggressive rhetoric
and destabilizing actions, as well as to consider
returning to the dialogue table, with a view to restoring
confidence-building measures via an agreement and its
effective implementation, whereby the commitments
agreed upon in such an agreement would be respected
in a sustained manner.
In conclusion, we endorse the Secretary-General’s
call on the parties to extend New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty and enter negotiations on new arms
control measures.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu
for her briefing
Belgium is particularly concerned about the current
risks in the area of non-proliferation and disarmament.
The end of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty, threats to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and the uncertainties surrounding the future

As was stated earlier, the INF Treaty was a pillar
of European and international security for more than
30 years. Thanks to the Treaty, nearly 3,000 missiles
equipped with nuclear or conventional warheads
were removed from European soil and destroyed in a
verifiable manner. The Treaty therefore represented
a tangible contribution to the fulfilment of the
disarmament obligations of the United States and Russia
under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Belgium therefore deeply deplores
the dissolution of the INF Treaty. We regret the fact
that Russia has not responded to repeated international
calls for it to resume the implementation of its Treaty
obligations. The dissolution of the Treaty was the result.
However, our debate cannot be limited to
accusations and recriminations. It is important that
Russia and the United States engage in active and
constructive dialogue in order to agree on stabilization
and confidence-building measures. A new arms race
is in no one’s interests. Furthermore, the unparalleled
destructive power of nuclear weapons reminds us of
the need not only to prevent any proliferation, but also
to make progress in the area of disarmament. More
specifically, Belgium calls on Russia and the United
States to engage in productive dialogue in order to
develop initiatives to strengthen strategic stability and
take resolute steps to reduce their nuclear arsenals,
including weapons systems of all kinds. We also stress
the importance of extending New START beyond 2021.
The Treaty’s expiration would end any limitation on the
strategic nuclear forces of both countries.
Let us also not forget the responsibility of other
nuclear-weapon States to contribute to arms control
through their actions and participation in international
deliberations. The development of new capabilities
and the expansion of arsenals take us away from the
objectives agreed under the Non-Proliferation Treaty.

19-260109/16

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

Lastly, I would like to underscore that the global
non-proliferation regime is a crucial element of the
multilateral system, based on international law. We all
have a national interest in a global order based on arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s meeting on threats to
international peace and security. My delegation also
appreciates the briefing by Ms. lzumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs.
South Africa’s primary concern on matters of
international peace and security is the threat posed
to humankind by weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons and their means of delivery.
It is our firm view that the only guarantee against the
intended or accidental detonation of those weapons is
their total elimination. It is equally of concern that some
nuclear-weapons States still insist on the modernization
of their nuclear arsenals and their means of delivery, in
flagrant violation of the letter and spirit of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
It is indeed deeply troubling that a long-established
arms control instrument such as the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty has unravelled, placing
not only the region of Europe but the whole world at
risk of a nuclear war and catastrophe. We also wish
to use this timely opportunity to urge both the United
States of America and Russia to resume discussions
on the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New
START) before it expires in 2021. Such an undertaking
by the two premier nuclear-weapon States would be an
appropriate and fitting tribute to the NPT, whose fiftieth
anniversary we mark in 2020. We will also celebrate
in 2020 the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations — the parliament of the peoples of the world,
which those two countries assisted in establishing.
As the international community will commemorate
the International Day for the Total Elimination of
Nuclear Weapons on 26 September this year, let it serve
as a constant and painful reminder to the international
community of its unfulfilled commitments and
obligations to eliminate nuclear weapons, as envisaged
in the very first resolution (resolution 1 (I)) adopted by
the General Assembly in 1946 — 73 years ago.
As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations in 2020, it is our view that we
should reflect deeply and reaffirm our commitment
10/16

22/08/2019

to the realization of a world free of nuclear weapons.
South Africa’s support for the total elimination of
nuclear weapons is informed by our own experience as
the only country to date to have developed and then
voluntarily eliminated its nuclear weapons for the sake
of our children and generations to come.
South Africa joins the majority of Member States in
voicing our deepest concern regarding the humanitarian
consequences of nuclear weapons, as aptly outlined in
the Treaty on Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW),
which opened for signature on 20 September 2017. We
call upon the United Nations community to sign and
ratify the Treaty at the earliest possible time so that the
TPNW can enter into force as soon as possible. We need
just two more signatures for the Treaty to come into
force. South Africa reaffirms its view that the TPNW is
a bold and positive step towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and strengthens the NPT.
The NPT remains the cornerstone of nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation. However, we
are deeply concerned that the NPT continues to be
subjected to significant tensions as a result of the
non-implementation of the nuclear disarmament
obligations under article VI of the Treaty and the related
undertakings made at the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review
Conferences of the Parties to the NPT.
The current NPT review cycle, which will coincide
with the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty, presents
an opportunity to make urgent progress on nuclear
disarmament. South Africa believes that nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually
reinforcing processes that require continuous and
irreversible progress on both fronts. The selective
focus on non-proliferation measures and the lack of
progress on nuclear disarmament undermines the NPT
and weakens the non-proliferation regime. The total
elimination of nuclear weapons and legally binding
assurances that they will never be produced again is the
only guarantee that those weapons will never be used
as we saw in Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.
In conclusion, South Africa wishes to reiterate its
commitment to multilateralism and the centrality of
the United Nations in resolving today’s challenges,
including that of nuclear disarmament.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
19-26010

22/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security

The State of Kuwait attaches great importance to
everything that could promote security and stability
throughout the world and establish international peace
and security. Today’s subject is a very important one and
has a direct impact on international peace and security.
It is unfortunate to see such an extremely
important historic treaty, the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which was signed at
a very critical time — at the peak of the Cold War
between the United States of America and the Soviet
Union — end in collapse. This is undoubtedly of great
concern. Looking back, we can see that the Treaty had
a very important positive impact. By committing to its
provisions, the two parties were able to destroy and
remove approximately 2,700 missile systems in 1991.
The Treaty also helped to considerably reduce tensions
at that time and to tangibly maintain international
peace and stability, especially in Europe. The world
was looking forward to the reduction in short-range
and intermediate-range nuclear missiles. However,
following certain recent events, that hope has begun to
fade away, in particular in the light of the threats and
challenges we are facing everywhere. Our world today
cannot afford further chaos, instability and disruption
of international security.
The collapse of the INF Treaty and the potential
repercussions could undermine other arms limitation
treaties and accelerate the collapse of the global system
which aims to achieving non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. It could also undermine global security and
knock down a basic pillar of arms limitation, especially
since some have taken advantage of the opportunity to
avoid compliance with international conventions and
instruments on limiting nuclear weapons.
It is unfortunate that the doctrine of nuclear
deterrence is still part of the security policies of all
nuclear-weapon States. Frustration is growing because
of the slow pace of nuclear disarmament and the
resulting disappointment, while fears of tragic and
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of the use of
nuclear weapons are increasing.
We stress that the only way to end the threat of
nuclear weapons is to completely destroy them. The
ongoing possession of these deadly weapons is itself a
threat to international peace and security. Circumventing
the responsibility to comply with conventions limiting
this danger send the wrong message to other nuclearweapon States that did not join the Treaty on the

S/PV. 8602

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, such as Israel
and other countries on the Council’s agenda, namely,
North Korea and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In conclusion, we call on all parties to avoid
escalation and embark upon an effective dialogue
with a view to adopting confidence-building measures
in order to reach a new joint agreement to limit the
proliferation of short- and intermediate-range nuclear
missiles, and perhaps to not cancel the Treaty under
discussion but to strengthen it.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
consider the convening of this meeting to be timely, as
the Security Council has from the outset played a crucial
role in efforts to reduce and control the proliferation
of nuclear weapons. We thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her
valuable briefing.
In the circumstances that bring us together today,
Peru wishes to reaffirm its historic position in favour
of disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation,
as well as its absolute support for all measures and
international instruments that contribute to the
achievement of those goals. We reject any nuclear
threat, as well as the production, manufacture and
deployment of nuclear weapons. That is why we support
a world free of these weapons, through the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and through nuclearweapon-free zones, as well as a complete ban on the
testing and deployment of nuclear weapons in outer
space, the ocean or on any other terrestrial site. In this
context, Peru reiterates its appeal to nuclear-weapon
States to adopt concrete measures to at least comply
with their obligations under article VI of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The current situation is all the more worrisome
given actions that appear to be aimed at the
eventual dismantling of the architecture for nuclear
non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and nuclear
law. Peru deeply regrets that the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty has been suspended, given
its positive impact in fostering confidence-building,
global security and an international order based on
norms. We encourage the Russian Federation and the
United States of America to resolve their differences
through dialogue and reach agreements on the basis
of the principles of irreversibility, verifiability and
transparency. In particular, we urge both States to
extend the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and
agree on new arms-control policies.

19-2601011/16

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

I would like to conclude by stressing that the nuclear
Powers must set an example and prevent a new nucleararms race, which, it should be remembered, will have
the sole merit of having the capacity to irreversibly
destroy life on our planet. We are therefore convinced
of the need to follow the diplomatic path as a means
of safeguarding the international non-proliferation
architecture, in the first instance, and, subsequently,
resuming the progressive elimination of nuclear
weapons. Avoiding unilateral actions or decisions that
could lead to greater instability is critically important
in that regard.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
comprehensive briefing.
Under the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty, almost 3,000 ground-based intermediate-range
missiles were verifiably destroyed. The INF Treaty
was an important pillar and a real cornerstone of EuroAtlantic security and a contribution to disarmament in
the context of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Germany has followed the
recent demise of the INF Treaty with great concern. But
let us be very clear: the Russian Federation bears the sole
responsibility for the recent demise of the INF Treaty.
It is the Russian Federation that developed and fielded
a missile system — the 9M729 missile system — which
violated the INF Treaty and causes significant risk to
Euro-Atlantic security. This is extremely regrettable
because, in our view, we cannot afford an erosion of the
global disarmament architecture and need to redouble
efforts to preserve and strengthen it.

22/08/2019

arms control need to be priority issues on the agenda
of the international community as a whole and at large.
Against this background, two things are needed, and
Foreign Minister Heiko Maas made these points on the
occasion of the Security Council meeting on the NPT
held in this Chamber on 2 April (see S/PV.8500).
First, tangible steps must be taken to reduce the
risk of inadvertent escalation. More transparency
and dialogue on nuclear doctrines, force postures in
military contexts, crisis-proof communication lines,
declaratory restraint and reduced ambiguity can all
significantly contribute to a more predictable and stable
security environment.
Secondly, we need a road map that will get us back
on track with disarmament by preserving and further
developing existing arms-control arrangements. The
contribution of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
to security and stability cannot be overestimated. In the
current security environment, it is essential to maintain
verified limitations of the biggest strategic arsenals and
to extend and build on that landmark Treaty. Russia and
the United States have a responsibility in that regard.
Before concluding, let me turn also to next
year’s fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the bedrock of
nuclear-disarmament and non-proliferation diplomacy.
The achievements made under that Treaty in five
decades are remarkable, but in 2020 we must build
on those achievements and lay the groundwork for its
future, which also requires a credible recommitment to
nuclear disarmament.

The future of global arms control concerns us all
and is a matter for the Security Council to discuss. The
United States test of a conventional cruise missile by
itself does not warrant the attention of the Council.

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We extend our customary gratitude to UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu for the briefing she
just delivered.

Russia’s violation of the INF Treaty is part of a
broader pattern of behaviour in which Russia violates,
circumvents and avoids the implementation of a
number of its agreements in the area of arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation. Russia’s actions
have contributed to a disturbing development, namely,
the overall erosion of the arms-control architecture,
the development of new capabilities and serious
proliferation trends.

As a country that loves peace, dialogue and
brotherhood among the nations and the peoples that
make up this planet, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
cannot but express its concern about the course of
events that have motivated us to hold this meeting here
and now. We sense that we are moving dangerously, and
not for the first time in our recent history, towards a
new arms race.

In spite of, and due, to these worrisome
developments, Germany is more than ever convinced
that the issues of non-proliferation, disarmament and
12/16

Facilitated by this Organization, of which we are
all Members, peaceful dispute resolution, dialogue and
diplomacy — especially preventive diplomacy — are
the mechanisms that have enabled three quarters of
19-26010

22/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security

a century of relative world peace. The events taking
place in various parts of the world threaten to destroy
that achievement.
The rapid scientific advances that humankind has
achieved in the past century have turned out to be, as
aptly described, a double-edged sword. On the one
hand, technology facilitates the development, wellbeing and progress of many societies and people, but on
the other hand, when knowledge is put at the service of
the military and weapons industry, the same technology
that enabled that progress threatens to wipe out our way
of life.
We therefore regret that so much money continues
to be invested in the arms industry, when those
resources could be used to make progress in many other
areas where poverty and inequality reign. It is precisely
those factors — poverty and inequality — that are the
root causes of most of the conflicts that lead countries
to arm themselves more and more, with increasingly
sophisticated weapons.
My country believes that the members of the
Security Council, in particular the permanent members,
bear a great responsibility, and their behaviour in
the theatre of international relations must reflect that
status. We are now well into the twenty-first century,
and geopolitics cannot be seen as a zero-sum game
based on who has more missiles, better missiles and
missiles with greater range.
The recent collapse of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty is a regrettable fact that makes the
world a less safe place. Equatorial Guinea believes that
the United States and the Russian Federation must trust
and cooperate with one another, not for their safety alone
but for that of the entire planet. Both countries, even
if only as permanent members, must lead by example,
making greater use of soft power in their diplomacy,
especially in a context in which, unlike the Cold War,
more actors have emerged with short-, medium- and
intercontinental-range nuclear capabilities.
The international community and the allies of both
countries must work to create the necessary conditions
and establish confidence-building measures so that
Washington and Moscow can renegotiate this Treaty
and, taking advantage of the opportunity that this
challenge represents, delve deeper into disarmament
issues, both at the bilateral and multilateral levels.

S/PV. 8602

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Allow me, first, to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing.
In maintaining international peace and security,
the only choice must be to move forward on right path.
Although the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty was bilateral in nature, its positive effect
was felt by all States. The Treaty was an important part
of the arms-control and disarmament infrastructure. It
contributed, at least to some degree, to a reduced threat
from nuclear and conventional weapons. We therefore
regret the termination of the INF Treaty. It is a major
step backwards in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We share the concern of UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu that the collapse of the
INF Treaty will remove one of the few constraints on
the development of dangerous classes of missiles.
My delegation has no desire to use this very
important meeting to determine only who is right and
who is wrong. The stakes are too high. Therefore, allow
me to make the following points.
First, Indonesia regrets the inability of the
relevant parties to continue dialogue to uphold the
INF Treaty. We are concerned that the Treaty’s
termination could lead to a new arms race. Given that
some are already modernizing nuclear weapons and
developing new armament technologies, the Treaty’s
absence will exacerbate the great strain weighing on
the global disarmament and non-proliferation regime,
spurring instability.
Secondly, Indonesia calls upon all parties to
exercise maximum restraint, because maintaining
regional and global stability is our common priority. We
must uphold the rules-based international system, with
effective multilateralism and meaningful negotiation as
key principles. Let me draw the attention of the relevant
parties to some vital instruments aimed at maintaining
peace and stability, particularly the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, which emphasizes
confidence-building measures as the basis for relations
between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and its partners. Major States that were parties to the
INF Treaty are also parties to the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia. Therefore, the
obligations under the latter still apply.
Thirdly, Indonesia stresses the imperative of
preserving and advancing the general arms-control,

19-2601013/16

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

disarmament and non-proliferation regimes. As a party
to both the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, as one of the major proponents of the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and as the
coordinator of the working group on disarmament of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Indonesia
continues to support every effort to limit, reduce
and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery. We also reiterate our long-standing
commitment to verifiable and effective treaty-based
nuclear arms control and disarmament.
While hoping that the relevant parties will negotiate
the creation of a new and even more effective instrument
to replace the INF Treaty, we would welcome an early
discussion of the future of the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty and other arms-control agreements.
Reaffirming Indonesia’s commitment to the Treaty
on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, or
Bangkok Treaty, in ensuring the security and stability
of the region, Indonesia calls upon all the relevant
parties to sign the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty as
soon as possible.
The existence of even one nuclear weapon, by
design or accident, poses immense risks of catastrophe.
Indeed, there are no right or wrong hands to possess such
weapons. As Indonesia has emphasized repeatedly, total
elimination is the only guarantee against this threat.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation listened attentively to the
briefing by Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu. The
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty,
signed between the United States and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in 1987, is an important
treaty on arms control and disarmament. With
the objective of strengthening strategic stability,
the Treaty effectively mitigated the arms race in
intermediate-range missiles between the United States
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in Europe.
It helped to enhance strategic mutual trust between
the major Powers, eased international tensions and
advanced nuclear disarmament.
As we enter a new century, safeguarding the
effectiveness of the INF Treaty is of great practical
significance, not only to the United States and the
Russian Federation but also to international and regional
peace and security. The two countries should have
properly handled differences over Treaty compliance
14/16

22/08/2019

through dialogue and consultation in order to diligently
safeguard the Treaty’s effectiveness.
However, the unilateral withdrawal of the United
States from the Treaty led to its demise, which will
have a far-reaching negative impact on global strategic
balance and stability, regional security in Europe and
the Asia-Pacific region, as well as the international
arms control regime. The international community
should be clear-headed about the impact.
With regard to the INF Treaty, China has made
clear its position on many occasions. It is unacceptable
to use China as an excuse for withdrawing from the
Treaty. China rejects the baseless accusations made by
the representative of the United States.
The world is undergoing profound and
unprecedented changes, as has never been seen in this
century. Peace, development and win-win cooperation
remain the irreversible trends of the times, with forces
for peace predominating over elements of war. At the
same time, destabilizing factors and uncertainties
in international security are increasingly prominent.
Multilateralism is the most effective means to address
our common challenges.
All countries should resolutely safeguard the
international order, with international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations at its core; embrace the new concept of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security;
fully respect the legitimate and justified security
concerns of all States; work hard towards a peaceful
and stable international security environment; and
promote the building of a shared future for humankind.
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the important responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security,
and Council members should earnestly fulfil their
responsibilities in that regard. All countries should
refrain from taking any action that could undermine the
security interests of other countries.
Prior to its formal withdrawal from the INF
Treaty, the United States had already announced its
plan to accelerate its development and deployment of
intermediate-range missiles, and recently it conducted
a test launch of a new type of land-based cruise missile.
China strongly urges that country to adopt an attitude
of utmost responsibility, exercise restraint and earnestly
preserve the existing arms-control regime, in an effort
19-26010

22/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security

to safeguard the global strategic balance and stability,
and international and regional peace and security. That
is a shared message from the international community.
The United States withdrawal from the INF Treaty
is another negative act in the pursuit of unilateralism
and the shirking of international obligations by the
United States. Its true intention is to render the Treaty no
longer binding and seek a unilateral, absolute military
advantage. China has always pursued a national defence
policy that is defensive in nature. China’s land-based
intermediate-range missiles are all deployed within
Chinese territory. They are for defence purposes only
and pose no threat to any other country. China firmly
opposes the United States attempts to deploy landbased intermediate-range missiles in the Asia-Pacific
region and hopes that the United States will exercise
restraint and be rational in that regard.
The international arms-control and disarmament
treaty system, as the cornerstone of global strategic
balance and stability, is key to international peace and
security. Nuclear disarmament, as one of the three
pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, constitutes an important part of global
governance in the nuclear field. All countries should
follow the principles of maintaining global strategic
stability and undiminished security for all and advance
the disarmament process step by step.
Countries possessing the largest nuclear arsenals
should earnestly fulfil their special and primary
responsibility for nuclear disarmament. We support the
political and diplomatic efforts undertaken by Russia in
that regard. We support and encourage Russia and the
United States to maintain dialogue on strategic security
and bilateral nuclear-disarmament issues; commit to
the extension of the new Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty; and continue to make substantive reductions
in their nuclear arsenals in a verifiable, irreversible
and legally binding manner, with a view to creating
the necessary conditions for advancing multilateral
nuclear-disarmament processes.
I would like to stress that any arms-control
negotiations should take into full consideration overall
national military strengths and respect the principle of
undiminished security for all, which is a key principle
of international arms control. China has repeatedly
made clear our position on arms-control negotiations.
At the current stage, China has no interest and will not

S/PV. 8602

participate in the so-called China-United States-Russia
trilateral arms-control negotiations.
China unwaveringly pursues a national defence
policy that is defensive in nature. China’s nuclear
strategy for self-defence is completely transparent, and
its nuclear policy is highly responsible. China’s nuclear
arsenal is extremely limited in scale and in no way
poses a threat to international peace and security. For
decades, China has actively participated in arms-control
consultations and negotiations, under multilateral
mechanisms and frameworks, including that of the
United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament.
China opposes an arms race and works to safeguard
global strategic balance and stability. Moving forward,
China will continue to firmly uphold multilateralism
and actively participate in multilateral arms-control
processes to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
Allow me to first thank the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her briefing.
Poland is committed to all efforts aimed at the
preservation of effective arms-control and disarmament
arrangements, which are fundamental to international
security. However, to be effective, the commitments
must be verifiable and observed by all sides in
good faith.
The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
Treaty has been crucial in upholding European and
global security for more than 30 years. Under the INF
Treaty, almost 3,000 missiles have been removed and
verifiably destroyed. We regret the failure of the longlasting United States efforts to preserve the INF. The
erosion of that significant element of the European
security architecture constitutes yet another challenge
for international security.
The Russian Federation bears sole responsibility
for the demise of the Treaty. NATO allies have
raised concerns over Russia’s compliance with the
Treaty for several years, including within the NATORussia Council.
In December 2018, NATO allies affirmed that
Russia had developed and deployed the SSC-8 missile
system, also known as the 9M729, which constitutes

19-2601015/16

S/PV.8602

Threats to international peace and security

a violation of the Treaty. We regret that Russia has
shown no willingness and taken no steps to ensure
the implementation of the INF Treaty in an effective,
verifiable and transparent manner.
In a post-INF-Treaty world, we have to take steps
to guarantee our security. However, NATO does
not intend to install new land-based nuclear missiles
in Europe, while Russia decided to field its SSC-8
missiles across from European regions. Those rockets
are hard to detect and can carry conventional or nuclear
warheads and therefore significantly enhance the risk
of nuclear conflict.
Poland, like other allies, supported the United
States’ decision to withdraw from the INF Treaty.
It was a logical and understandable reaction to
Russia’s actions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We had not intended to go into technical
details, but because our American colleagues and their
partners brought up specific issues, I am compelled to
take the floor once again. I will be brief.
Since the 9M729 missile was mentioned, I would
like to give an explanation. Over many years of
discussions, the United States has steadfastly refused to
communicate with us not only about the tests that have
been carried out, which, as we understand, gave rise to
questions in Washington, but also about any identifying
information concerning that device.
Last year, after it finally became clear what
Washington was so concerned about, we offered to the
United States side the opportunity to take a look, behind
closed doors, at the 9M729 missile they were interested
in, so that it could obtain exhaustive information about
it and thus be assured that that weapon did not violate
the Treaty. That response was once again met with
a refusal.
We then made another attempt. As an unprecedented
transparency measure that goes far beyond the
requirements of the Treaty, we publicly displayed the
missile in the presence of foreign delegations, but
United States representatives did not participate in

16/16

22/08/2019

the event and recommended that their NATO partners
follow suit, which, of course, they did. We therefore
fail to understand my American colleague’s arguments.
We offered to provide the Americans with all the
information they needed to save the Treaty. And now
that they have already caused the Treaty to collapse,
the American side is making attempts to demand
that information.
With regard to the new Russian weapons systems
that were mentioned earlier, my American colleague
must know that they all share a common feature, namely,
the ability to overcome missile-defence systems. It
is precisely because of the withdrawal of the United
States of America from the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile
Systems, to which I referred earlier in my statement,
and the deployment of such systems near our borders
that we were forced to develop this type of device.
That is another problem that Washington has
artificially created, which, as I already said, we have
been trying unsuccessfully to prevent for a long time.
I should like to stress, so that no one has any illusions,
that the NATO countries are involved in this situation.
In conclusion, I would like to say that, unfortunately,
today’s meeting has proved to be so predictable that it
verges on the boring. As we expected, despite the facts
and common sense, the United States and its client
countries parroting along with it were shifting the
blame from the guilty to the innocent, blaming Russia
for all mortal sins. There is nothing new or surprising
about that. In the parallel reality created by our Western
partners, where no evidence is required and allegations
in the spirit of “highly likely” are accepted as proof,
such behaviour is considered normal. The fact is that
we live in the real world, not a virtual one. And as
long as there are countries and experts who continue
to question all these seamless but empty Western tales,
our world still has a chance.
I would like to believe that our initiative with China
will increase the number of those who are not afraid to
call things by their real names or to demand actions and
practical steps from those who violate agreements of
importance to the whole world and flout the norms of
international law to serve their own interests.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

19-26010
