1’ IV 1%N 1’ Y - 1%1 C 11 ‘I’ Cl Y 15A R
rd

MEETING:9MARCH 1973
NEW YORk

CONTENTS

.

Report ol’ the Security Council Special Mission established wider resolution
- ~~- 326 (1973)(S/lO896 uud Corr.1 and Add.11 . . . . . . .-a . . :.-. .-a-. .-e-m. . .~-

(I.6 11.)

s/w.

I

1693

NOTE
Symbols of Unked Nstlons documentataracampoaodof capital lsttors combined with
figures.Montlon of sucha symbol indIcntoaa referanwto a Unltcld Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .)aro normally published In quartorly
Supplements of the Offichd Recordsuf the &wiry Counc~Tho dnta of tha docunwnt
Indicates the supplemont in which it appearsor in which InformatIon about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security CouAl, nurnbored in accardancowith a system
adopted in 1964, are published In yearly vohnms of Resolutlotuwtd Deca’slms
of the
Security Council. The new system, which ho ken appllad ratroactlvely to resolutkms
adopted before~lJamrary 1965, becamefully oparatlvo02 that data.

hWi~/~t: Mr, Aqullh~o 0. BDYD (P~anw).

will be hivlted to take
they wish to speak,

a

place at the Council table when

PLesetit:The roprcsontatlvos of the followhig Stnfw
Austdle, Austria, Chh~n, Pranca, Wtica, India, lndoneslh,
Kenyn, Panamn, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socinllst
Republics, United Khlgdom of Great Drltaln and Northern
Ireland, Unitcd States of Amorlca and Yugosluvla.

At tlie brvitatiott of tire Presidettt, h!r. A. Raitul(A&w&),
Mr, R. Alamhr (Cuba), Mr. A. Qsttuttt(Egypt), Mr. S.
Satturels (Guymn), Mr. MeFail (Scttegal),Mr. J, Nur Elttrl
(SotttaCa), Mr. S, Cltale(UttitedRepublicof Tattmtth)and

Psovidornd a&onda (S/Agenda/1693)

hlr. Ipoto Eyebu Botrkatd’asi (Zaire) took tlte places
reservetl for tbetti Itr the Couttcilchatttber.
3. Mr. ABDULLA

I. Adoption of the agenda.

(Sudan): Mr. Prcsldent, may I open this
on the report of the SEcurity Council
Special Mission established under resolution 326 (1973), by
extendhig to you the slncercst cangmtulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of this
CouncU for the month of March? In so dolug, I wish to
recall your constant co.operoUon rind support for issues of
vital slgnlfirance to the-future of Africa-whether
III the
southern or northeastern part of it-whore international
peace and security urc behig critically thrcataned. It is
therefore a matter of great comfort to my delegotlon that
you prosidc at this vcg moment when the situation h\
soud~ern Africa is being assessed by the Council. My
delegation extends to you the best of wlshcs und its
co~oprution for a successful term in the eventful month of
March.
Short

2. Complahrt by Zumbia:
Report of the Security Council Speclnl Mission
estabilshod under rosoluti~n 326 (1?73$(8/10896 and
Corr,l rind Add,l),
l3c meet&g was mlled to order ut 4#,20pm
Adoption of the agenda
i%e agetda wasadoptccl.
Complahlt by Zambia

stst0r~lolIt

Report of the Security Council Special Mission estnblished
under resolution 326(1973)
Add.11)

(S/10896 and Corr.1 and

1. The PWSIDENT (ittlerprctatiort front Spatrish):In
accordance with previous decisions of the Council /1687rfr
tncctblg/, and with its consent, I propose now to irivitc tha
rcproscntativc of Zambia to tnkc a place at IIIC Council
table,

4. May 1 also ctrngratulatc you; prodccessor in the Chair,
my dear colleague and brother, Ambassador OderoeJowi of
Kenyn, for the efficient and diligent manner la which he
guided the Council during February, and for his successful
efforts in dispatchhig the Special Mission to Africa and
attcndlng to Its hushass while it was away?

S, As Q mumbcr of the Spechd Mission, It is my pinusnnt
duty to join Ambnsssdor Anwur San1 of Indonesia, ChairAt tlte ittvitatlott of tile &csldettt, Mr. I? J. E Lusaka man of the Mission, ill affirming that tho composition of
(Zatt3h) tookaplaceat the Ckxutcil table.
the Misslon, namely, the four Security Council members,
the economfc experts and the members of the Secrctarlat,
2. The PRESIDEN’I’ (ittterpretatlott frottt S@at~ish): Alw
rendered our mission enJoyable as well as productive. For
ln uccortluncc with previous dcclsionn /1687t/t, 168Ytkuttd my purt, I submit that it was miiinly r&e to the udmlreblc
169Wr ttreelitgs/, and with the consent of the Councii, I
personal character and high h~tclloctual qualities of Ambati
intend now to invite the reprcsenttrtivcs of Ghana.
sador Anwar !&ml that the Mission was successlul in its
Morocco, the United Kcpubllc of Tunzaniu, Zrrire, Chile,
investigations al:d In its ummhnuus asscssmont of the
Algaria, Scncgsl, Egypt, Somallrr, Cubti, Cameroon and
situation and the needs of Zambiu.
Guyann to ttlkc tho pluccs rcscrved for them ill the Council
ciiambcr iii order to liilrticipate, without the right to vote,
6. The Chulrmun of the Special Mission submitted to the
in thu discussion of the Item on our agendu under the terms
Council a statement /1692& rtzee@/ intruducir~g the
of Article 31 of the Churter, it bchlg undcrstuud that they
report ii1 general tories on bchtllf of all the members of the
Mission. My delegation fully endorses that stutement and
the assessments of the report. These usscssnients hevlng
been reached by the general CO~SC~SUSof the four

1

1

mlcally, 1 beg to pojnt out, as an example, the reptied
prcmpt manifestation of such solidarity and support in the
form of the St mlliion cheque tra.Wnitted to Zambia by
President Mobutusof Zaire. 111ls~lndeed an example to be
followed, The hlission was llsa~ made aware of generous
~~bllatcral aid alresdy commltted by friendly countries In
Inore&g
the road, rallway and harbour capacity In the
United Republic of Tanzania, which capacity and facllltlec
will assist Zambia in the alternative raroutlng of itc ex(3arts
and Imports. My delegation takes thh opportunity to
express its full appreciatlpn to th* count+

mombm, my delegation requests the indulgence of the
Cauacil in highllghtlog certah1 aspects of tho report.
~,

7. -I should like to start by Fma.khig somc general obserregard@ ‘the tour, to follow them with some
‘CUIIIIIICI~~S.~II
the essassnlcnts (hamselves, aud to end with
the vlows ~of my -delegation 011 the imp~l~atlons of the
vntlons~

‘:, re

:- Eltuatloll.

.~

:

-‘-

8. While in Zumbin, as the report speciflos, we made an
axtousive tour of the frontlcr of Zambia, and from UIC
plcnc WC saw land clearances for military acroplanos,
rullltnry
camps,
miiitpry roads and gun positions along the
frouticrs of Angola, Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and
Mozombiquu. On tho Zamblau side WC visited sites of
previous nllno explosions and were nearly victbns of ~:ewly
planted bombs. During those tours we were left III no doubt
that the colonial and racist rdghnes have committed and
plan to conuni! acts of aggrossslonand provocation against
Zambia which could easily lead to i conflagration.

13. On the political side, my dologatlon oxpreDsas its
dismay and grave concern at the situatlon that dangerously
contbmos to develop In Zimbabwe, In our view, tho robeI
rbglme, through the continuously mounting military
prcsencc of South Africans, ia becoming not only more
oppressive In the South African QWHW&I manner, but also
hlcreashlgly danBerour to Zambis’e security and natlonal
hitcgrity.
14. it Is a matter of great regret and conWrn that the
adrulnlstcrlng Power, though reaffirming its responaibllity,
constantly declines to discharge It by failln~ to take
appropriate and effective measures for the rif-dotorn&at&n and Independence of Zimbabwe. Everywhere it
went hi Africa the Mission WB ramlnded that, to all istenta
nnd purposes, the United Kingdom is seeking recognition
for the tan Smith rdglma rather tllan majority rule; that the
United Kingdom polloy is guided by sentiments of klnshlp
with the white mblority and by economic hitererto in
Zhnbabwe Itself, to the detrimbnt of the African majority
in Zhnbabwe. My delegtlon
wN1 therefore h&t that the
United Kingdom Government be constantly rcmlnded and
prompted to fulfil its moral and politlcal responribility
towords the whole people of Zimbabwe. By the Mlbsion’a
findhip il Is also that Government’s duty to affect the total
withdrawal of South African armed forces from tho colony.

9, Dy contrast, Zambia has so far mdntaincd a measure of
restraint dospite those provocations; yet my delegation
wanders how long the Zamblan authorities cnn maintain
sucil
restruint under mounting provocations and aggressJon
against Zantbian citizens whose lives and properties are
cousl;l;ltly beiug threa!cned from across the border,
10, it is also important to observe that the de&Ion of
Zambia to close the border with Southern Rhodeslo Is
irrevocable, and that it is i.~ intention to forss&.e its
cxcmptlon under mandatory sanctions against the Ulegol
rebel rdghne of Ian Smith by implementing fully the
de&ions of the Security Council in this rcspcct. The
Council may therefore wish to take full note of this
Zambiau decision.
t1, As u result of such conourreuce with mandatory
sauctlons, the economic assessment of the report under
rcvicw cs~h~~atcsthe cost of physical requlrcments at $124
million, plus $6.5 milliou monthly for air freight to balance
the normal trnffic for essentlai materials and supplles. I
refer to paragraphs I75 and 176, It is slgnlflcant to note
also that tho csthnoted extra costs for using alternative
routes amount to some $50 million aniiualiy.
Furthermore,
hi purugruph 178, the report shows that these hlghe: costs
will incronsc the pslcc level in Zambia, the cost of structure
in the mh~irr~. stietor and the government deflclt and,
notably, that the forclgn exchange costs “will ncarly
double”. The final par&)raph of the economic assessment
hIghlIghts the urgency of ;Isslstance iieccssary for the
economy of Zamhja to continue to develop L a r~ormsl
way, By those quotations from the economic ussetimeut of
the uecds of Zaniblu outlined in the report. 1i1J delcaotlon
hopcosto impress on the Council and oh ell nle.&beers;f the
lutornatlonal community that Zambiu’s sacrifice in huplementlng the Security CouncU mandatory sanctions nguiusr
the rebel r&jnie of Southern Rhodesia deserves every
hnmcdlnte uosistance and sppreciatlon.

15, On the question of the assessment of the situation in
the area, the MissIon has ascertined that “a consldernblo
measure of tension continues to oxh% In the area covered by
Security Council resolution
326 (1973)”
/&‘/l&!&6,
pm. 164/. That is evidently a mild way of doscribing UIO
situation. Judging by what we snw across the bordora of
Zambia, by way of the massive milllary praranco of South
Afrlcuns in Southern Rhodesia, in Cape Caprlvl and In ths
south of Angola, by the mllltory camps, military roads, gun
posts and the gallant f&h: of the liberation movements
hiside those territories, my delegation is more convinced
than ever that Ihose racist nlinorlty and coOonlnl r6gimec
constitute a real danger to international peace and security
In southern Africa. It would pay for the Security Council to
toke preventive measures now rather thsn b faced with a
mliitary conflagration iater OIL Reports coming from south
of the Zambezl river about crtatine, a Viot-Nem in that part
of Africa, and the detormlnetion of South Africa to send
military forces at will towards the Zambezi, cannot bo
dIsmissed ns empty words. The minorilko, haunted by a
fear which thoy themrelvee have created, -are highly
susceptible to mud actn, utider the nervousness and tenslou
in which they are living at the presant time.

12. In this counexion, my delegation uotes with great
satlsfactlon the ussurunces given by neighbouring Africsn
couutrlcs or States of full solldnsity and support, even at
nutlonal sacrifices, to Zambia, both poiitlcally and err_r!!o-

16. So fur, President Kauuda has demonrtruted remarkable
;;x! ~ieh~&dp.
Faithful to his peaceful

~X-~~&hi

2

mu
_
-~~

_ ~7;~

..

humanitarian +litical
philosophjl, he Ierr aucccssfully
avoi&d ratpllpuonr agaillsl the aggressive and provocative
Kclr of
-- mrnllLly,

the l@ill9cP
who
but

surrouJ9dtng
the
SFcurity

his country.
couJ9cu,

IIlQ qUQk#il
e11trusted
witir

.:tntarnnUomd malten of-peace, can insum -Zambia,~and
indeed Africa, against those dangerous tdgimes~and their
‘designs which threaten international peacc Bnd,se!uyity in
tint port ?f Africa? - ---=--y--

the United Rcpubllc of Tanzania and Kenya, Once again,
we should like to pay a deserved tribute to all the members
-of that Impcu$nt Mlssion for t@ courage and the flnnnoss
they~di@aycd in cariying-out the difficult task cntrustcd.
&
-to them. The success of the MissJon, which might well hnvo a-: i, ~~~
ended la tragedy in vies of the explosions which taok place
...ody II few mtnutes before its arrival on the scene, would
not have been possible without the spirit of courage and
resolute timmass which prcvallcd.

.17, On the basis of the short statement I have just made,
.nry delegation fully endorses the contenta of the report of
lhe Sneclai
MUM
and ulrdlv loins the fnonsors of the two
d&resolutions
whlch”wiU~~ presentid, in appealing to
tho membera of the Council to voto ~Umously
in their
favour.

22. The members of the Council will recall that when this
problem was presented /1687rir n~eet@/, Be’ rcprcscetativo of the Republic of Zambin, Ambassador Paul Lusaka,
drew our attention to the crlnilnal acts of the racisl unrl
illegal Government of Ian Smith. ?;lu~ Special MissIon’s
report corroborates all the facts and cons!dentiuns that had
been reported to the Council. The acts of uggrcsslun
perpetrated against the people of Zambia by Riiodcsinn
forces. strenathencd by those of South Africa. the uniustified -lncur$ons and ihe laying of land mlnc~ along ihc
Zambian frontbr by those forces have been proved. In this
regard, the letter from Minis:er Muller of South Africa,
deny@ the presence of South African forces in Rhodesia
while, at the same time, recognizing the strengthening of
the Rhodes&n forces by contingents of the South African
potice, seems to be without foundation.

18. ?&a Jeanne Martin CISl? (Guinea) (itttetprefuflotr
from f+e%ch): Mr. President, may I congratulate you on
your recession to the presidency of the Council for the
mcath of March, assure you of my delegation’s cooperation and express the wish that successmay crown the
work that awaits YOUthts month. I have had the Privilege of
appreciating, thr&th our contacts in the C&ncil-and
elsewhere in the United Nptions, your outstanding diplomatic quaIlha, I have thus always enjoyed the relations of
solidarity and frien&blp that unite our two countries and
our two delegations. A happy accident se& you in the
presidency of the Council as it faces one of the urgent
probiemr of Afrkp, when only a week now separates us
froiia a hifitoric series of meetings of this CouncU in a
country of the third world, your own country, Pananla,
whose dedic&ur to the principles of peace, freedom and
Jurtica is well known beyond your national frontiers. We
are thus convinced that qnder your wise presidency the
work of the CouncU wUi be aa successful as the peoples of
the third world hope. We have not forgotten the very
important contribution you made to the success of our
work in Addia Ababa in January and February and again in
New York in November of 1972.

23. ‘Ilie Mission’s report notes in tangible fashion the
tension prevatUng in the frontier zones along the ZambianRhodesian border aroa. My delegation regrets the detcrioration of the already explosive situation along the Zambezi,
marked by Rhodestan military preparations. Thus Zambiu
has not only to face the economic difficulties resulting
from the closing of its frontier to the transit of its imports
but must also eonfront.aggression which is being prcpnrcd
against it.
24. Zambia’s geopolitical situation as a landlocked
country, end particularly the assistance it is giving to UIC
liberation movements, make of it, like of Guinea, the
United Republic of Tanzania and other African countries, u
strulding
target
for iiuperiabnl.

19. I should like to associate myself with tile preceding
speakers in payhlg tribute to the wisdom of Mr. OderoJowi
Of Kenya, Who $reslded over the Council last month. VIC
fruitful consultations that he carried out with such skill
were very happily reflected in the Special Mlssion, whose
report is the subject of today’s meeling. To Mr, Anwat !&ni
and We companions I would extend my delegation’s
gratitude f y the miNion they have successfully discharged.

25. Within this framework my delegation would like, as it
aheadv did in 1970. once aeain to drew the attention of the
men&s of the douncil io the provocations of Porlugal
against the Republic of Guinea, my own country. III :l
communication received from my Govcnuncnt our uttcn~
tion has been drawn to Portugal’s preparation of new
exulloits by mercenaries. We have been informed that the
v&se1 Albhus, carefully prepared by Portugal, has aIrcad)
loft the port of Fucrteventura with subversive elements on
board, with 3 view to carrying out furlher aggressdon ugalnst
the Republic of Guinea, Followbig the dastardly ussassination of the great PAICC /Part&h Afti~~ da /udcpcrrJench (SI Cuitrd e Chbo Verde/ fighter, Amflcar Cabral,
Portugal is continublg its cynical attempts to divide the
lrl9ks of the liberation movement of Guinea (INxau) and
Cape Verde.

20. Before turning to the agenda item before us, I should
like to ask the deiegatbn of the United Slates to convey
our greetings to Ambassador &ail, who is replaclng
Mr. George Bush as representative of !he United States in
the Co~ncll. I should like to BUU~C htm of my dclegutlon’r
intention of cmtlnuing, as In the past, to strengthen the
good relatbnr of co-operation wnd friendship that we
rnaintllned with htn predecessor.
21. My delegation took note with satlshctiou of the
efforts of the Security Counctl to give prompt cffcct to
resolution 326(1973) in settln# up II special mission to
assess the situation resulting from tha unhappy events In
Zambia. We much appreciute the preiseworthy efforts of
tie Spcci~i MissS31wwhich proceeded to London, Zamblrc,

26. I can assure the Council that no pressure and no f&x
of any kind will prevail over the firni and rcsolutc r;cill of
the peoples of Zambia, the United Kepubllc of Tunzunla
and other African Stutes to us&t their brothers struggling
3

Kinadomwill as&t th,c African countrlcsandthe Unlto

against tho forces of colonial dontinatlon in ,Bmbabwe,
Mozambique, Angola, Guinea (&sau) and ,J!ape.Verde,
Namibiaand +uth Africa.

I ? ~27, Pari of tlds effort is the declslonof the Govcrnmcnt of 32. -‘The,importantdocumentprovidedby. the Speclr
~~_ the Republic of Zambia, which despite it9 impllcntlons for
MMOII,
the additionalInformationgiven at our lar
meetingby Uie representative
of hmbla, Ambassado
.:that country has remained true to the declslons of the
--%ecurity Coundl concerning economic sanct!ons. In thal
Lusaka,will, I am sure,enableour Council to devise
effort the Afrlcen count&s are already prepared to afford
prompt solullonto the urgentand critlcal situatloh0
measures
to betakenasso01
Zambia all tile necessary assistance it may need. The Zambiapendingthenecoss:uy
!n Ulemonthsahead.
My delegation
reserves
th
conclusions of the Special MIssIon show that, if adequate aapossible
the Councilnralnlatrr andto spuakon th
asslstaucoIs forthcoming from nolghbourlngAfrican States, right to address
whichIt lntcndsto submittogeulerwit1
some 115,000 tons of imports and exports could be draft resolutions
the delegations
of Kenya,SudanaudYugoslavia.
transllippcd to Zambia through the Unlted Republic of
Tanzaula,Zalrc and Malaw!. To this end we welcome the
fortunate lnltiatlvc of the Government of the United 33. Mr. hlALJK (Unlotl of Soviet SocialistRepublics
Kepubllc of Tanzania,which is d&ermined to help Zambia (tratrsbtlotrfront Hussb,,):Mr. Presldcnt,
allowmefirst o
to take up this challengeby making available to It other
all to congratulate
you ou behalfof the Sovietdelegatlo1
port facllltles ln Dar es Salaam.
to the
, andon my own personalbehalfon your accesslon
high and responsible
post of Presidentof the Seiurlt)
28. As was eloquently stressed by the Prime Minister of
Council.TheUSSRdelegatlon
In theCouncU work9ln close
the United Reaubllc of Tanzania. Mr. R. M. Kawawa
contactwith tl1edelegation
of Psnama.
Wehavehad the
/S/10896, +rpc i43/, the SecuritydouncilandtheUnited opportunlty on a numberof occasions
to convblceour
Nationssystetnas a whole have the 1noraland legal selvesof the importantcontrlbutlonmadeby the Pana
obligation,underAiticle 50 of the Charter,to give Zambia mcnlandelegation,
headedby yourself,to the work of the
materialandotherassistance
in overcontigits presentand Councilandof the UnitedNationsasa whole.Allow metc
future diffkulties. By carrying out the decisionsand offer you my slrtcerewitios for your success
in this far
resolutionsof the Security Council and the General from easypostin carryingout theresponslbllitles
conferred
Assemblyon SouthernRhodesia,
Zambiahasundertaken uponyou, the rangeof whichis constantlyinci-easing
In
considerable
sacrifices.It is thereforeessentialthat no connexionwlth the Impending
historicalevent-themeet,
effort bespared
111co1nLJto itsassistance,
ingsof the Councilto bo held in the capitaiof your
homeland-and
to express
my convlctlonthat theguidanc
29. To promoteandencourage
that effort, my delegation of the Council’swork duringthe monthof Marchis in
believesthat the Security Councilmust urgently take experiencedand reliablehands.The Soviet delegatio
adequatemeasures
and recommend
a31peace-loving
and wouldlike to asaurcyou of Itsreadlncss
to co.opcratowit11
iustlce-lovlna
countriesto makeavaIlableto Zambiaall you In seeking
solutionsto the problems
now beforethe
possiblem;al and materialsupport,for the country’s colulcil.
economyisnowgravciyaf?ected.
34. The Soviet delcgatlonwouldalsolike to expressIts
30. My delegationreyets that the UnitedKlngdom,the gratitudeand thanksto UIO Permanent
Representative
of
arilnhdrtering
Poweruf the rebelcolonyof Ian Smith,dld Kenyato the UnitedNations,our dlstb1gulshed
colleague
nothing to enablethe SpecialMissIonto proceedto Ambassador
OderoJowi, for hls extremely usefulaud
ScrlthernRhodesk.We weresomewhat
surprised
at this effectiveworklastmonthasPresident
of theCouncil.
reaction,for weseefromthe talk.9heldby theMlsslonwith
the United Kllgdom,Mlnlsterof State for Foreignand 35. Mr. President,
beforecomingto the substance
of the
Commonwealth
Affairs,LadyTweedsmuir,
that:
item now underdlscussloa
by the SecurityCOUIICLI, the
Sovietdelegationwould llko to expressIts viewson the
“Although!: [that is,the UnitedKingdom]hadresponsi- mattersyou toucheduponIn your introductorystatemen
bllity for SouthernRhodesia,
it hadhadnoresponslblllty at thelastmeetingof the Council,
intcrsa!iy for manyyearsand couldnot force a settle.
mont.It wasfor the ‘Rhodes&mthemselves
to try and 36, The SovietUnionwelcomed
the resultsof the Paris
gst togetherin their own country and to dlsussa Conference
whichconfirmed,at theinternational
level,the
solutlonto theproblem.“/Ib&&para 41.1
cessationof the war and the restoratlo11
of peaceIn
Viet-Nam,andreaffirmedthe basknationalrightsof U1e
31. Thai last part ‘is fully in’ keepingwith my own Vlet.Namese
people-Independence,
sovereignty,and tlie
d&gat.lon’sanalysis
a11d
that of all Africa11
States,Whatwe u11ltyand11ational
l11tegrity
of Vlct-Num.
wantis for the Rhodesians,
undermajorityrule, to accede
to the exercise
of thismuchva1111tcd
sovereignty.
Unfortu. 37. The agreemcritreachedin Pariswnstlie resultof a
nately--atidthis iswherewqpart companywith theUnited hard, long and cuuragcous
struggleby the Viet.Names
Kingdom-thatcountryrenii.instheadministering
Power.It
peopleagainstaggresslou;
it wasu victory for justice
is Iberefvreits duty to Induceits rebelcolonyto respect realismand reason.The agreement
wasmadepossibl
the exerciseof that sovereignty
andnot to allowa11undful primarily throughthe hcrolc efforts of the Viet-Names
of wblte raciststo govotn. Nevertheless,
my delegation people themselves
who could nut but commandthe
hope?tl1atthe spiritof rcsponslbllify
U1utguldastheUnited ympathy of all tu whomthe idealsof freedomand
4

Startesand Belgiumin Khartoum,“theSovietdelegation
deems
It necessary
to makethe followhlgstatement..~-, :
,.
_;43. The SovietUnionis stronglyopposed,-on
groundsof _
principle,to internationaltcrrorlsmwllich disruptsthe
dlplomaUcactivitiesof Statesand thei?representatives,~,
transport communication
betweenthem and the normal
38. The sigrtingof the Paris agreementis only the first step courseof Intarnationalcontactsandmeetings;
It Isstrongly
on the path towards P completesettlement of the Viet-Nam opposed
to actsof violencethat serveuo polltlcalendand
prtiblem. The task now is to secure the completeimplemen- involvethe deathof buiocentpeople.The majorrcsponsitaUon of the provblons of the ;Oar& agreement. May I
bllity, however,for all acts of terrorismcommittedin
axpre8s my cc.wicUon that the solutloiu reached at the cannedon
with
the situattonin the Middle Eant lies
Par& Conferencewill scne the CBU~O
of establishinga stable primarilywith the Israeliaggressors
whoarecontinuingto
peace in VlebNant, in IndoXhina li6a whole and through- pursuetheir criminalpolicy of aggression
andareimpeding
out Ule workI.
a peacefulseulement. Westronglycondemnthe useof
terrorist methodsin internationalpolitics regardless
of
39. The whole world recently witnessed the latest criminal whetherthey are usedagainstSovietcitizensor against
acts committed by the lsraell aggressors wdiut tha Arab citizensof othercountries.The positionof principleof the
peoples
andagainst
peacein theMiddleEast.Thebarbarous SovietUnionwasstatedby theMinisterfor ForeignAffairs
attack by the Israeliair force on a Llbvancivil aircraft. of the USSR,Mr. A. A. Gromyko,at the twenty-seventh
whkh resultedin the tragic deathof over 100peacefui session
of the GeneralAssembly,In his statementon 26
clvUiana,coheidedwith anotherplraticulraid by Israeli September
lasthesaid:
rrnted forcesagablgfthe peace-loving
State of Lebanon,
which once agabi took innocentcivilian lives. These
“We. . , supporttheJuststruggleof the Arabpeopleof
piratkal acts by Israel have arousedjust anger aud
Palestinefor the restorationof their inalienable
rights,
condemnationno! only in the Middle East but also
whichhavebeenrecognized
by the UnitedNations.At
throughoutUle world. The inhumanaction of Israelin
Us same
time, we cannot,of course,
condonetheactsof
JhooUnq
downanunarmed
civil aircraftcannotberegarded terrorirm committedby certain elementsamongthe
asa chanceincident.Thiscrimeiu just one of the tragic
members
of the Palestinian
movement... . Thclrcrimina!
links in the chainof outragescommittedby the Israeli
acts alsostrike a blow at the nationalinterestsand
troopsin UrohllddleEastfor the purpose
of implemenUng appiratlons
of the Palestinians
andarcusedby the Israeli
a policy of force in that regionandaggravating
an already
criminalsto coverup their own piraticelpolicy against
tenserltuatlon Lnorder to underminethe effort8 being
the Arabpeoples.“~
madeby theArabsidetowardsapeacefulsettlement.
~.44. Proceeding
from that purition taken by tho Soviet
40. Responrlbilltyfor the destructionof !he Libyan Union,we express
our regretin connexionwith the murder
aircraft and the death of completelyinnocentpeople, of the diplomaticrepresentatives
of the UnitedStatesand
inch&g womenandchildren,mustti placedsquarely
on
the cbrg6 d’affiircs of Belgium
in Khartoum.
the Governmentof Israelwhichhasmademassterror and
the escalation
of aggression
themainobjectiveof itsofficial 45. The SecurityCouncil,asyou know,havingconsidered
policy. It is now perfectlyclearto everyouethat Israelis anappealby Zambiain Januarythisyearconccr:ih&actsof
coinmiltIng thesecriminalactsfor the purpose
of further provocationand aggresslon
committedby the iiiegalracist
Increasing
tensionin the MiddleEast,Justaaa timewhen r@mein Sallsbury
against
Zambia,expressed
graveconcern
trendsfavourableto peaceareapparentin the international at Ue situaUonthat had developedand condemned
all
situ;lUonandwhenthe principleof the non-use
of forcein theseactsof harrassment,
includingeconomicblockade,
internnUond relations
is gainingincreasing
recognitionand blackmailandmilitary threatsagainstZambia,committed
hasalreadybeenrecognlzcd
andconfirmedin the historic by the illegalrt!gimein Salisbury
in collusion
with theracist
decisiontaken by the GeneralAssemblyat its twenty- colon&listrbgbnes
of SouthAfrica andPortugal,
seventh
session
[resolutiott 2936 (XXVII)].
46. A numberof representatives
pointed out in their
41. The lsraellaggressors
arc wrong In thinting that statements
in the Councilthat theracistrCghnc
in Salisbury
nowadays
it is possible
to float .B rulesof international wasusingeconomicblackmailandhadconunittcdnun~crlawrnd U~D
&cir~Iu~u
of th2I’,.tted Nationswith impunity. ous actsof subversion
and sabotage
in violation of the
Tha Inmate of penceHIIG justice in the Middle East sovereigntyand territorial integrity of Zambiain an
u:gnUy requirethat allGovernments
and,aboveall, all ?he attemptto forcethe Government
andpcoploof Zambiato
Govarnmenls
of the perinauentmembers
of the Securlly refrain from sympathizing
with and supportingthe IcgitiCouncil,shouldmukeevery effort IO restrainthe israeli matestruggleof the peopleof Zimbabwb,to concealthe
aggiessora
and extremists,to achievelhe withdrawalof growingnationalliberationmovementof the peopleof
Ismelltroopsfromall the Arabterritoriesseizedby themin Zimbabwe,and to placethe responsibil!tyfor the crisis
June 1967, and to ensurerespectfor the rights and brought about by its racist and colonialistpolicy on
legitimateinterests
of theArubpcoplcof Palestine.
Zambis,

independenceare dear. The combination of the tenacity of
-- _:.:-the Vi&Namefe p&p16 and the hiternational ossiiwKe,
. .L_.. =Inoral? political and material, given to Viet-Nam by coun::mrm-tries In the socialist communfty and other peace-loving
--=A. forces in the world was an .lmportant~faclor in bringing

42. lo connoxlonwith the monrtrousterror&t acl coinmlttedagaijnst
the diplomaticrepresentatives
of lhc United

.

52. -It is quite obviousI oven ia the light of UICfacts which
have b&m cited in the report of the Special h&ion, that
myoue who did not support ~such a rosolutlon in the
Assembly has’wlilingly
or unwillingly, amburhed on a
wup38 -of ~supporting and covering up the policy of
3ggredon and the us0 of force by the fascist and racist
rCglmea in Southern Rhodesia, South Afrioe,a@~orQal
apht Zambia and other States la Africa,

-47. The members of the Council can now see that the
asscssmcnt made in January of the oltuation existing alonp
the border between Zambia and Rhodesia 1~~9been fully
Wnflrmed in the offlclal report of the Security CoWcil
+eclel hUs.sIonwhich haspinvestigated the situ&n on the
spot and submlttcd to the Council a report on the ra&tsl of
its visit to Zambia. ‘Ilre MMon, coosisting of the reptesen-~‘taUvesof Indonesia, Austria, Peru and the Sudan, under the
experienced Q~airmauship of Ambassador AIWU &nl, did
its job well,
,.

53. The aggresplon being committed by UIO Southern
Rhode&n racists against Zamble, rind tho partlcipatlon In it
by South Africa and Portugal, simply confirms once sgnin
that here Is an urpnt ~mxl for the United Nations to adopt
affective measures to restrain UIO aggressors and lhnit UIC
porolbllitles open to thou aggressors.

48. Tho report of the hiMon, as wall as other material
beforo the members of the Council, confirms that the
sitwtion in southern Africa haa deteriorated otill further
recently and that tension on UIOborders @ween Rhodesia
a~ld Zambia has incrcascd and beep aggravated to a
dangerous level. The Southern Rhodadan racist authorities
are cout@Ung to challenge Zambia and the wholo of free
Africa by their acts of aggression. .ConUnuing their hortlle
provocnUon and pursuing a policy of aggression against
Zambia, tho Smith regime recently annouuced a blockade
of postal communications with Zambia, Southom Rhode&m troops are continuing their anned actions againat
hmbia. Those actions are accompanied by a campaign of
thrcnts.

54. In thts connexion, the importance attached by the
non&gned countries, UIO countries of the third world as
U~oy are called In the United Nutions, to UIE aftlrmation of
the piincipla of the non-us4 uf force ii) international
relations is significant. At the Confercnca in Georgotown
(Guysna) in August last your, the non-aligned countries
stated, aa you know, that one of their most important tasks
was to alimlnate force from lilternaUonal relations, that Ls,
to ensure UIO non-use of force iii relations between Statu.
Moreover, they placed purticnlar slrr33 on the fact that
States must refrain from the thrcut or USCof force in their
international relations. At the twenty-seventh scsslon of the
General Assembly, in keephlg with this position takeu by
the tMrd world countries on this lmportent internationsl
question, the well-known Declaration on the non-use of
force in international relations and the permanent prohibiUou of nuclear wcapuns was, as I have alrcndy said, adopted
otz the initiative of the Soviet Union. Thnt Gcnerbll
Assembly decision contains the recommendation that the
Security Council dlould take, as won I potibla, “‘zippro@ate meosuras for the fuli inrplanientation of the prcsant
declaration of the Gencral Asscmbiy”. The SecretaryGeneral, on 5 December last, transmitted this resolution to
the President of the Security Cowncil for the Council to
take the necessary measuics /S/1(1844/, Unfortunately,
however, the Council bus not yet taken uny measures on
this matter. It Is thereforu essential for UIOPresident of UIC
Council this month and. for his successor next month to
take the neces3ary measures,

4% 1110 raport of the Special hMon once again confinns
that South Africa and Portugal are assisting Southern
Rhoda& in its aggressive acts against Zambia. Several
thousand soldiers and officers of the South African armid
forces are still h the territory of Southern Rhodesia,
rlcspilo the Security Cowncti’s condemnation of the prescnce of those troops in Southern Rhodesia and its demand,
in rho resolution adopted on 2 Pobruary last /326 (1973)/,
for the immediate and total withdrawaLof South African
armed forces from Southern Rhodssla.
50. Thu situation that has developed in this region is
fraught with further complications and danger, as h&Wed
in paragraph 166 of die MisYlon’s report.
51, In his statement yesterday to the Security Couilcll
/1692ud neer&&/, the representative of Zambia, Ambassador Lusaka, quite rightly noted that the acts being
committed by the racista ware creeting a direct threat to
peace und security in this part of Africa. ‘IWs we are
tivrlillg wilh lho use of brute force by Southern Rhodesia
and South Africa agllinst a young hidependent Africa
State, Zambia, Another ally of UIC Southern Rhodoslan
racists, the Portuguese colorUalists, frequently and aystematically ruscrts to the use of force also. It is no mere chance,
thcreforc, that at the twenty-seventh session of the Ganoral
Asscmbiy, South Africa and Portugal voted agalnot the
resolution on the non-use of force in International relations
and the permanent prollbition
of the USC of nuclear
weapons. Ilie vote agahist that resolution, which was
adopted, as you know, on the initiative of the Soviet
Union, was cleirr proof and an lndicution of the fact that
the South African and Portuguese racists and colonhdists
reyilrd that resolution as a so~iow international hnpcdhuent
towards their implen~entation of a policy of aggression
agaIns young African States, which is a threat to the wacc
and sccurily of the peuplce of Africa.

55. Another Importunt tssk which, if cnrried out, could
help, first, to curb ug&rcssorsand, secondly, to release funds
for development, In view of UIO fact that cvory year the
world spends over $220 thousand mlilion on the arms race,
Is the preparation for and tho convenhig of a world
disarmament conforcncc. At Ule twenty-seventh ses.dur~ of
the General Assembly ways and 1mx11s were found and
approved for preparations fur c01wc11i1ig such a conference,
and a rpecial commltteo was established for fhaL purposa.
And, hero too, we can say quite deflnitcly tha( the idea of
convening such a conference rccclves wide support from the
third world countries. This is quite clear from the position
thut was tak)tn by the non-aligned countria3 boil1 in Guyana
and at thr last session of the General Assembly, The
resolution on that item woo adopted by IO5 votes In favour,
with 1 abstcn, ion.
56. Those who oppose the cor~vcr~hg
of thill confercncc,
however, BTJ inventing quilo i!njxiUfied obstacles to pm6

vent the Spcclnl Commlttcc from starting its work. It is
c.wntini to ovcrcomo thcso obstacles; tho mombcrs of the
~ISpecial Committcp must bc allowed to start their work. No
--. ,. ~= ono has the right to revise or amend de&Ions taken by the
.~’ General Assembly and Its I’roslda~t,_~xcc~t, $$qpsg~, t$p_ __= .@!!eral
~.~~ ~~;. ~~-.~~ ,~ S~.~
j: hsscmbly itself.

deoislom, has allowed a &quo of raoists and usurpers who
do not represent the people of that country to s@.c powcr
and continue to hold powor for a very long tirno, As is clear
from tha facts cited In the report of tho Mlsslon coliccrnhig
-UIO positlon ~of tho Dr&h Govormnont, the United Kink
dam is now washing its hands of cvorything, and contlnucs
to rofusa to take any monsurcs agah~sl~thc. raolst rcbcls ia-

57. The ‘Prcsidont of Zambln, %r. Kcnncth Kaundn, an
outstandhig African statesman and polltloian, whom 1 havo
had the honour of mcothlg and talking to personally, stated
In kis mossago whtch wns clrculntcd as a Security Council
document /S/10677/ that the pcoplc of Zambln could no
longcr con~inuo lo that mamlcr whilo Rhodcslnn nnd South
Afrlcan ormcd forces violntcd Znmbln’s territory, killed and
mahncd innocon t pcoplo nnd dcstroycd property, The
mcssago strosscs thnt the maln tusk of the Council Is to
consldcr scrlously urgent action to put an end to the critical
situation, and cmphaslzcs in particular the nced to onsurc
tho withdrawnl of South Afrlcnn troops from Southern
Rhodcsin.

61. Thus, tha aggravation of the situation on thc borders
between iridcpcndcnt Afrioa and tho rnclst rdgimcs, lo 1111s
case the Pasclst rdglme in Southern Rhodesia, ,ls II direct
result of the connIvanco, bordering on cncourngcmont, of
cortahl Wcstcrn countries, above all tho Unltcd Klngdum,
with those rdghnos. lnotcad of takhlg strong mcasurcs
ugnlnst the lllogal Smith rbglmo und its policy of u~rcsslon,
violence and racism, London rccommcnds P cnut!ous and
cahn approach to the problem rather than n firm “MI” IO
the rob4 Smith rbgimc. London is clearly lust courting UIO
r6ghc und seeking alllcs for Itself,

58, The USSR dclcgatlon fully supports thcso proposals
and demands made by the Prcsldcnt of Zambia. These arc
IcgiUmntc and fair demnnds madc by the hoad of a
sovorclgu State In Africa, and the Security Council Is
obliged to give Ulcn~, fill dgc attention and tomtake tho
ncccssary steps.
S9, Tho question has frcqucntly been asked ia the
Security Council, whnt is lhc ronson for tho oxplcs? z
sltuntion cxistlng on the border bctwccn Zambia and
Rhodosln and in the whole of southern Africa. ‘I’hoso
directly rcsponsiblc fur the situntion nrc, of course, SmiU~‘s
Covcrmucnt, his ruling clique of white racists and the other
colonialist and rnclst rdglmrs In southern Africa.
GO, In rcsoh~Uon 320 (1972), tho Security Council des.
cribcd the policy of South Africa and Portugal as n refusal
to co.opcratc wi111 the United Nntlons la the obsaivanco
and itnplcmcntntlun of Sccurlty Council dcclsions agulnst
South Af~lca and XIIICI~OI~S ugnhuinstSouthern Rhodcsla; it
condemned than for this nnd Icqucstcd the Security
Council C~on~n~iltca on Southern Rhodesia to proparo a
mport on ucllons that could bo taken ngnhlst those two
countries. IJut 1110cxlstenco of the Smith r6ghnc is to b0
oxplahicd not only by this, but mninly and prhnarlly by the
support nnd asslstancc it rccclvos openly and sc+ly from
certain clrclcs in Wcslcrn countrlos and from the iniurtrti
tioiu~l hnpcrlnllst mo~~opollcs whose s)nistor rot0 In Ihc
world toduy wils so sogcntly cxposcd lmd dcrcribcd by the
Prcsldcnt 01 (%llc. Mr, Allcnde. In his brilliant statement at
tho twc~lf,y.w/c~~~l~session of the Gcncral Asscmbly.3 Much
ol‘ lhc ~crponsibllity fol lbu cxlslc~nrc of lhc rCelni0 hi
!$alisl~~~.tand Its unti.Africun cvll und criminal actlvltics and
for the iiict thut the S milllun gcoplc of Zhubabwc are still,
in the &,,md half of the twcnticth ccnlury, llvhlg In slnvcry
undor the power anti racist opltrcrsion uf the usurI=rs, is to
bc placed on tu1lng cl&s in thu Unltcd Kl~~ydom Tim
report of the Spcclal Mission, which we UIC dlsusslng.
ptovidcs cxt~c~ucly convhlclng proof of this. The I lnltcd
Khlgdom IIUPnot dlschur+~d 11s~sponsibllitles towards the
people 01’ Zimbabwe ;!nli, In vlolution of’ United Natlons

62. Such an approach on the part of the IUIIII~ clrclcs of
the metropolitan country to a rcbol rbgimcr la a colony
undermines any soluUon to the Southern Rhodcslua qucse
tion and other problems of southern Afrlco. It cncourugos
the Smith rEglmc, covers up Its crhnos und SCIVUSthe
inlcrcsts of slr~nglhenlng the position of tho rncisl cola.
ah&t forces In that area.
63. In rcsoluUon 253 (1968), thci Security Council la.
posed compulsory sanctions against Southern Rhodcsln
with a view to putting an end to the racist Smith rbgimo.
Ilowovor, In spltc of this and shnilar subsequent dcclsions
by the Council, the sanoUons agahut Southern Rhodoslu arc
being vlolatcd by South Africa, Portugnl and certain
Western countrlos. This, of course, cannot but undormh~c
the authority of the Unltcd NnUons; it provonts it from
being mom affective and hnplomenth~g the mcnsurcs It hus
adopted to mahit& pcacc and security and to hnston the
cllmb~otion of colonialism and tho Uboration of the pcoplc
ol’ Zimbabwe and other pcoplcs In southern Africa from
racist and colonialkt tyranny. Why are sunctlons agahlst
Southern Phodcsia not acldoving thclr ahnl The auswcr Is
clear: certain States mombcrs of the CouncU thnt voted 111
favour oftho applicntlan of sanctions had, aild still have, no
real l+cntlon of applying sanctions in pructlcc tmd lmplc~
mcntlng the Council dcoision on sanctions. Tho rosolutlons
upplylrg snnctlons are bolng violated both covertly and
whh oynlcal openness. Thu wide gates through which lrudo
and economic co.opcrutlon with internntlonal mono.
pollee-ln which Rrltish und United Stutcs capltul p~cdomlnatus--is still being car&d 011 with the racist Smith
rdglmc arc South Africu und Portugal.
64. Tho Security Council ustabllsbcd a spcclal commlttec
on SuuUran Rhudcsia, Its mandate lncludcs promotIny ho
effective hnplenicntatlo~i of anctluns by Stulcs and thu
prcpnrolion of recoearlcadatiors to the Council on tho lyp
of actiun it could take against violutions and against those
who vlolatc thu suactiuna. I+~~pusalu rugardhlg tha adoption
of rcully cffcctivc nic~sures which ura consistently llulntr
submitted to UIC Cununlttcc by Afrlcau and wcictlr;~t
countries and which could lead to tcul results in curblng the
racist rOgl111cIII Soutl~eru Rhudesla, uro met with iicr’c~

opposltlon from rcpreseritntives of certain Western coun. 69. The Sotie! delegationhas alreadystated th2t attempts
tr!es.
Coii~pOilUy,
tllo work
of the Committee ha.6bcon
to &ft the responstbility of the racists and their protectors
--_-:nlade- mora dlfflcult, and limited to tcchnic2lities, 2nd it
to the intcmat!onal community-could bc taken to lndlcate
haqnot kc11 in a posltlon to submit-any co~creto propoosals that the &u&y Cbuncll has come to terms with the fact
to’thc 67oUncil.The Smtth ~~glrneis taking tldngs calmly. It
of the exlstencc of’th6 racist rdgimo In ‘Salisbmy and with
.~Iti -nothing to- roar from snnotions. It ‘Is protectcd~from ~lts policy of aggroadonngalnst lndopondontAfrican St;ltes.
bumsanotlons by sympathctlc strong ‘protectors who net as its
That would be nothing but a concosslon on the part of the
..--- guardian angels in the Security Council Commlttee..on Council to the lllonal tigime ‘of the racists lin Southern
sanctions againstSouthern Rhodesia,
Rhodesia and an encouragementto those external forces
~.
that are protect& it 2ndensurirlg its sulvlv;ll, To all intents
2nd purposes the Council would be addresslog itself to a
65. Tho Security Cou~wil cannot rornain.llidifforeiit to this
solution not to tile osscncoof tho problem itself, but only
challengehurled by the colonialist 2nd racist r&imes of
to somo of its raanlfcstations. The main task Is to rcpulm
southern Africa at 11104fricon pcoplos2nd the whole world
the nggrcssor and clhninatc the amcsslon, to stamp out the
III dlsrcgard of United Nations decisions and lu violntlon of
dlscase ltsclf 2nd not 0111~its cxtcrnal symptoms, It Is
its Charter. In the opinion of t11eSoviet dolegatlon,if this
cxpIoslve situation is to bc ended, it is essential that t11e essential to place direct polltlcal and mater121responsibility
Council not 011lybroaden tho compulsory sancllons against on those who are responsible for the existence of a
Southern Rhodcsla but also take mc2surcs against it under sltuatlon which cncouragcsthe sutvlval of this racist r&line.
Artlclc 4! of the Charter, in order to cilsuro the com- The Council must tnko measures to OIISUIOthat this r&hne
pulso~y ,obscrvanceby all States of the szmctions against is brought to an end,
Southern Rhodcfla and the lmmediatc ropcal of legislation
70. Mr. ODi.!RO.JOWI (Kenya): Mr. Presldcnt, first of all I
permitting trudo with Southern Rhode& in violation of
should like to congratnlatc you very warmly on assuming
United Nations dcclsions. In view of tho direct vlola!io~~ by
the piesldency of UIC Council for tho month of March, My
l’ortugai and South Africa of the Council de&ion on
dclegatlon’s
ussocintlon
with yoursand my own personal
sanctions and the stubborn refusal by UIOSCcountries to
co-opcratc With the Council in this matter, the Council contactswitl~you convlnccmethat duringthis monthwe
should rake measures to apply sanctions also egainstSouth shallbe in safahands.WCshallbe in the handsof a fair,
dedlcatcd,
internationally.mlnded,
friendly Latin American
Africa and Portugal,
statesm8.n
whoseinterestin theproblems
of UI~world,and
particularly
in
t11e
problems
of
the
third
world,
arebeyond
G6, T11eSoviet dciegntion fully supports the proposal
We are contldentthat duringyour presldencp
n1ndoby another outstanding African statesman and poll. reproach.
matterssuchas the item we aro discus&gthis
tician whom I have also had UIU pleasure of meet@ and serious
aftcnloonwill begiventhe weightthey deserve
rllid that
talking with, the President of the United Republic of
~111
be found to asmanyof thoseproblems
as
Tanzania,Mr. Nyerore, at UIOs&on of the Organlzaation solutions
possible.
of African Unity at Rabat in 1972, a proposal aimed at
strengthening mnctions against Southern Rhodesia. He 71. Beforeintroducingthe two draft rcsoludons
onbehalf
proposed that a boycott should be instituted against firms,
of the delegations
of Guincn,India,the Sudan,Yugoslavia
c~inpmios 2nd monopolies wldch violate sanctions aghast
my own delegation,
I shouldlike to congratulate
the
the racist Smith r6ghne and that wldcr publicity should be and
given through the United Nations.to those who violato SpecialMissionto Zambiafor the goodwork it ncconp
plished.Whonwe sentthe Missionto Zambiawe rcalized
unctions. In supporting this proposal made by Preddcnt
that it wasgoingon 2 tricky mission.
Whileit wasmoving
Nyercre, we submit that that khid of action hy the United
aroundin the Republicof Zambia,it wasreportedallover
NaUons would be,effecUvc and would havesome Influence. the world that it missed
2 bombcxploslonby 2 coupleof
minutes.We at1prayod for its safeand speedyreturn,
67. Lastly, it would be completely logical, justilled and because
WCrcalizcdthat the situa!lonit wasdownthereto
proper for the Security Council to take a decision to the invcsti@ewarrantedquickac!ion,wasfraughtwith danger
effect that the material responsibility fwr the consequences andwas2 se&uscl~ul~c~~ge
to theintcrnattonalcommunity
01‘ aggression against Zambia by the racist r&&e in
andto peaceandsecurityin the world.The reportof the
Southern Rbodcria, and for the losses incurred ln Zambia as Missionspeaksfor itself and we thank the Mirslon,
a aesult of these aggressiveacts oi ihe Southern Rhodesian parUcul2rlyIts Chairman,for the goodjob it did on the
r&lmc, should be placed 011 those States an their
instructions
of thisCouncil.
monopnlies..both n2ti01121and muitinational--whit ‘v,c~e
rcsponsihlc for tile secession of the racist r&me to .vcr 72. The two dral’tresolutions
which1 havethehonourof
and which arc continuing to support It through contacts,
introducingdealwith two broadaspects
of the situatiorr
and through the maintenanceof eooiiomic,trade and other
that WCareat presentdiscussing.
&tions.
73. Thefirst draft resolution,
in docunientS/lOgc)S,
deals
with pollticnl und military aspectsol’ the situationIc
68. To shift the responsibility for the damagecaused by
the racists of Rhodesia, Sonth Africa and Portuga:al
to tho southernAfrica, focusedon Zambia.Thisdrsft‘resolution
dealswith four m2joraspects
of thesituation.It dealswith
~w01ld commuaity would mcau In fact lifting it from
those
of rebellionIn SouthernRhodesia;
\,+r~ arc mainly responsible l’or the accession to power and the f2ct of continuance
itlu cOi!tinUafi0ll
iu power of tllc racist, eoloni2liJtr&line
it dealswith cc~ntir~ued intciI’crence
by the SouthAfrican
in Suutherr~
Riludcsiu.
rCgln1e
in the internalaffaiis of tbc colo11yol’ SouUicrn
8

Rhodesia; It also touches on the rcnponslblllty of tha
must seize itself In earnest; othcrwlsc, the purposes and
United Klngdom ln rclatlon to tho rcbcll!on’ in Rhode&;
principles of the Charter of the United Nations will not be
served.
:__ -and, bally, lt rcaffimls the dght of the people of
..-i- ._
.~.~ Zimbabwe to seIf.determlnation and lndopondcnceIn ac.
~-mPmFm
.~.cordancc tiith GoneralAs~mbIy_rosolut~on~~514(XV), : : -79. Tliose arc the four -eIcments of UN first draft
74;? ‘thlqk enoughhasbeensoldaboutthe sltuatlonIn
~~ .~-8outhernRhodcda;I think enoughhasbeensaidaboutthe
throatto the peaceandsecurityof the Republicof Zambia
posedby the SouthernRhodcslan
rcbclllon,It is the view
of my delcgotlon-and
1 am surethe sponsors
of the two
draft rcsolutlons
will agree-thatthe timellosnowcomefor
actlonby the Council,by the UnitedNatlonsand,Indeed,
by the lntcrnatlonalcommunity.Continuanceof the
rcbcl]lonIn SouthernRhodes&is a direct threatto peace
andsecurityIn southernAfrica, ln Afrlcn generallyandlu
the world. I say that becauseI know the sltuatlon
yorsonally,

80, I dldl now turn to the opcratlvoparagraphs
of that
&aft rcsolutlon.In paragrnph
I, wccndorsctheassessment
and conclusions
of the SpeclaIMhslon-and,as I said
carllcr,wearc mostgratefulfor Itsvery posltlvcandtlmcly
assessment
of the sltuatlonoxlstlngIn that partof southern
Africa, It Is my delcgatlon’s
vlcw thnt the asscssmcnt
and
conclusions
of tho Mlsslonare rlght, In paragraph
2, we
reaffirmthat the sltuatlonIn SouthernRhodcslu
constltutcs
a threatto Intcrnatlonall~o~co.
I haveahendyspokenabout
that. In paragraph
3, asIn pnragraphs
Band7, WCdcalwith
the sltuatlonof rcbclllonIn SouthernRhodcsln.
In the first
75. The whlte r&lmc In South Africa and the Legal place,wo declarethat the only effcctlvo solutionto this
r&lmc In SouthernRhodesia
Intend to pcrpotuatetheir grave sltuatlon flcs In the cxcrelsoby the peopleof
and lndc.
domlnatlonover the majority of the African peopleIn Zlmbabwcof their right to self~determlnatlon
in nccordancc
wlth GoncrnlAssemblyresolutlon
southernAfrica. That Is why the SouthAfrican Govern. pendence
1514(XV). WCrequestall Govornmcnts
to take strlngcn!
merit hasdecmcdIt fit to lntcrveneIn the sltuatlonIn
measures
to
enforce
and
ensure
full
compliance
by all
SouthernRhodcsla-because
the South African r&h&e
lndlvlduals
and
orgnnizntlons
under
thelr
Jurlsdlction
with
regardsSouthernRhodosla
asthe northernbulwarkfor
policyagainst
SouthernRhodesia,
white domlnntlon.On the other sldoof the pictureis the the sanctions
fnct that wc Africansarcnot goingto toleratedomlnatlon
81. I saidcarllcr that, in thisdraft resolution,we were
andoppression
bymlnodtyrdglmcs
in Africa anylonger.
dcallngwith n rebellionIn southernRhodesia
and our
in operativeparagraphs
76. Sowehaven sltuatlonwhichIdcscalntlng
seriously.
It verdicton the rebellionIscontained
to bocnforccdagainst
Isa dtuationwhichhasall the elements
of danger,
Ilkc the 3,6 and7. Weshouldllkc sanctions
asa means
of bringingdowntherebel
sltuatlonIn the MiddleEust.Wehavea dtuntlonwherethe SouthernRhodesia
whlte mlnorlty r&lmesIn SouthAfrica andRhodesla
are r0gimeof IanSmith.
workingIn collusionto oppress
the independent
African 82. The secondclcmcnt ‘wc deal with In thls draft
peoples
throughmllltarymight-indeed,to terrorlzethem, resolution
concerns
the roleof SouthAfrica in thereboIlion
just aswe seepeoples
In the MlddleEastbolngterrorized In Southern
Rhodesia.
In operatlvcparagraph
4 we con.
through mllltary rnlght. Dut tha Afrlcln peoplesare demnthe SouthAfricanrdglme
“For
its
perslstcnt
refud to
determined
to marchfor Independence
and to free those
partsor Africa stillundercolonialruleandthosestUJunder withdrawIts mllltary and armedforcesfrom Southern
Rhodesia”.I know that the Governmentof SouthAfrica
minorityr@ntcs.
allcgcsthat It hasno armedforcess!atlonedIn Rhodesia
77, For quite sometime It washopedthat the whltc but a closeserutlnyof the reportby the SpeclaIMlsslon
no doubt at all that SouthAfrica hastnllltnry and
regimes
In southernAfrica wouldchangetheir mindsand leaves
enter lnto meaningfuldialogueandnogotlntlons
with the paramllltaryforcesstntloucdIn SouthernRhodesia.
African peol~les
for someklndof rationalsettlement
of the 83. In operativeparagraph
5 werclteratcour “demiuldfor
sltuntlon.That wasthe thrustof theLusakaManifesto.4It the
lmmedlntcwithdrawalof SouthAfrican military and
hasbeenthe thrust ot a numberof decisions
by the armedforcesfrom SouthernRhodesia
andfromtheborder
Organlzatlonof African Unity. Dut the white mlnorlty of
that Icrlii*lty wlUi Zambia”,because
It Is due to the
rdglmesln southernAfrica hnverejectedthe handsand rclnforcementof the Rhodcslanforces by the South
gestures
of Blendshipof the African Independent
States.
armedforcesthnt Rhodesia
Is thrcatenlngZambia
Theyhaveelectedto entrusttheir future andtheir livesto African
directly. I havescanpressreportsIn whichSmithisallrgcd
the gullandmflltary might.But ‘NCAfricanpeoplearenot to havesaidthat ho wouldbombtargetsIn Zambia.This
goingto take that line because
WCowaIt to our brothers remindsmeof the situationthat existsio the MiddleBust
andsisters
In SouthernRhodesia
to ensure
Uinttheywill be
harass
andoppress
independentand enjoy the dignity due them ashuman wherethe sfrongPowersco~~tinuously
the
weaker
ones.
This
is
not
the
world
that
the Unlted
beings
and3scitizensof thegreatcontinentof Africa.
Natlonscancountenance.
It Isdirccrly against
theCharter.
7g. Therelono doubtthat the situationIn southern
Afrlcu
Isfraughtwlth dnnger.It Isn threatto InternatIonalpcacc 84. I mentloncdearllcr that African countrlcsunani.
and securityauwell nsa situationof wldchtMs Council nrously extendedthe hand of frlcndshlpto the whltc
ndnority r&lmesin southernAfrica but thut thishadbeen
turned down. WCshouldlike to seepeacerclgno11out
continentandIt Is hccauscof thisthut WCaremnkinp,
an
9

-QppeJd iJ1 this fOlUJI1 to ihe hIt0IJlatioSUd
ColIIUNIJ~ity t0
iUoblli2e the opinion of the pcoplos of the world against rhe

.~ cgpr0rslon of our pcaple in Southern Rhodesia, in South

85, The third olemnt hi this draft resolution deals with
clu responsibUi(y of 1110 United Khadom. We still bellove hi
the logal position that the IJnitcd ‘Kingdom is the adnMsterlng Powcr hi the colony of Southern Rhodcsla. We are
sUII pcrsuadcd that it hns UIC powcr to exe&e that
aulhorlty hl the colony of Southern Rhodesia. We are sIllI
convhiccd that it has not glvcn its blesshig to the rebelllon.
That would bc agahlst the whole lcgql tradition of the
United Kingdom. SJIlh would be @c ouly rebel hi the
hhtory of the Drltish l.!n~pl~ who hQd &Alcd
agahIs1 the
authoilty of the Queen 0119got away with it. We have nol
been told by the United Khlgdom that it has given up
working to brhig down the rebellion in Southern Khodesia,
We thcrofore believe thnt, as the admlnlsterhig Power, it has
certain rcspom.ibUitics to carry out in order lo bring the
rebellion to an end. That is why in oprativc paragrmph g
wc urge:
“the United Kingdom as tho administering Power to
.convcne as soon us possible a naUonal Constitutional
Confercnce where genuine representatives of the people
of Zirnbabwe would be able to work out a settlement
relathlg to the future of the Territory for subsequent
endorsement by lhe people through free and universal
adult suffrage”,
It is In pursuance of thesc beliefs and in supporl of this
legal posiition thu! we urge the United mdom,
In
operalivc paragraph 9, to effect:
“(u) The unconditional release of all political prisoners,
detPlncos and restrictccs;
“lb) The repeal of a11 repressive and discrhnhuuctory
legislatioll;

“(c) The removed of all rcslrictions on political activity
and the establishment of full democratic freedom and
equality of politic5l rights”.
815. I now move to th3 second draft resolution contalncd
.,.
hl dOclJJllCJI t s/ 10899,
87. Iha report of the Spcc!al Mission makes it very clear
ihat Zambia has bee11 sufferhig econonlicaUy for a long
thnc becausc of its speclai gcoyaphical posltion in that part
of southern Africa and (hat it 114s been L’thls negatlw
sitrrn~io~~ since 1963. It niukcs it clear ulso that the recent
closure of the border by the illegal r&hnc In Southern
tilodcsia
is orliy one lhik irl a whole chahl, a Whole train of
events which have been affecUiig Zambia Irecnure of itr
speciui positions irI that part of soutlreia Africa. The United
Natlonr should hava recognised the special ccorromic
problems of Zambia a long time ago. But it is comforting to
know that In 1970, in restdutlou
277 (1970), the Unifed
Na~iuns, for thf first thue, recogulzcd
the special positiwr
of Zambia. Znmbia is WJIJ&IR a battle for the United

~~~~~“&b~~&~uls -the ‘Government of the :Republle -of
.-~Zambln for deciding to abandon the use of the southern
route for 11~ irade unlll the rob&don lo quelled and
nuJodly rule Is established In Southern Rhodesia”,
I Udnk that we muat pat Zambia ou the back for fIghUng
for the United NatEons. Zambia is Bghtlng to vindicate the
principles contahlcd In the Charter of the Un4tod NaUons.
88. In operative paragraph 2 wa take note *of tha urgent
economic ncoda of ZRnlbla as Indicated la the roporr of the
Special h!lsslon olld ita annexes”. la this respect I ollould
Uko to draw the attention of the Cwncll to Ule very clew
e.xpaiUon of the special cconomlc diMculUer Zambia in
facing in the anmxeo to the *port.
89, In operative paragraph 3 we are appealhlg ‘to all
Slatea

for

irmnedlate

technical,

fl~~anc&l

and

mater&l

assistance to Zambia In accordance with resolutlono
253 (1968) and 277 (I 970)” and in accordance with a
declslon we ourselves took by hnplicatlon when wo weed
(0 send a special ~nkislon to Zambia.
90. Zambin needs the help of all pace4ovlng countries in
the world, so that it0 economy nlny be salvaged from the
ravapa apioing from Zambia’s decision to abandon the
southern route because that route is clearly unreliable, We
are also appealing to the United Nations and 11sepeclall.zed
agencies to lake positive stops to Involve Uicmselvca in the
task of aiding Zamblp.
91. Let me repeat that what is happening to ZPnibla hat
come about because Zambia la a faithful Member of the
United Nations; it has come about because Zambia upholds
the tenets of the Charter and because 11 supports all Ute
resolutlonn regardhig independence for colonial peoples,
human rights and so, forth. Zambia is indeed a loyal
Momber of the Organization, a Me!nber In good standlag,
and a Member threatened by economic dislocation arising
out of the situation
in which it fl;rds itself. That Lowhy we
appeal to the i.ntemaUonal community, through the Unlted
Nations and UIQ specialized ag~nnler, for spt~lal aid 10
ZsrUbL

92. Lastly, we are requesting that the Economic and
Social Council bc seized of this matter and that il discuss it
from tinia to thaw so that the economy of Zambin nay be
kept in focus by the lnternatlonal comniunlty.
93. I should like to pohlt out that, us a representative of
an eastern African country, a country which haa had
mlotiom with Zambia for as many years as we have been
around In that part of the world, I know what the situation
is; I know what dangers are hUierent In that dluwtion. The
international
commu&y must not allow the racist rtghm:
of Ian Smith to commit aggression against Zanibin mt any
time, becaua the States of eastern Africa and all the
members of the Organizulion of African Unlty are dutermined lo resist any aggression against ZsJnbia. Any aggres-

fax OSthe c.ategorkid
andf’M-hsndSinding
of theMIssion
of tha “ccmtinuodd&ovment of South Afcicm amted
fox&~in ~mdan&yto-& &rdar with Zambiarurdtheir
wd6nlod.prorencela other nei&bouringtorribrtos”’IS/
10896,pmu 1671, sonl~attcJilpb of certainde!egaUons
tid txomeGovernmentofrM& to m&ninUz~
al&or the
cu&orii or the lnlpartancoof Ura prcacncaof those
farces-p&d
to timmtaa, pressure,
tenor&a and intop
wno-&$ke my dela@Jon, frankly, BEa ahortrigkted
podtion, hardly in CONO~ with what inc&d for by
ti situmtlon and ~4th what is axpcotodOf us. it is
dgalhnt tit UIO&Won’8 ceritralpoWal acswunent
ir
tllat:
95. itut I dull not wait to axprsu our wanwrt tb&a and
8ppcWkw
to th0 mprarentHiv0 of Kenya, our good
frkad Amwdor
&teMowi, for the akilftd, m&c+ur&l
md bmad-vidonad way in which ha d&&ar@d the dut&a
of Preddstrt for tlm month of Pobruary, tbb month whan
the ealllall ullderto0k importmt commitmorlb Md road0
tlr.m
de&ion8 mnaarulng the coinplaInt of the
Ropublb ofzMlb& the hue before ml today.

“ths koy to the udutlon of tiw problem, , , lice in the
0 p&xtlon of majority rule iu , . , SouthernRhodesia,
L rtilot hlpbmtaU0li of t3la, * , @ancuom
agaimtthe
illapl r4&lo. I. and the hplenlcntaUan
of relevant
mwhtloun of tha Security Councilwith regardto the
whole ~MR”[~M&

p&r. IbE]

59, It in very timely and mwt helpful for tho who
nwdodit, thnt the MMola hasbothpiahedthematPaint
Of
the Gavmmmt of Zambia,evenunderextmno provoca96. Aa my ddopUon tidy
rat forth our c&u ad
tion, audWd to scatthe s~urto~redhorrtagof the~~ipts
CrtopdNl viaw collNrlliDp tlda lllJsttor at the CouDcll’r md their mupportmthat the natiorrp1
llbwtion etruggle
me&p of 29 Jarmary lI687th meetrcls;land 2 February
and the pmjlh
war that lo on tllo ttwwo in Soutlm0
fl69h.t mtteetittg/,wa dud mSmhfrom raperUngthem Rhode& had baensomehow
broughtfrom outs&, from
now and &a!l addroraourvalv~ to the eubraquent
&vel. Zamblnaud oiher countries.That in of coursea regular
opmantm
andraqukcnmb0f the presmtaltuation00ly.
excuseof all reactionaryandoppressive
r@n~eoembattled
fjgnhstpmptarwho rim to mus to Ubfmtethemselves,
t0
97, I &all @M-and tt h truly P greatpleaemu
to do orderto prooeadwith les bnpu@tywith terror,oppresslm
@o-byOtaurQhow impmsrad
my delogatloiliu with tho and ~xpl~JtaUon. In hia ablepm&enteUon
in the Council
rapcatof the SpsciplMluioa, refkctiug the tmmarndow ytmterday[169&d meti?@, AntbacadorLusaka,the
amumt of work doneby rind the greatund~ri&inding, mpmsentntivo
of Zambia,madeonlightenlng
comn~ents
GUI
poWal wkdoraandrem&mof theMisdon’o
membera,
(ha the-truef&a of the uprisingof thepeopleof Zimbabwe.
rupmilbntaUwo
of Indonorln,Aurtria, Peruandtko Sudan.
100. It ta for all thbrereaaona
that any resolution
dealing
with the paWcal sspcct.6
of thesedevelopments
hasto
i&il&~
326 (1973)aud327(fi73) mapecUvely,
andwe tx+aSSirm
ti on0wayor the other all the basicelement8
of
hope,in&d weurge,nsmbenof the Councilto ondorte the wdUon of the Councilaadthe UnitedNationscmthe
tb reportfully andmMmoudy.
mattorof Southernl&dada andrelatedquesticurs
endto
hdiwo whatciwt ty the pdU.kA waysaf denlingwith the
98. 3’urx&gto tha pollUcnlpart of the situation,I would dtuationa8it develops
now.For that reason
my delegation
mv that it ilnnortMt to not0that t&olmoaruml
Mblolr of
ia rpo~~dn&
tqpthw
akin Guha,
India, Kenyaandff~o
ihi Cwncll -‘lug confIrmedthe asse&sntsthat hrva Sudan,tho draft remlutioncontied in documentS/10898
corrilotw~tlymcitlvatadtho Councilin CDosIlag
with the whf& wanjlutt soably introducedby the represent&oof
dtU8l.h crated by themb%!IMOfLO iuagslm&t @me
Wi!.
~.
in SoutharnElbdodaandita coIIuUonwitk thataoiatand
colontdr4&11ea
in SouthAfricn andPortugel.+I+~B
m,ti
101. In that connexlonwe shouldbe at leantsomewhat
data t&It the dwelopmentn
with which the CouilcU& manmud,or at Ieat &xneof our f&u’swould-b+~
to COJ~~@
~gsre,Inlpdrtput,r~tof~~oftfieright
axtent Plluycd,if we shouldLcarnfrom the admInIstering
of alf&tarminaUon to the majority of the Aftican Powerwhat exactly It thinDvs
it Is propnrcdto contklua
cou~~triarntled and tcrrotid by the Bbovc.mentioned doingIn that mepxt. Wehave to hearmorereassuring
r&lInw. It strwleJ,hOWeVQ,
thlt tko CQNtRlltet4toof
titamants, not juuststatenxwte harkhg bwk to the
teodonhu bwn heightened
to a marcurable
dagrua
by the ded
proposal@
for wtllemcnt,whichWIIQsodccisivcly
provo&iw md rpgramive
ac%mcontlycommittedby the Fafocted
by tic peopleof Zlmbabwa,
or npeUUomof the
smithr&he qdsut Zambia.ThaMl&n hruobserved
the wuunad total Impotenceof tho admtutatohgPower.If
ndh’)’ plOpWBfiON
GO~lfroIithl~
h&e PC&ON
of
wa continue to hear only exprosslonr:
of hope that
?&nblm’rborderandtieno themPIBI-Iimportantfactorin romehow,st MI=NWm Smlflilaylng to fdk to fhapeople
lncmsiogtan&n, I 16gitirultaCIU# of concdrnfor tha ho oppresses,
wa-an@not only we alone-should
rcmaiu
Gouammmtof Zunbir, andu fmughtwith thednngeroue ~prehendveof p&Me newattemptsat enabling
the raolpt
pc~t~~~tid
of OSI&UOII that couldIuveUB&ar~ effectas
minorityto continuei9nrule wide obtelrringtheattributes
the rrUtra& of mrtrnintadoptod10fur by Zambia.Iu tha of legitinuwy.

102. I think that it would ba vary wrang indeed if we
~otddered the problem ‘wa are desihrg with today-the
&uubjm needs-as On0 of or for just one ~~Untry, or felt
~’ Ukat.we w&3 facingjust some i%nrbhurSoutheru Rhode&n
--coxifcontatian, wo CFnlplCtoly8haro the viows of znmbim
Ltiesident, Kaunda whtah he expressed to the Special
MissIon,. that ,Yt wss not Zambia’s battle alone, it was a
battle for the oauseof humanity, for the sufforhrg 1nas3eshr
8c$thern AfriOtl” RWithat I COSl+@CU\ttly 1

‘%IO ~SpeoialMIssion’s work was not for the people of
Ziunbla alone. Rvory tntemationaiist who believedtn the
Wnitod Nations must accept that what Zambiawas dohrg
was not its affair alone but a matter for humanity as a
who!o.‘“[S/10896, pare. 129.j
,

a’eubstantiva stap forwsd in our batt.!a for the effe&lvenaoo
of the r%BIl0tlG,~,-,
” ‘106, 33m hftaalixi’s mpart slso ipotes the ‘view of Om
nruu~vcaith offioialson ,the dashedeffect of 2an)bla’s~

aothn agdmt jhc Smith @ghne”a.
eeononry~~to
Ureef@t
rh$i.t wag
-;
,~ .-.-+
%I Iii10 with one of the k&lo abjeotives of u1e sallotlon8

p&y, andit fflwtratod the needfor appropriate
triter.
nationsIas&tameto !&ambia,
sothat it couldplayits full
part h ItilplonlE!l~tillg,. that polhly.“[ltrw,,

puru S?/

To that we wouldadd the conchrdhtg
aaaessment
of the
report-thevery lastsenteuce-where
it Isstatedthat “only
adequate
andthnely assistance
will m&o it possible
for the
economyof Zambiato eontlnuato &v&p In II normal
f~Qu.~~rf&~,~K 179,j

103. It is absolutelyfmpossib!a not tb see tn the Zambian
de&ion. f\llty to apply sancttons againstthe UIesnlrbgime,a
maJor and noble deefslon ori the part of ar ~outstanding 107. For thoserossons
weurgethe Councilto adoptalso
Momber of the United Nations in contributina its utmost.
the seconddraft reaolutloucontired in documentS/
and against overwhehning difficulties, to the”Unitad Na: lOSp9,subinlttedby Guinea,India,Kenya,the Sudanand
Uons struggle for assuring the peoples of southern Atijca Yugoslavia,becauseit adequatelymeetsthe needs and
self~detornlnattan, independenceand majority nrlo. That ObjeCtfVC8 of the momentfn our commoneffort, together
rerualns tho only way in which we can removethe hotbed w&h Zambia,in keep&r with the bask U&d Nations
of tensionand war thraateninginternationalpeaceand polioyin Afrioa.
seourity~
Onewouldhavohopedthat all theMembers
of the
United Nations,especiallyblg, rich and industrlrrllzad 108, Weare surethat the Cotmallwhl conthiuoto be
Members,
would followsuitandnot helpthe Smith&hue
seizedof this item, and my delegationwill support
throughbroakhrgthesanotions.
It is for thosereasons
that reconatderatbn
of f&a matter of adequateinternational
we find totally unacceptable
the viowsexpressed
to the
osnlsranoo
to Zarnbipif and wheneverthat shouldbe
Speoial
Missionby highoffloialsof someGovernments
that required.
“tho fact that Zambiahad&selfdo&ledto oloaothe border
WRS
cntlrely a mattei for its owndecision”andthat “the 109. Mr, DE3
CUIRINGAUD(Pranca)(&lev~~erullotr
fionl
closure was expectedto bringsomedifficultiesfor Zambia, I&?&r): Mr. President,before de&g with the subject
but the matterremained Zambia’s
internalaffair.” [&!&,
before ~8, may II say, Sir, that we are partiodarly gfatificd
VU
39.1
to seeyou presideover the work of the SecurityCounoil
and we wish to congratulateyou mostwarmly on this
104. WhUewoaregladthat somewhat
dlfferontviewson cwmdon?My &legationisconvincedthat, thankato your
this point were expressedin slnfflar quarters,we are
abtlity andexperience,
our meettnga
hereandIn Panama
disturbedby the advocacyby sonioof goingbackto the will be pre8hled over with authority and in the nmt
so~alled&lus qua a&?, of merelyroaum&tg
tradeand effectivepossfble
fsshlon.
commmricatibns
whh the, illegal r6gimeinsteadof wol.
cominganythingandeverything
that makesthat r&hne’s 110. May I also pay. a tribute to your predecessor,
suxvivLlmoredifB.xdt, whichboth rhosphitandthe letter Ambassador
tXero&wf, the represedtative
of Kenya?He
of manyunanimously
adoptedresohrtions
of the Council earnedrhat tribute for the wa~in whichhe presided
ovar
askur.to do. Agstu,wearesomewhat
heartened
by the fact our debates
durinathemonthof Pebruarv.It wasunderhis
that thereare,ht similarquarters,thosewho welcome
the enlightened
presidency
that theCourtoil,itrter a&, adopted
Zambisndecisionasa majorstrikefor the morestrhrgont thornresohrUons
that led to the sendJng
to Lurakaof the
application
of mandatorysanoUona.
Thoreportdircotlyand Mirzionwhosereportwaarenowexamining,
honestlystatesthat ‘the evasionsof the sarroUons
by
certahrpowerful industrial&d countries,as well ss by 111. Tho SyeclatMissionthat want to Zambia,pursuant
SouthernRhodcsla’s
neighbours,
were)quite s@itlcant” to tha termsof resolution326(1973, hassubmittedalong
but that, “in thelongterm,sanctions,
particularlytlnanchd report,Wew&&rto congratulate
It for Uroconsiderable
work
sanctions,
hada curnu&Uveandhlcresshrg
effect.” [&&I,, it hasdoneIn recordthne. This Is, ht fact, an extremely
pm. 5.s.j
completeandpraeise
documentwhichdoubtless
wlUserva
ss one of the most.usefulhrstruments
in the work and
105. It is hi thut context,andin thecontext of the item meet.@sof the CouucU.UnSortunatoly,
we have not had
on tho agenda
today,andbccauso it is very relevant to the
sufffcionttime to study Ulfrdocument
in derail;andat this
~Ircisions
we areuboutto take,that mydelegation
attaches stagaof our debato\YQ canonly permitourselves
a fowvary
pwUcularimportance
to theworkof theSecurityCou~~eii’s @mcral Nmurlents.
thmmittooan SouthernRhodcsie,
whichisto submitto us
u epxhl reprt uureyuiredby resolution320(1972).My 112. The politlcslfindtn~ reachedtn the field by the
dclcgationwNI cwtinuu to do sll it curl to makethe euvoyaof the C!ouncM
do not surprise
us.Thoyconftrrn,if
(:onnntttce’sforthcomingreconnnondaHons
to theCouncil archconfhnationwar0neccs8ary,
that Uiatensionaxloting

L;

In thu region-which
III timus @OS rise to incidents of
killing that wu doyloru, since WOknow that Ul0 us0 of for00
_ leads nowhere-is not duo o~iy lo Ihu~~~oshig of,thu frOutiCr
=~ :::~t#twacn the two counlrius. Tlds last act has nlorcly
aygravatad thc situation, Tho true causes lio olsowhoro; choy
Ua prinmily in tho ~rofusnl of the Inn Sn1ith rdghuo to =
conlply with tho decisions of tho Council concoming tho
pgli~U~m~fil!&ro.of Rhodosin.
--~
~~ ~.
113, Tho Prmcl~ dolcgntion hus u11coa5i11glystated tl1at
tha problcn1 is l~oliticnl nod that the bnslo rcsponsibiiity 110s
with Uta ndn1hiistoring Powor. Thoro coo bo uo solution
unless it is acccptod by tho 111a]ority. And thus the failure
of the Poarcu Conunission should not dlscouragc us. As wc
have stated buforo III the Council chambor, it had a
two,foh! mrit, 0~ tho ono hnnd it lowed thnt the United
Kingdom wns dctormhiod not (0 shirk its rcsponslbilitics;
and, 011 thu other, It allowed tbo cstablish111c11tof direct
contacts bctwecn tho ndmlnistoriny Powor ond the populn.
(Ion und, hi so doing, pvo sonic hoi10 to tho indigenous
ma]ority. WC also havo stutod III Uro pnst Ulut sn11ctio11s
111ust bo implcn1cntod, Althougli wo should not overestimate the cffcctivcncss of sucii nioasurOs, for which
Prance has votod over since 1968, and with which wo
scrupulously comply, tl~uy do contribute to placing tho
illegal r6@mo in on cmbnrrasdng situation and do hoip in
tho search for a solution,
114, The report of the Special Mission is to a Iargc Oxtcnt
dovoted to a11 ns.scssmOntof the needs of Znmbin to
mah~taia its trndo reintions. I wisi1 once sgalo to pny tribute
to the dotcrminolion shown by I’rosidunt Kaundn who,
despite the difflcultios confronted by his country, dacidod
novcrtholesi to tako up the challcngu of Inn Smith, rofushg
to take ndvantago of the reqming
of the frontlcr and
dccidinp to apply the su11ctio11s fully, dcspitc the doso
cconomlc dopondencc that tics Zambia to Rhodesia bccnusc
of 0 c0111111011 pllst.

I 17. Therofore, it appears thnt, from thib: standpoin$
our
nicotlnghnsbcon usoful. Tho Council llan takun direct
cogoizanco
of the difhlt situationin wNchZmbia finds
Itaolf, WO will hnvo moasurOd its ncods, and Governments
can Xl1eu uodcrtnko in 111oro thorough study of tha can118, The French dologatio;i \viii boar nli ~IIOSOfncts 111
mind whoa considuriag U1o draft rosolutlons that hnvo just
boon submitted to tho Council,
119. Sir Colin CROWO (United Kiagdor11): Mr. Prosidont,
wo shall iiav4 the proper opportuiiity to congrntulatc you
on tho assun~ption of thu office of Prcsldcnt when wo meet
la Panama; wo shnli bo hapily rho11 to do SO. Now I would
si111plyoxpross nly plunsurcc at your proscilco
iii tho Clinir
nud assure you of our co-operation III UIC conduct ,of your
arduous dutlos,
120. I should also like to congrntulnto our outgoing
I’roddont, Ambnssador Odcro-Jowl, for his decIslvc rind
cfficic11tcouduct of our business lust month.
121. Coming to UIOsubstam of tho mttcr, I should first
of ali iiko to associotc myself wit11 U1oso who have
congrutulatud the Special Mission on the six+cd and offlclcncy with which it has propared Its cxtrcmcly corn.
prchcnsivo n11d adntirablo report. WC nrc all grntofui to the
individunl mombcrs of the Mission, whose unsparing and
co11sci0r1tlousofforts have enabled us to rccclvo and discuss
Uioir raport in the rcintively short time before the Council
lunves for I’aoania.
122. No 0110 would dcscribo the Rhodesinn question as a
sinipio one, but I thiok it would i1elp to clarify our
apl)roach to UIC prosent situation if we disth~gulshed two
main nsimts: U1o immodinto offccts of ti1c events which
began in January with the closure of tho Rhodcsian.
Zambiao bordor by tho Smith r6gimc, OII UICono hod, and
the i111pllcntio11swhich those events my have for the wider
question of a suttlcm11t of tho Rhodosino probim, on the
other,
Obviously, thu two arc intor~connectod, but it is
bcttcr to consldcr the111 0110 nt a tine. On both these
questions 1 described my Govcmn1ont’s posltion in the
Conncfl on 29 Jn11uary /1687th rmefhg/ and 2 Pcbrunty
[1691st

I IS. The oxpurts stress the fact that the needs are groat.
Obviously, their study Is of lntcrost minly to the principal
trading pnrtnors of Znmbia und the foreign companlcs that
havo invostcd III thet country. Tho report speaks not only
-of the imn~Odin!o needs of the country but nlso of the morO
long&nn ConscquOnccs of Zambin’s givh~g up of the Boirn
rallroad for thO import and export of its products. Perhaps
wo ought not to loso sight of the fact tha!, within thrco
yuars, thanks to Tnnzpm, Znmbia will hnvo a mqro direct
accessto the soa.

tncotingl

s

123, As regards L!C CVCIHS cormctcd with tha closlog of
the border, my Government’s views uro ugnl11 described in
paragrnphs 39 and 46 to 48 of the report of the Special
Mission. We dcplorcd th\: ciosu~o of tho border by the
Rhodesinn r6gimc. Not only was this a blow at tho
economy of Zambia, but also this inow and other uctions
at about the same time rcprcsentcd n flcigbteniug of
tonsio11, Wo thcreforc wclcomd the revr:csuiof the Rhodcsinn r6glme’s actio11. Tills was n 111ovctowards a less tense
situntio~~ But, of course, WC rccognizcd 01u( this did not
eliminate the dlfficuitics which faced 111~C;~~VCIIIIIICII~
01
Zambia, We syn~imthrzcd wit11 the Govcr~mumt of %iu11bia
in thcsc difficultias nud rccognizcd that, ctmccrni11g a
qU0Stioo vitni for its cconon.y, Zainbiu could not aliow
itself to rcmah1 at risk,

116, The vory brlof ti111cthnt bus been given us to cxamlno
this report of tho Special Mission obviously does not allow
us to tako n positio~t now oo the rcqucastsit coatni~~s,These
must first bc rcforrcd to our Govcrmncnts, cspcdaily since
any decision with financial i~npiicaUons presupposes COIIsultation with the dif’forcnt respun&lc dcpnrtmcnts. But
WOcan Rssurutho roprescntutlva of Zumbin thut the concern
felt by the Vrcnch Govcrnmont about
ho dlfflcuitios
confronted by 111sGovcrnmcnt will load IIS to study the
documcut wit11 the best i)~&blu spirl1 of undorstandlng and
to exu111i11e
IIOWbest WCcao rcsimd 10 the appcai mdc by
the Zambian Govcrnmcnt to UK intcr~~ationui commur~ity.
It is in this spirit thut the French delcgution is ready to take
noto of the report beforu it,

124. We thorofore understund Za~:rblu’s decisions to free
itself of the dengor 111future of uny intcrfcrcntc witi~ 11s
13

&ado. Wo walcomcd t.h~ pro&
that M expert exambin- mighthnvobeenmomclosrlyoxprosscd,
It wouldhavebeen
Uon should bo undertaken by the Special Mission of tho
in closerconformity with what wasnctunllysuidby my
cconomlc conscqucnrar for Zambia of mrdntahting nlterMlnbterandwlth the actualposltionif thisparugmph
ha&
nntiye trade rOUtC&‘~ow
that WG have receivedthat IOpQPt,
begun01).the folIowIngIlnos:
-my Govoriunont wtil study it &scly--and .consldcr its.
reconuncndntionswlth sympathy, -~TV~~~ _-~-:~ -= ; -? “The Minlstorof Stntorcodlodjhot U\ollnitod Klug
.domrognrdodthe 1971I’roposols
for a SottlomorllPSa
” ‘12%’ AmyGovormnont’s vlowo on thelonger-term
affectsof --- ~pod boginning,
partlculorlyslncotheyhndonshrhlod
for
thcsodovolopmonts
havaalsobconmadequltoclearand1
the Orst thno mcognitlonof the prlnclplcof majority
wassorw to sco,from the spcachof tho wprosentntivo
of
ruIc. Although the Unltod KlngdomCovornmonthnd
Zombinycstordny/1692& nleerlrlg/,andfromthat of the
rospunslbtiity
for SouthoroRhodesIn,
It hudnot boonin a
roprosontatlvo
of the Sudantoday,that themstill appears
to
positIonto oxcrcisoresponsibilityintcrnrdlyfor many
b someniisundorstonding
about thorn, My Govcrsmunt ‘yearsandcouldnot forcensottlcn~cnt.”
doesnot rognrdthe starllspuo In Rhodesia
assatisfactory
nor Is it trying to protect the Smi$ rbgbno.My Govcrn- I think that would havo bcon II ruther more accuroto
ntont hasalreadygivt proof of! Its dosir0to achievea roprosentnthlof whatthe Mh~lstcrsaid.
scttlcmontnccoptablc
to thepoop10
of Rhodesia
asawhole,
127. I muststrass
ognnln:
only thosewho llvo ln Rhodosln
andIt mustbetho
126, Wo do lndcadf&r that a worsesltuatloncould can b~lngabouta puncofulsottlomc~~~,
dcvclop.It wasprcctselybccnusa
of this dfIngorthat wo aim of everybodyclsoto glvu thonlcvcry opportunityto
doplorodtheoctlonof UNRhodcslan
r6gbneIn closingthe doso.
borderwith ZambiP.Weamconcerned
that hrcldcnts
such
nsthismuyprcjudicothomorepositivusigns thnt therehave 128, Agninstthnt background,
my dolcgntlonwill study
bconof dovclopmonts
In relations
botweonall partieswlthln tho two draft resolutions
whichhovebeenaubmlttodthis
KhodoslaItself, on which wo are dependentfor furthar afternoon.My dolemUon
will wishto play OShelpfuland
progross
iu tho solutionof the Rhodcelan
problem.That Isn constructlvoa part 3s possible,
and 1 havealreadymudo
I shall,of
very dlfforont thlnn from wlshlngto maintainor snnctlfy somoprelbnhlnrycommentsto tho sponsors.
thesrutusquo,IISI wouldhavehopedthatnnyonewhohad course,seeklnstructlonsnnd hope to bc in P posltion
studiedmy Government’s
rtatonnnOs
on the subjectwould tomorrowto discuss
thedruft rcsolutlons
furthor,
mnllzo,Tho report of the SpcclalMlssionalsorecordsour
27re wrc&g rose at 6.25 pm
VIOWS
on thispoint, thoughI mustadmitthat paragraph
41

14
I.lIh InIlnltadNhm,

NW

York

rrlcrl SU,8.1.00(01eqlllvr:aIll
In otrlsrcurranclar)

73.ll2046-Docenhor

1976~-1,925
