UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 2

THREE HUNDRED AND NINETY.
EIGHTH MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York,

on Tuesday, 11 JanJtary 1949, at 3 p.m.
President: General McNAUGH70N (Canada).
Present: The representatives of the following
cotmtries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Sow

cialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
America.

United

States of

1. Prm'i8ionaI agenda (5/Agenda 398)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The Indonesian question.

2. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wa.; adopted.

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 2

TROIS.CENT.QUATRE.VINGT.DIX.
HUITIEME SEANCE
Tannc ,t Lake Success, New-Y()r!l,
le mardi 11 janvier 1949, d 15 heM'cs.

Preside-nt: Le general McNAUCiHTON (Canada).
Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovil,hique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Roywme-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(S/Agenda 398)
1. Adoption de J'ordre du jour.
2. Qllestion indonesienne.

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jOllr est Mopte.

3. Request of Burma to sit at the Se- 3. Demallde de la Birmanie tendant il
curity Council table during the disce que le representant de ce pays
cussion of the Indone5ian question
siege it la table du Conseil pendant
la discussion sur la question indonesienue
The PRESIDENT: Before calling to the Security
Council table the representatives of those Governments which have already participated in the
discussion on the Indonesian question under
Article 31 of the Charter, I sho111d like to dispose
of the question raised in the letter from the
permanent representative of Burma [S/1200J,
addressed to the President of the Security
Council. This letter is dated 11 Jan!.lary and has
been circulated to the members of the Security
Council.
.
As the members of the Council will observe,
the Government of Burma has requested the
privilege of participating in the discussions on
the Indonesian question in the Security Council
llnuer Article 31, for the reasons which are fnllv
set out in this letter.
.

\

Le PRE.SIDENT (tmdllit de l'angl.a.is): Avant
d'inviter a prend~e place ala table du Conseil
les rep resentants des Gouvemements qui ont deja
participe it la discussion sur la question indonesienne en vertu de l'Alticle 31 de la Charte, je
voudrais que le Conseil regIe la question soulevee dans la lettre' adressee ;1ll Presider~t du
Conseil de securite par le representant permanent de la Birmanie [S/1200). Cette lettre est
datee du 11 janvier et a ete distribuee aux mem·
bres du Conseil.'
Ainsi que les membres du Conseil pellvent le
:emarquer, le Gouvernement de la Birmanie a
5011icite, ell vel·tu de I'Article 31, le privilege de
participer, pour 1es raisons exposees clans cette
lettre, al1X clehats que le Conseil de securite
consacre it la question indonesienne.

2

I believe the members of the Security Council
would wish to accede to this request, in view of
the reasonable grounds which have been stated
and which are supPOlied in the application.
Tl1erefore, unless I hear any objectioo, I take
:it :hat tlte Council agrees that the representative
of Burma should -be invited to take his seat at
the Council table.

.Te pense que les membres ::Iu Conseil voudranl
bien acceder a cette dem;mde, ell raison de la
valeur des motifs sur lesquels elle s'appuie. C'est
pourquoi, s'il n'y a pas rl'o~je{'tion, je considererai que le Conseil accepte d'inviter le represelltan: de la Binnanie a pre;J.dre place a satable.

Ther{f being no discus~-ion,it was so derided.

, En l'absence de toutc ob;'ection, il eft est ainsi
decide.

4-, Continuation of the disell8siQn on the

4. Suite de la discussion sur la question
indoJ1F!sienne

Indonesian question
At tlle invitation of t}w Pr::sideni, Mr. Hood,
representative of Australia; Mr. Nisot, repre-

sentative of Belgium; Mr. So Nyun, representa~
tive of Aurma; Sir 13cnegal Rama Rau, representative of India; Mr, van Roijen, t'l1presentative
of the Netherlands; Mr, Ingles, representative of

the Philippims; and .Mr. Palar, rept'l!sr:nlatt.ve of
tl:e R{!P1~btic of Indonesia, took their Places at
the Sew.rity Council table.
The PRESlDENT: When we adjourned OUT discussion of the Indonesian question last Friday
[397th meeting}, I suggested that the members
of the Council would wish to have some time
to wnsider the importar.t statements made at that
meeting, particularly those made by the representative of the Netherlands and the representative
of Indonesia, and also to study the reports which
had just been received from our Committee of
Good Offices and :he Consular Commission which
are contained in documents Si1l89 and 8/1190.
Since then, three more messages have been received from the Corr.mittee of Good Offices,
These have been circulated as documents Sj1l93.
5/1194 and 5/1199. '[he last document reached
Lake Success only this morning and was issued
to members of the Securi~y Council fOT the
first time at this rne"eting. Members will note that
in document S/1193 ~hey may find a further
:eport from the Committee of Good Offices
dated 8 ]armary, stating that arrangements have
been made for the despatch of military observers
to the various areas in Java and in Sumatra,
beginning en the morning of January.
Keeping in mind this information and the
further information given in 5/1]99, we s~lall
now continne our discussion.
In accordance with our usual ctlstom, tnt"re
will be simultaneous interpretation for those
nations invited to participa:e under Article 31
and the usual consec:utive interpretation for members of the Security Council.
Mr. ]ESSUP (United States of America) : My
delegation has taken into account, as be President suggested, the statements which were made
~efore the S{"Cllrity C::otmcil at our last meeting.
My Government still can find no adequate justification for the military action taken by the Nether:ands ,in Indonesia.
In many important respects the reasons justifying tl1eir action Pl,t forth by the Netherlands
representative at the 389th meeting of the Security Council on 22 December in Paris, and
again here last Friday, are not supported by the
reports of the CColllmittee of Good Offices.

Sur l'invitation dl£ President, M, H o'Jcl, repreJ'enta-r.t de l'Australie; M. Nisct, representant
de la Belgique; M. So Nyun, representant de fa·
BirmCNni8; Sir Benegal Rama Rau, representa1lt
de l'lndt; M. vm, Roi;'en, represelJtant des PaysBas; M. 11:glas, reprasmtu1:t des Philippines, et
M. Palar, reprhmtalll de la. Republique d'ltuJo'lcsic, prcm~ent place d la table du Conseil.
Le PRESlOENT (traduit de l'angiais) : En ajournant la discussion de la question indonesienne
vendredi dernier I397blle seance}, j'ai estime
que les membres du Conseil vOltdraient sans doute
disposer d'uII certain temp~ pour examiner les
importantes declarations eritendues a cette seance,
en particulier celles des represelltants des PaysBas et de_ la Republique d'Indonesie. et aussi
pour Hudier les rappoTts des documents 5/1189
et 5/1190 qui "it:nllt:lll de nOllS etre communiques par notre Commission de bons offices et
par la Commission consula;re. Depuis lors, nous
avons re~u trois nouvelles :::ommunications de la
Commission de bons offices, les documents
5/1193, S/l194 et 5/1199. L<;; dern:cr de ces
documents n'est parvenu a Lake Stccess que
ce matin et n'a pu etre distribue aux membres
du Conseil de securite qu'au cours de la presente
seance. Les menbres remarqueront que le document 5/1193 contieul un Ilou"eau rapport dc la
Com:nissicn de jons offices en date du 8 janvier,
au il est dit que des dispcsitions ont ete pri~es
pour l'envoi d'abservateurs militaire: dans les
diffe~ents sectellts de Java et de Sumatra a partir
du 9 janvier au matia.
Compte tenu de ces renseignements et des
autres indications fournies dans le dQcument
5/1199, nous allons poursuivre la discussion.
Suivant la pratique habituelle, nous appliquerons pour les declarations des representnnts des
Etat!' invites a participer a la disc.ussion en vertu
de l'Article 31, le systeme de l'intel'pretation
simultanee et pOLlr celles des membres du Conseil,
le .<;ysteme de l'interpretation CQ::Isecutive.
M, ]ESSUP (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais); Comme 1'a suggere le President,

ma celegation a pris note des declarations faites
deva."lt le Conseil de S€curite au cours. de notre
dern:ere seance, Man bO'.lveroement considere
toujours que l'action militaire entreprise par Ies
Pays-Bas en Indonesie n'est pas justinee,
A bien des egards et S~lr des poi:1ts importants, !~.<; raiso,s invoquees a cet effet par le
representarlt des Pays~Ba; Jors de la 38geme
seance du Conseil de securite, tenue le 22 decembre, a P<'-ris, et, ici enci:,re, venclredi dernier,
ne sont pas corroborees par leg rapports de la
Commission de bons offices.

3

In our view, the Netherlands military action
is in conflict with the RUlVille Agreement (5/649,
Appe'ldi.~ Xl] and with the Security Council
resolution of 1 August [5/459] and 1 November
1947 [5/597]. As the delegation of the United
States has frequently made clear, it is our opinion
that these two Security Council resolutions were
adopted under the provisions of Article 40,
Chapter VII of the Charter, and that therefore,
in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter,
the Netherlands Government was and is under
obligation to comply with their provisions.
On the initiative of the United States [5/1128],
the Security Council was called into session in
Paris to consider the emergency created by the
military action of the Netherlands authorities.

,,

The United States, joining, with Colombia and
Syria, introduced a resolution [5/1142] which
called upon both parties to cease hostilities
forthwith and immediately to withdraw their
armed forces to their respective sides of the de~
militarized zones under the Renville Agreement
of 17 January 1948.
Unfortunately, the paragraph calling for the
withdrawal of forces was not adopted by the
Security Council. The Security Council, on 24
December [392nd meeting], did pass the resolution [5/1150] calling upon the parties to cease
hostilities forthwith and to release the political
prisoners who had been arrested since 18 December. Later, on 28 December [394th meeting],
the Security Council passed the additional resolution [5/1162] calling on the Netherlands
authorities to release the political prisoners within
twenty-four hours.
The Netherlands representative has a~snred
the Security Council that his Government has
complied with the cease~fire demand and with
the release of prisoners ordered by the Security
Council. Neither my Government nor the Committee of Good Offices considers that the Netherlands has done so. In that connexion, I should
like to read from the report of the Committee of
Good Offices [5/1189] which has been distributed
to us. In the conclusions of the report the Committee says:
"12. The Committee is not in a position to
report that there has been satisfactory compliance
with sub-paragraph (a) of the resolution of 24
December, which called on the parties to cease
hostilities.
"(A) The telegram dispatched to territorial
commanders in Java by the Chief of Staff of
the Royal Netherlands Indonesian Army at 1700,
29 December 1948 is, according to its tenns, for
information and cannot be construed as an oIdel'
to 'cease hostilities forthwith'. The dissemination of the order of the Commander-in-Chief to
territorial commanders in Java which confirmed
the fac:t that hostilities in Java had ended at
2400 of 31 December was begun at 1845, Batavia
time, 2 January. In Stlmatra where a 'special
emergency situation' existed, the par~l1el order
disseminated late on 4 January had an effectil'e
time of 1200,5 J<lnuary 1949.

,i
"(B) It is noted that these orders were issued
at a time when the 'operational phase' of mi1i~

, A notre avis; l'actlon militaire entreprise par.
les Pays-Bas est contraire a l'Accord du Ren'lIille [5/649, annexe Xl] et aux resolutions
du Conseil de s~urite en date du ler aout 1947
[5/459] et du 1er novembre 1947 [5/597].
Comme la delegation des Etats·Unis 1'a souvent
souligne, nous estimons que ces deux resolutions
du Conseil de securite ont etl~ adoptees en vertu
de l'Artic1e 40, Chapitre VII, de la Charte; donc;
aux termes de l'Article 25 de la Charte, le Gou~
vernement des Pays-Bas etait et rcste tenu de se
conformer aux dispositions de ces resolutions.
Sur l'initiative des Etats-Unis [S/1128], le
Conseil de securite a ete convoque a Paris pour
examiner la situation critique resultant de l'actioll
militaire entreprise par les autorites neerlandaises.
Conjointement avec la Colombic et la. Syrie,
les Etats-Unis ont presente un projet de resolution
[5/1142] invitant les deux parties a cesser les
hostilites sur-le-champ et a retirer immediatement leurs forces armees en de~a des limites
respectives des zones demilitarisees imposees par
l:Accord du Renville en date du 17 janvier 1948.
Malheureusement, le paragraphe tendant all
retrait des forces armees n'a pas ete adopte par
le Conseil de securite. Le 24 decembre [392~me
seance]. le Consei1 a adoptee la resolution
[5/1150] invitant les parties a cesser les hostilites sur le champ et a liMrer les prisonniers
politiques arretes depuis le 18 decembre. Plus
tard, le 28 decembre [394eme seance], le Conseil
de securite a adopte une resolution additionnelle
[5/1162] invitant les autorites neer1andaises a.
liberer les prisonniers politiql1es clans les vingtquatre heures.
Le representant des Pays-Bas nous a assure
que son Gouvernement s'est conforme a I'ordre
donne par le Conseil de securite de eesser le fell
et de liberer les prisonniers. Mon GOllvernement
et la Commission de bons offices estiment que les
Pays-Bas n'en ont rien fait. Je voudrais, a ce
propos, citer un passage du rapport [S/1189],
de la Commission de bons offices, qui nous a ete
distribue. Je lis, dans les eonc1usions dudit rapport:
"12. La Commission n'est pas en mesure de
declarer, dans le present rapport, qu'une suite
satisfaisante a ete donnec aux dispositions de
l'alinea a) de la resolution du 24 decembre, qui
invitait les parties a eesser 1es hostilites.
HA) Le telegramme adresse le 29 decemb~e
1948 a 17 heures, aux commandants de tertltoire~ a Java par le chef d'etat-major de l'armee
royale des Pays·Bas en Indonesie, a ete envoye
pour information, d'apres la maniere dont il est
redige et ne peut etre interprete comme un
'ordre'de "cesser les hostilites sur-le-champ".
L'ordre du commandant en chef aux commandants de territoires a Java, ordre qui confinnait
le fait que les hostilites a Java avaient pris fin
le 31 decembre, a minuit, a commence a etre
transmis le 2 janvier a 18 h. 45, heul'e de Bat~­
via. A Sumatra, ou existait nne "situation partlcuW:rement critique", un ordre similaire, transmis
tard dans la journee du 4 janvier, fixait la date
et l'heure d'execution au 5 janvier 1949, a
12 heures.
"B) Il est a noter que ces ordres oht ete donnes au moment ou la "phase pratique" des acti·

4

tary activities presumably had been c.o~pleted.
The oraers noted respectively tll2.t hostilities had
terminated on 31 Decembe~ 1948 in Java and Qn
5 January 1949 in Sumatra" but c~argcd the
troops to 'carry out action agamst roymg groupS,
bands or individuals, who attempt to c~use !.lnre~t
or, as was stated by our representatlVe to the
Security Council',-this is in terms of the Netherlands statement-'to act against disturbLTIg- ele~
roeots, who either individually or collectively endanger public seCllrity or interfere with or prevent
the supply of food and other essential commod~­
ties to the needy populiltion'. The orders permlt
the continuation of the very type of military
action that would be required against the guerrilla
resistance likely to be offered by regular or irregular Republican forces.

"(C) As a result of the immobilization of its
military observers, the Committee h<.ls no firsthand information as to the effect of the orders
discussed above."
I might interpolate that the lack of information
of the Committee was due to the fact that the
military observers were not allowed at that
time to move out into the field for purposes of
observation. The report continues:
"(D) The Committee is of the opi~iOl.\ that
these orders issued more than a week after the
adoption of the resolution of 24 December, and
expressed as they were, cannot be looked npon
as satisfactory compliance with sub-paragraph
(a) of the resolution.
"(E) There is no channel available to tlte
Committee for dissemination of the resolution
of 24 December to the Government or to the
comomnders of the Republican Army.

"13. Sub-paragraph (b) of the Security
Council's resohltion of 24 December calling for
the immediate release of the President of the
Republic: alld other political prisoners has 110t
been implemented. So far as the Committee is
aware, President Soekarno, Vice-President Ratta,
and the other members of the Republican Government who were captured by Netherlallds
forces on 19 Decelllber are still under detention ...
"15. Despite the statements made to the Security Council by the Netherlands representative
on 27 and 29 December. the Committee has not
been in a position to make independent investigations of any kind in the field for the purpose
of carrying out its functions under the resolution
of 24 December. It has been heard unofficially
and infonnally that certain military and naval
liaison officers attached to seme of the consulan
officials in Batavia took advantage of a Netherlands offer to conduct tbem on a tour of some
of the mtlitary areas on 5 and 6 January. These
officers are not the military observers of the
Committee of Good Offices and their observations
are not avnilable to the Committee, even if their
tour was the type of field investigation and
observation required by the functions of the
Committee."

vites militaires etait probablement athevee. Ces
ordres indiquaient que les hostilites avaient pris
fin le 31 decembre 1948 Java et le 5 janvier
1949 a Sumatra, mais chargeaient les troupes
d'''agir contre les groupes de partisans, les bandes
ou les individus qui ten~ent de provoquer des
troubles OU, comme I'a declare notre representant au Conseil de securite, d'agir contre les elements perturbateurs qui, so it individuellement,
soit collectivement, mettent en danger la securite
publique, ou encore entravent ou empechent la
distribution d'aliments et d'autres denrees essentielles a la population necessiteuse". Ces ordres
autorisaient done la prolongation du type meme
d'ac.tion militaire qu'on aurait a engager pour
mettre fin aux operations de guhillas auxql1elles
se livrcraient probablement le~ forces reoublicaines regulieres DU irregulieres.
"e) Etant donne l'immobilisation de ses observateurs militaires, la Commission ne dispose
d'aucun ren~eignement de premiere main en Cl"
qui concerne les consequences des ordres <1iscutes ci-dessus."
]1". pourrais ajouter iei que, si la Commission
manquait de renseignements, c'est parce que,
Cl". moment~la, les observateurs militaires n'etaient
pas autorises a se rendre sur 1es lieux d'operations pour y elfeduer des observations. Le rapport poursuit:
"D) La Commission estime que ees ordn~s.
donnes [Jlus d'une semaille apres l'adoption de la
resolution du 24 decembre et dans les terllles
ou ils sont rediges, ne peuvent etre consideres
comme une e..xecution satisfaisante de I'alinea a)
de la resolution.
"E) La Commission ne dispose d'aucun moyen
pour transmettre la resolution du 24 decembre
au Gouvernemellt ou atlX chefs !llilitaires de
I'annee republicaine.
"13. L'a1inea b) de [a resolution du Conseil
de securite en date du 24 decembre, qui demande
la mise en liberte immediate du President de la
Repuhlique et des autres prisonniers politiques,
n'a pas ete execute. JIlsgu'ici, la Commission sait
selllement que le President Soekaruo, le VieePresident Hatta et les autres membres du Gouvernement republicain, captures par les forces
netlrlandaises le 19 deeembre, sont toujours
detenus ...
"15. En depit des declarations que le representant des Pays-Bas a faites an Conseil de seenrite les 27 et 29 deeembre, la Commission n'a
pas ete en rnesure de procMer cl. des enquetes
independantes sur place en vue de remplir 1es
fonctions que 1ui confie la resolution dtl 24 decembre. Les autorites neerlandaises n'ayant pas
Zllltorise ou facilite le retour a leur poste des
observatenrs militaires de la Commission . . . ,
eeux~ci n'ont pu se livrer a a1.1cune observation.
Ii nous est revenu, de source officieuse, que certains offic.iers de liaison de I'armee et de la
marine, detaches attpres de certains cOllsnlats it.
Batavia, ont profite d'nne ofire des Pays-Bas qui
leur ava;ent propose de les emmener visiter certaines des zones mi1itaires, les 5 et 6 janvier. Cl'S
officiers ne sont pas des observateurs militaires
de la Commission de bans offices, qui ne peut
connaitre le resultnt de leurs observations ffieme
si la visite qll'ils ont hite constitue le type cl'enquete et d'observatiOllS sur place qu'exige l'exe~
cution des fonctions de In Commission,"

a

a

5
I believe it is fair to say that, in a situation of
this kind, the Security Council must place
reliance on the report of its own agency in the
field, particularly if it conflicts with a report
from one of the parties to the dispute.

Je crois qu'il est normal que, dans nne situation de cette nature, le Conseil de securite ajoute
foi au rapport de l'organe qU'il a envoye sur
place, surtout lorsque ee rapport contredit celui
de l'une des parties au differend.

The continuance of military action of the
Netherlands authorities after the adoption of the
Security Council resolution of 24 December' was
clearly an act of defiance on the part of the
Netherlands authorities. No excuses offered by
the Netherlands Government can conceal the fact
that it has failed to comply with the Security
Council demands both in refusing to order a
cease-fire immediately and in refusing to release
the political prisoners immediately.

En poursuivant lellr action militaire apres
l'adoption par le Conseil de securite de la reso·
lution du 24 decembre, les autorires neerIandaises font nettement un geste de deri. Tous les
pretextes invoques par le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas ne sauraient dissimuler le fait qu'i1 ne
s'est pas conforme aux ordres du Conseil de securite, puisqu'iI a refuse a la fois d'ordonner de
cesser le feu sur-le-champ et de liberer immedia·
tement les prisonniers politiques.

In the opinion of the Government of the United
States, the representative of the Netherlands has
failed to relieve his Government from the serious
charge that it has violated the Charter of the
United Nations.

Le Gottvernement des Etats-Unis estime que
le representant des Pays-Bas n'a pas reussi a
laver son Gouvernement de l'accusation grave
d'avoir viole la Charte des Nations Ulties.

The purpose of ~he Security Council ceasefire resolution of 24 December was to stop the
fighting in Indonesia immediately so that the
dispute could be settled not by force but by the
processes of peaceful settlement enjoined on
Member States by the Charter. Even though
members of the Security Council were well aware
that it was the Netherlands authorities which had
initiated tfle resumption of military action, the
resolution of the Security Council called on both
parties to order a cease·fire. In such situations
as those which existed at that time, this is an
appropriate form of Security Council resolution,
since the cessation must be mutual, no matter
who is responsible for starting the fighting. It
must be assumed that, in ordering a cease-fire,
the Security Council could only have intended
that such an order would apply equally and
simultaneously to both sides. The Council could
not have expected one side to comply unilaterally
while the other considered itself free to comply
at such a time and in such a way as it saw fit.
The continuance of military action by the NetherLands forces until all military objectives had been
taken cannot be regarded as compliance with the
cease~ti.re order. Certainly the reservation of the
right by one side to use its own forces in the
territory of the other to eliminate the anned
resistance of that other side which may thus far
have escaped destruction, cannot be regarded as
compliance with the cease-fire resolution.

La resolution du Conseil de securite, en date
du 24 decembre, ordonnant la cessation des hosti.:.
lites, avait pOllr but de mettre immediatement
fin aux combats cn Indorresie de maniere a pouvoir resoudre le differend, non par la force mais
par les moyens pacifiques auxquels la Charte
enjoint nux Etats Membres de recourir. Les
membres du Conseil savaient pertinemment que
c'etaier.t les autorites neerlandaises qui avaient
pris J'initiative d'une reprise de l'activite mili~
taire; la resolutiondu Comeil de securite invite
pourtant les deux parties a ordonner un "cessezle-feu". Etant donne la situation a l'epoque, le
Conseil avait raison d'agir ainsi, puisque les
hostilites doivent cesser de part et d'autre, quel
que soit ce1ui qui les a declenchees. Donc, en
ordonnant de cesser le feu, le Conseil de securite entendait forcement qu'un teI ordre s'appliquat e.galement et simultanement aux deux parties, 11 ne pouvait entrer dans les vues du Conseil
qu'une seule des parties se con forme a SOLt ordre,
alors que l'alltre se considerait comme libre
d'ob6ir quand elle le jugerait bon et i sa guise.
Puisque les autorites neerlandaises ont poursuivi
les operations militaires jusqu'a la conquete de
tous les objectifs militaires, on ne S311rait dire
qu'elles ant respecte l'ordre de cesser le feu. 11
est evident qne,- si l'une des deux parties se
reserve le droit d'utiliser ses forces sur le territoire de l'autre partie pour eliminer chez celle-ci
toute resistance armee qui aurait jusqJ,le-la
echappe a la destruction, on ne saurait dire qu'elle
s'est conformee a la resolution ordonnant de
cesser le feu.

Taking these factors into account, I am sure
that the Security Council has no intention of
approving action cOllsolidating military victories
which themselves were gained as a result of open
defiance of an Grder of the Security Council.

Pour toutes ces raisons, je suis persuade que
le Conseil de securite n'entend nullement approuver des actes qui consolident des victoires militaires remportees au mepris evident de ses ordres.

Probably the most striking and clearest disregard of the orders of the Security Council is
to be found in the refusal of the Netherlands
authorities to release President Soekarno, Prime
et Minister Hatta and the other leading officials of
~ the Government of the Republic of Indonesia.
Ik Quite aside from the disregard of the Security
~ Council resolution of 28 December [S/1164]
1ft which required that these prisoners should be
j'(released within twenty-four hours, there is the
'eJ present fact these persons are still not at liberty.

Ce qtli constitue la meconnaissance la plus
neHe et la plus evidente des ordres du Conseil
de securite, c'est probablement le refus des autorites neerlandaises de 1iberer le President 50ekarno, le President du Conseil Hatta et les autres
principaux dirigeants de la Republique d'Inclonesie. Non seulement on rt'a tenu aucun compte
de la resolution du Conseil de securite en date du
28 decembre [5/1164] exigeant la mise en Iiberte
de ces prisonniers dans les vingt-quatre heures,
mais,encore ccs personnes, al'heure actuelle, n'ont

6
The Security Council car not be expected to accept
the view of the Netherlands Government that
these p:-isoners have been released because they
are given a certain libe~ty of movement on the
islanu of Dangla. In an archipelago cOlnpri~ing
thotlsands of islandsl liberty of movement which
is restricted to a single island, and one which, I
might <!odd, was under Netherlands control even
under the Renv.lle Agr~ement, canttot be regardQd
as being_ in conformity with the Security Council
resolution of 24 and 28 DecelJlber.

I hav-e just seen dowment 5/1199 containing
a further report f:-om the Committee of Good
OfriC(".3 conccrnitlg the question of the r'll"tention
of President Soekarnc, Prime Minister Hatta
and other leading officials of the Republic of
Indonesia.
It appears from this document that there i~
some question as to the present whereabouts or
these officials, but I fmd nothing in the text of
ilie letter from the Netherlaflds delegation of 11
January, which is reproduced in that document,
to alter the essential facts and the conclusions
from those facts which I haye just dmwn.
The clear intent uf the resolutions of the SecurIty Council on this point was that the high
officials of the Republican Government should be
restored to a position in which tlley would be
free to exercise their governmental authority.
The minimum which would Seem to be called for
at this moment is that the President and other
in~erned officers of the Republic sho·.1ld be allowed
to ret'.lrn to their capital and to exercise their
appropriate fUllctions :here, free from the const:-aint of any occupying anny. They should be
free to establish and tr.aintain contact with other
officiais of tbeir Government. They should also
be free to provide their own fcrces for the maintenance of law and order in ]ogjakarta.

pas e:e liberees. On ne pel.t demander all Conseil

de s'associer :lUX vues du G()ltverlleoent Ileer~
landais qui estime que ces prisonnies ont ete
liben':s, pllisqu'ils jouissent d'une cert2.ine liberte
de mottvement dans 1'1]e de Bangka. Lorsque,
clans un archipel comprel1ant des miJ:iers cl'iles,
on accorde une liberte de mouvemt:n: limitee
llne ~eule Ile, laquelle, soit dit en passant, se trouvait sous cnrltr61e n/'erl:mclais meme aux termes
cc l' Accord du RC1wil!e, nul ne saurait considerer
roue cette fa~on d'ag:r est confoi1ne aux resobtions dot COllseil de securite en date des 24 et
28 dCcClUbrD.
Je viens de lire le document SlIlfY) qu~
contient un nouveau rapport de la Commission
de bans offices sm la Question de la detention
ell{ Fresident Soekarno, du President du Conseil
Hath et d'autres hauts fonctioJ1naires de la Republique d'Indcnesie.
I1 ressort ue cc document qu'on ne sait pas
t'.xac'ement ou se trouvent actuellemellt ces perscmnalites; mais je ne trouve den, dans le texte
de la lettre de la delegat:on des Pays-Bas datee
dll 11 j<:.uvier et reproduite dans ce document,
qui change quoi que ~e soit a l'es3entiel des faits
et aux c::mdusions q:le je viens d'en tirer.
A cet eg<!rd, le Conseil de secll~ite voulait
evidemment que, camme suite ses resolutions,
:es fonctionnaires du Gouvernement de la Republique soient mis de nouveau
merne d'exercer
:ellr~ fOllctiullS gOllvernclnentalcs. II semble qLl~
le minimum que 1'an puisse atte:1.dre en ce moment, c'est que le President et les nutres fonctionnai~s de la RepubJique internes, aient la faculte
de ~etaurner dans leur capilale et d'y excrcCl:"
les fanctiom qui Ieurs reviennent, i l'abri de
toute contrainte de :a part d'tme armee d'occupatbn. Ils deyraient etre
meme d'etablir et de
l11aintemr le contac: avec les autres fonctionnaites de 1ear Gouvernement. Ils devraient egnlement aVOtr la faclllte de constitue: les forces
necessai~es au maint;en de I'ordre public
Djokjakarta.

a

a
a

a

a

Further, my Government, in considering the
Netherlands-Indonesian dispute, cannot hut recall
a history af non~co-operation on the P3.rt of the
Ketherlands in the work of the Committee of
Good Offices in Indonesia. The failure to achieve
a political settlement and the protracted negotiations which followed the signing of the Renvil!e
Agreement ir: January 1948 broaght about in
IndOl·,esia a'O increased tension between the
Netherlands and the Republic, with a conseqaent
increase in f,rovocative incidents which sorely
strained the tmce. The bill of particulars for
these acts av~r a period of mont[lS is recorded
il1 the reports of the Committf'e of (;00<1 Offices
to the Security Cotmtil. From these reports it
appears that even prior to the resumption of
military action against tIle J(epubJ:c, the Netherlands pursued a policy whi<:h had the ~ffect of
weakening the Republic, working unnecessary
IJardship on the population, isolating the RepublicanGovern:nent economically and politicaliy,
and presenting it with a prefabricated interim
administration for In<!onesia with which it was
to associate itself but whic11 it had no part in
forming.

En outre, lorsqu'il considere le differend qui
oppose les Pays-Bas et l'Indonesie, mOll Gouvernerr;ent ne peut uublier que les Pays~Ba.s n'ont
pas aide aux travaux de la Commission de bons
offices en Indone.sie. Il n'a pas ete possible
d'aboutir
un regiement politique, des negociations interminables ont suivi la s:gnature de
I' Accord du Renv-ille en janvier 1948. 11 en est
resdte, en Indonesie, un surcroit de tension entre
les Pa}'s~Ba5 et la Republique avec, pour conseql1ence, llD surcroit d'illcidents de cnractere pro~
vocateur qui ant mis la treve a. une rude epreuve.
Le deUlil de ces incidents, s\~tendant sur une
periode de plusieurs mois, figure dans les rap·
ports adresses au Conseil de seccrite par la
Commission de bans offices. I1 ressort de ces
rapports glle, metTle avant la reprise de l'activite
militaire cantre la Repllblique, les Pays-Bas ant
pocrsuivi une poHtique ayant pour diet d'affaiblir
la Republique, d'imposer i la population des
sacrifices inutiles, d'isoler econorniquement ~t
politiqucment le GOl1vernement rcptlblicain et de
le doter, pOUr diriger l'Indonesie, d'une administration interimaire avec laquelle il aurait eu
c?ra~orer suns avoir pu participer
son orga.
ntSatlOn.

My Govcrr.ment considers these acts and the
failure of the Netherlands to enter into bona fide

Man Gouvernement estime que ces actes et le
fait que les Pays-Bas n'unt pas a vrai dire entre~

a

a

a

7
negotiations since May of last year to be indicative of a reluctance to utilize the procedure for
pacific settlement made available by the United
Nations, and to be in conflict with both the spirit
and the letter of the Linggadjati 1 and the Rrnvillc
Agreements. From a purely pragmatic point of
view, it should be [Jointed out that the quick
military successes of the Netherlands forces will
not effect a solution of the Indonesian problem.
My Government cannot associate itself with any
aspect of the Netherlands military action. The
use of force in this situation makes the solution
of the problem far more complex and difficult.
The problem remains a matter of international
concern with which the Security Council must
continue to deaL It cannot be solved if we begin
on the basis of acceptance of the fruits of the
illegal use 0 f force.
The Republic of Indonesia represents the
largest single political factor in the projected
federation and should therefore have a voice in
the formation of the federation. The Republic
has a two-fold nature. First, it is a political
entity; secondly, it is the heart of Indonesian
nationalism. This latter attribute cannot be
. eliminated by any amount of military fort::e, The
Netherlands Government may find that, far from
assuring law and order in the Indies, the course
upon which it has embarked may instead let loose
forces of terror, chaos and sabotage It may well
be that the only victory will be that of the forces
of anarchy.

My Government is of the opllllOn that real
pe<.H.:e in Indonesia can be expected only if there
is a settlement of the political issues on the basis
of the principles and procedures agreed to by the
parties in the Linggadjati and Renville Agree~
rnents [S/649, Appl'ltdices Xlll and Vlli] and
Under the auspices of the United Nations. The
responsibility for the future rests in the first
instance on the Netherlands authorities. The
Security Council has a right to assume that the
Netherlands Government will, in accordanc~ with
its obligations, bring to an end its defiance of
the Security Council and give its full co-operation towards reaching a fair and reasonable solu~
tion of the Indonesian qtlestion.

I
I
I

My Government has, over a substantial period
of time, devoted serious thought to this problem
and to its proper solution. Our views are containerl in the plan which our representative on
the Committee of Good Offices submitted to the
two parties on 10 September of last year and
which was accepted by both of them as a basis
for the resumption of negotiations, If Indomsian leaders were restored to their rightful
position as the responsible representatives of the
Republic of Indone~iaJ free to conduct the affairs
of their Government and to negotiate freely with
the Netherlands Government concerning the
future of Indonesia, and if these two Governments could proceed to negotiate on the basis of
this proposal in accOI'dance with their earlier
undertakings, this would be a notable contribution
to the ultimate solution of the Indonesian
problem.
• See Political Events in the Rrp"bl,c of b:dalle.,;:a,
Netherlands Information Bureau, New York, page .34.

pris des negodations depuis le mois de mai de
l'annee derniere, temoignent de pen d'empressen1ent a recourir a la procedure de reglements
pacifiques offerte par l'Organisation des Nations
Unies et Us sont, en otttre, contraires a l'esprit
et a la lettre des accords de LinggadjatP et du
Renville, D'un point de vue purement pratique,
i1 y a lieu de souligner que les rapides. sl\ct::es
militaires des forces neerlandaises ne resoudront
pas le prob1eme indonesien. Mon Gouvernement
ne peut approllver sous aucun de ses aspects
I'activite miIitaire entreprise par les Pays-Bas.
En une telle situation, le recours it la force rend
la solution du prob1eme bien plus complexe et
diffiei1e, Le probleme demeure une question d'jnteret international dont le Conseil de securite
doit rester saisi. 11 ne peut etre resoln si nous
partons du principe que 1es avantages obtenus par
un recours illegal a la force demeurent acquis.
La Repub1ique d'Indonesie constitue l'entite
politique la plus importante au sein de la Hde·
ration envisagee; elle doit donc avair son mot a
dire d:ms la formation de cette Federation. La
Republique a une double importance. Elle est
d'abord une entite politique; elle est ensuite
le cceur du nationalisme indonesien. La force
atmee, si puissante soit-eUe, ne peut lui enlever
ce dernier caraetere. Le Gouvernement des PavsBas decouvrira peut-etre que, lain d'assu~er
l'ordre public aux lodes neerlandaises, la politique dans laquelle il s'est lanct peut dechainer
la terreur, le chaos et le sabotage, It se peut
meme que ce soit en fin de compte l'anarchie qui
triomphe.
Mon Gouvernement est d'avis qu'on ne peut
esperer nne paix: veritable en Indonesie que si
les differends politiqnes sont n~gles d'apres les
principes et 1es procedures acceptes pal' les parties dans les accords de Linggadjati et du Ren~
viUe [S/649, atme;res XIII et VIll] et sous les
auspices de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
L'avenil' depend, au premier chef, des autorites
neerlandaises. Le Conseil de securite est en droit
d'attendre du GOltvernement des Pays-Bas que,
canformement a ses obligations, il cesse de le
braver et lui apporte son entiere cooperation Jlour
aboutir a une solution juste et raisonnable de la
question indonesienne.
Pendant un temps assez long, mOll Gouvernement a murement etudie ce prob1eme et la solution qu'jJ convient d'y apporter. Notre point de
vue est expose dans le plan que notre representant a la Commission do,: oons offices a presente
aux deux parties le 10 septe.mbre de I'annee derniere, et qu'elles ont accepte toutes deux comtne
base de la reprise des negociations. Si les dirlgeants indonesiells etaient reintegres dans leur
situation legitime de repl'esentaTIts re5ponsables
de la Republiql1e cJ'Indonesie, lib res de gerer les
affaires de leur GOtlver11ement et de negocler sans
entraves avec le GOl1verr,ement des Pays-Bas au
sujet de l'avenir de I'Illdonesie, et si ces deux
Gouvernements pouvaient ensuitc enlamer des
negociations sur la base de cette pmposition,
conformetnent a lell1's engagements anterieurs,
cela contribuerait beaucoup a la solution finale
du prob1eme indonesien.
'Voir The Political Evenls ia tht Reimblic of JI,do~

~lesia, public par le Bureau d'informatioll des
~e\... ~York, page 34.

Pays-Bas,

8
·.A first and fundamental step in this direction
should be the fixing of a definite date for the
holding of e.lections throughQut all Indonesia with
a view to establishing the foundations of the
United States of Ir.donesia. Secondly, and also
of fundamental imoortance, is the fixing of a
firm date for the transfer of sovereignty from
the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the United
States of I:1donesia. The elections should be held
for the purpose of choosing an assembly to repre~
sent the people of Indonesi:l as a provisional
legislature .and, at the same time, as a constituent
assembly for the pu~pose of cr8Wing, up a constitution. T~e elections should be held by secret
ballot with all the safeguards necessary to ensure
a vot~ free from any coercion. Freedom of
assembly, speech and publication must be guaranteed, as provided in the Reltville Agreement.

Le premier pas essent:e! dan.s ,cette dir~ctiol\
serait de fixer une date determmee pour 10rganisation d'elections dans toute l'Indonesie, en vLle
de jeter les fondatio~s des Etat~-Uni~ d'Indonesk. n faudrait enSltlte - ce qUi est egalement
essentiel - et;.Lblir une elate ferUle i laquelle la.
souverainete serait tran:sreree du royaume des
Pays-Bas aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesie. ~l;~ elections devraient avoil' pO:.Jr but de c:hOlS1r une
assemblee qui represente le peup1e d'Indonesie ell
tant qt.:'organe 1egislatif provisoire et, a la fois,
ell tant qu'assemb](~e constituante ayant mission
cl'elaboreT un!': constitlltion. Les elections dcvraient avoir lieu au scrtltin secret et r1vec. toutes
le~ garanties n~ce~saires pour .que !e vote. SO!t a
I'abri de toute contrainte. Les libertes de reUnion,
de parole et de la presse doivent etre .garanties,
aimi que le prevoit l'Accord du Retlv,tlle.

This programme contemplates a tennination of
t1-:e type of military oCCllpation of the country
which has been brought about by Netherlands
rr:qitary action. The withdrawal of the Netherlands armies should hegin at the earliest possible
date and as r:tpidly as the need for the preservation of law and order permits. The occupation
rr_ust be completely terminatec. before an effective
traosfer et sovereignty can take place. My
Government believes tlmt the l~ngth of time which
should ela.:Jse between the p~esent moment and
the date when the elections should take place,
arid also the date of transier of scvereignty,
should be c:alcu1ated in term~ of months, not in
terms of years. As soon as elections have been
held and a provisional regin:e set up, authority
should be turned over progressively to the new
regime by the Netl1erlands Government, and the
transfer sr.ou1d have been completed by the time
ar which sovereignty is assu:ned by be United
States of Indonesia.

Ce programme envisage la fin du genre d'occllpation militaire a laC]t\elle l'activite .militail'e (}es
Pays-Bas a somnis le pays. Le retralt des ~rmee:s:
neerlandaises devrait com:nencer le plus tot possible et aussi rapidement que le pennet le mailltien de l'ordre public. Il faut que l'evacl\atiol1.
soit chose. faite avant de proceder all transfel-t
de souverainete. Mon Gouvernement estime C]\ie
le dela: qui nOllS separe de la dute des elections
et aussi de la date du transfert de souverainete
doit etre de l'ordre de quelques mois et qu'il
ne saurait etre question d'annees. Aussitot apres
les elections et la creation d'un' regime provisoire.
le Gouvernel11ent des Pay~-Ba~ de.vrait pelt iI.
pell p<.sser les pouvoirs a ce norveau regime;
le transfert devrait etre acheve au moment ou
les Etats-Unis (l'Indonesif' aSSUnlf'ront l~ sotlverainete.

As I stated earlier, the problen1 of Indonesia
remains a matter of interna:ional concern with
which the Security COltnci1 must continue to
deal. The carrying out of the steps necessary
for the ultimate transfer of the sovereignty of
the United States of Indonesia. should, we believe,
be accomp:ished under the auspices of the United
Nations and with the help cf the machinery it
affords. The Committee of Good Offices, in its
report of 7 January [S/1189], has appropriately
pointed Ott, that "it does not wish to be j)l1t in a
positiolJ of seeming to apprme by its participa~
tion or e~'en its authentication, any settlement
based on force rather than on true negotiation".

Comme. je l'ai deja dit, le pmbl~e de l'Indone-sie reste une question d'interet internaf.onal
dout'le Conseil de securite doit demeurer saisi.
Les mesures necessaires pour le transfert de la
souverainete allx Et;:tts-Ul1is d'Indonesie <ievraient, pensons-nous, etre appliqnees sous I('s
auspices de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
a l'aide des moyens qu'elle fournit. La Commission de bons offices, dans son rapport du 7 janvier [5/1189J a souligne opportunement qu'elle
"ne desire pas se trollver dans line situation telle
qu'elle paraitrait approuver, par participation directe OLl par acquiescement, tm reglement hase
sur la fonne et non sur des negoeiations veritables".

The Committee of Good Offices was created
originally as an instrument to further free neQ'Otiations between the parties. The action of the
Netherlands has temporarily suspended the Committee's ability to carry out that function but
the Cound's agencies in tJ-:e field remai'n in
existence, ready to c~rry out -:ny task assigned
to them by the Secunty eoured. No t~uporary
suspension of the functioning of an agency of
the Security Council can operate to ren-lOve an
established interest of the United Nations in
dealing with a situation to which the Security
Cound has already addressed itself.

La Commis:sion de bons offices :L ete con~Uc,
des t'origine, comtne un moyen de faeiliter de
1ibres negociations entre les parties. L'actioll
entreprise par les Pays-Bas a pour :tn temps mis
la Con:mission dans l'incapacite de remp1ir ce
role, mais i1 existe tottjours sur place des organismes ~elevant du Conseil de secl1l'ite qui restent
pre.ts a accomplir les taches qlle le Conseil tellr
assigne. Le fait que le fonctlonnement d'un org<'.nisme du Conseil de securtte soit temporairement
sL1spendu ne saun.it du meme coup effacer l'inte~
ret qu: l'qrganisation des Nations Unies porte a
une SlttmtlOn clo:1t le CO::J.seil de' securite s'est
deja preoccupe.

In this connexion it is necessary to caB attention to the report of the Committee of Good
Offices which indicates that the Ne:her1ands

A cet egard, je rappe1.1e qlle le rapport d~ la
Commission de bans offices indiC]ue que 1es autorites neerlandaises ont pris stir elles de poser la

9
authorities took upon themselves the authority
to question whether the military observers were
reporting to the Consular Commission or to the
Committee of Good Offices. The account of this
is to be found in document 5/1189, in a letter of
4 Jalluary 1949 from the Netherlands delegation
acldre~sed to the Committee of Good Offices,
This is not a question which concerns the Netherlands authorities. The Security Council can
utilize any agency which it considers appropriate,
and it is the obligation of a Member of the United
Nations to co-operate with any and all agencies
operating- under Security Council instnlctions. It
cannot he denied that despite the efforts of some
Governments of States which are members of the
Scurity Council. this hody has not vet succeeded
in m·ercomillg" the obstadt,s which have been
placed in the path of achieving a peaceful settlement in IndOlwsia. The responsibility of the
Netherlands (;overmuent for this lack of Sl1ccess
has already been made dear. Another obstacle
has bcen creatc(l lw the action of n Memher of
the l. l1ikd NationS" which has, in many parts of
'
the world,
sougIlt to obstrtlct the Sllcccssful
operation of the United Nutions. I refer to the
Union of So\'iet Socialist Repllblics.

question de savoir si les observateurs militaires
faisaicnt rapport la Commission consu1<1ire ou
l,a Commission de bans offices. QU'OIl se rapporte
egalement aa document S/1189, qni contient
Hnc lettre d\1 4 janvier 1949 adressec la Commission de bons offices par la delegation des PaysHas. Cette question ne concerne pas les alltorites
needand;lisc$, Le Conseil de secllrile peut, s'il le
jugc utile, recourir aux services de n'importe
que! organismc et lcs :illelllbres de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies ont le dcvoir de collaborer
a\·ec tous le$ organismes agissant sur les instructi0I1S du COllsei! de securite. On ne pent nier
qU'Cll d~pit des efforts des Gouvcrnements de
certains Etats membres dll Conseil de securite,
cc demier n'a pas encore reussi a smmontcr les
obstacles l1ui ant ete semes sur la voie du reglement pacifique de la situation en Il1donesie, On a
Illontre dej,\ en qllOi le Gouyernement des PaysRas etait respollsable de cet insucces. Un autre
obstacle a ete cree par l'action d'un Membre de
l'Organisation des Nations Unics qui, en hictl
des regions clu monde, :l. cherche compromettrc
la bonne llI:lrche des trnvaux de l'Organisation.
Je yell x parler de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiqlles.

\VIll'l1 this ql1estioll of Indoncsia wa:; bcing
discU5SC'l! in the Sccllrit\· Council ill Paris, the
Soviet 1'11iOll, speaking-both thr{ll1~h it~ OWI1
reprcscl1tatiw and Ihnll1gh the representative of
the l"krainian SOy id S0cialist Republic, followed
its familiar pr<lCCdllrC of endeavouring to cloak
its own impru[JC'r actions by seeking" tu placc the
blame on someone el5c. Thc n>prescntati\'c (Jf
the PSSR r39IslllIcl'lil1Y] ami the reprcsentative
of the LTkrainiall SSR [393rd IItcctillol both
insinuated that the Govcrnment of the United
States was in some way responsible for the ::lction
of the Nethcrlands ill rcwrtin!; to hostilities
against the Indonesian Repuhlic. It thus 1,ecomcs
necessary to point Ollt again cCltain salient facts,

LOrS([llC cdtc question de l'Il1dom~sie a ete
disClltec, i.J. Paris, par le Conseil de sccurite,
l'Union sovictique, par la voix de son pl'Opre
rcpresentant et dl1 l'eprescntant de la Repl1blique
sodnlistc sovietique d'Ukraillc a Cll recours
sa tactiquc hJhituelle de camoufler ses actes reprehensibles en rejetant le blame sur autrui. Le
representant de l't:RSS [391Cmc s6auccJ et le
representallt de la RSS d'Ukraine [3938mc
Jt~mJ~'cJ ont tOllS dellx laissc entendre qlle le
Gouvernemellt des Etats-L'nis etnit en quclquc
sorte rcsjloll:;<tblc de cc: gl1'avaient fait les Pays~
Gas en engage<lllt les h()~tilites ayec la. Repl1bliqtw
,1'Indoncsie. Il dcvient donc lU~cessaire de rap~
peltr cncore certains bits saillants.

In the first place, it was the Governlllent of
the Uniterl Slates which took the initiative in
convening- an urgent lllceting of the Security
Council when it became <lppnrent that the Nctherlands was resortiJ1g to militar.v "cHon ill Indo·
nesia [5(1128J. It was the Government of the
USSR which endeavoured to pre\'ent the Security
Cotlncil fmm acting promptly by insisthlg that
the Council meeting should be deferred for three
days. Every otht'r member of the Council
attended the 387th meeting on 20 Decemher except the two Soviet representatives.

a

a

a

a

a

En premier licu, c'est le GotWernemellt des
Elats-Ulli~ qui

a pris l'initiative de faire convoquer d\1rg-ence le Con:;cil de secl1ritc, lorsqu'il
e~t devcllu evident 'ltle les Pays-Bas avaient
rr.cours
l';u.,tioll militaire en Indonesie
[S/ll2S}, C'est le Gouverncment de l'URSS
lllli n. essaye d'empecher le Conseil de secl1rite
d'agir promptement ell insistant pour que la
seance du COllseil soit retanlec de trois joms. A
l'exception des deux representants sovietiques,
tOllS les membres du Conseil ont a~siste
la
387emc seance, tellt1e le 20 deccmbre.

a

a

Conjointement avec les represent~llts de l~
The United States also took the initiative, in
conjunction with the repl'esentativcs of Colombia Calombic et de la Syrie, les Etats-Ullls ant aUSSl
and Syria, in proposing a rcsolution [S(1142] pris l'initiative de proposer un~ res~luti?l;
to the Security Council to deal with the situation, [5/1142J tendant ce quc le Conseil de secunte
but the USSR representative refused to support agisse en l'occurrence, mais le representant de
this resolution [3921/([ mecting] . .He later tried I'VRSS a refuse d'appuyer cette resolutioll
to covcr 11p this further attempt to block Security r392cI1Ic seance1. Il a plus tard essaye de camoufaire obstacle a.
COl1ncil action by introducing a resolution of his Her cette mant:el1vre destince
Own [S(1148 alUi Sj1148jCorr.l] which he I'action dll Conseil en soumeltant nnc resolution
kncw conld not be adopted by the Council. More [5/1148 ct S/1148(Corr.l] qui ne pouvait pas
flmdament'll, however, that these obstructionist ~ il le savnit - etre adoptee par le COIlseil. Ce
tactics in the Secllfity Council, is the fact that qui est plus grave que cette tactiqlle d'obstructi0!1
the USSR is fundamentally opposed to the Gov- all Conseil de secllrite, c'est que I'URSS est radlernment of the Republic of Indonesia and has calement opposee au Gouvernement de la Repuitself. through the Comml1nist Party-which is, blique d'Indonesie et 9t1'elle a cherche a, nU,ire
of course, its mOllthpiece throughout the world it ce GOllvernement et a le renverser par 1action
-sought to undermine and overthrow this Gov- dtl parti cOl"nmuniste - qui est, on le sait, son
I porte-parole dans le monde entier.
ernment.

a

a

]0

No one doubts that the communists in ludo·
nesia like the c::Jmn1uni!rts thmllghont the world
are responsive to and act in accordance with instructions from Moscow. The communis: revolt
against the Government of President Soekarno
and Premier Hatta was itself an effort on the
part of tl~e Government of the USSR to overthrow the Inconesian Republic. Furthennore,
when the resumption of hostiLities by the Netherlclllds Government against thp. Incollesian Republic took place, the offic:ial Communist ~arty line,
as printed in the commllnist Press, Instead of
deplori:Jg this action, openly gloated that it was
a punishment for the Government of President
Snp.karno and Premier Hatta, which had suc:cess~
fully P'lt down a communist revolt.

Personne ne doute que les communistes d'Indonesie, tont comme les eommu!listes du monde
entier. ecoutent et c:xccutent les instrnctions de
Mosc~u. La revolte cornmuniste contre le Gouvernement du President Soekarno et du Presi~
dent du Conseil Hatta a ete en sui uue tentative
du Gouyememel1t de l'URSS oour retlverser la
Rcpt6lique d'Indonesie. En outre, lorsque le
Gouvernement des Pays-Eas a repris les hostilites contre la Republiqlle d'hdonesie, le parti
communiste a eu, Pf.JUl- politique officielle, si ran
en jr.ge par sa presse, non pas de deplore I' eet
acte mais de s'en rejouir sans dissimuler sa satisfac.tion en y yoyant le dlatiment du Gouverne~
ment du President Soekarno et du President
du Conscil Hatta pour ~voir reprimc et fait
ec.hOller une revolte communiste.

The communist line which, I repeat once more,
means the line of the Soviet Government, accused
that distinguished statesman of th",_ Indonesian
Republic Mr. Hatta, of being a traitor to his
country. ' At the very time when editorials were
appeming to this effect in the CUInll1unist Party
organs in Paris, the USSR represent;'.tive on the
Security Conor.il sought to cover tip the actual
pohy of his Government by identifying himself
with the Council's endeavours to secure the
release uf Mr, I-latta and other politic;:\l prisoners
~392nd meeting].

La politiquc communiS1.e q\li, je le reIH~.te unc
fois de plus.. est la poliriClue du Gouvernement
accuser M. Hatta, eet
sovietique, a consiste
homme d'Etat indonesiel1 di5tinguc, d'ctre un
traitre
son pays. Au moment meme ou des
editcria\l){ ne Cl'. genre paraissaient dans les journaux tlu parti canm1ttnisle de Paris, le repn!:sen·
tant de I'URSS au Conseil de see-utite s'effan:;;ait
de donnel' le c.hange ~\1r la veritable poli~ique de
son Gouvemement en encourage-ant hanternent
les efforts que tentait le Conseil pour faire: liberer
M. Hatta et le£ aut res prisonnien politiqucs
[392eme seance].
'

These are tile facts, which are on the record
the Government of the USSR is not interested :0
supporting the Government or the Indonesian
RepllJJic or in restoring pf'ace to Indonesia. On
the contrary, it is following its familiar tactics
Wllich it has used in Korea, in Greece, in Berlin
and again, r_ow, in IlldolJesia, and which have
been described in the speeches of many repres;e1t8.tives at the last session of the General
Asse~nbly-namely, seeking, to overthrow a lawful
democratic' Government and to undermine its
authority. But the USSR dres nnt want an independent Indonesl2.: :t wants an Indonesia under
the domination and contL'O! of a communist
mincrity talring its 'orders from Moscow. Ar:ywhere in the world wilen a communist government c1imb.~ in t!lrough the window, indeper.d~
enee is kicked out of the door.

Tels sont les faits, officiel1ement constates et
conrlUS du monde entier, et qui revdent que le
Gouvcrnement de FUR SS ne se preoctllpe pas
de soutenir le Gouvernement de la Republiqne
d'Indonesie ou de reta1Jtir la paix en Il1donesie,
All contraire, il aplJJh~l1e sa tactique c.ontumiere,
Berlin et
qu'il a e:11ployee en eorie, en Grece,
maintenant encore en Indonesie, tactique exposee
par de nombreux representants au cours de III
demiere session de ['Assemb[ee genera[e et qui
t:Sl ut: chercher a renverser un gouve:rnernent
ICRRl et dClUocratique et
saper son auto rite.
Ca~ l'URSS ne veut pas d'llnc lndonesie :ndeper.dallte; eUe veut une Inc1unesie plC\.cec SO~1S 10,
c01;pe cl'une mine rite communiste qui prend les
Ol'dres de Moscou, Ql1e] Que soit le pays dll
mO(lde on un gouvemernent communiste entre
par la fenitre, J'indepedance est mise
la parte
a coups de pied.

T::te Govrrnment of the United States. on the
contrary, has viewed with admiration the efforts
of the Indonesian pecple, both in the Republic
a.mI ehewhere, to gain their independence, and it
113-5 steadfastly sought to support them. The
Government or the United States still takes that
positio:1, and it is for tbis reasun lhat it has
taken the lead in endeavouring in the Security
COllllCil :md in the Comm:.ttee of Goac Offices
to bring abottt a peaceful adjustment of the
diffiwlties between the Indonesian Republic and
the Netherlamls Government, :wd 1.0 establish th!'
United States of IndonesiE. as onc of the fullv
sovel'e:gn a:1d independent peoples 01 the world.

Le Gouver;lement des Etats-Unis, au contraire,
a admire les efforts que le peup1c indonesien a
deployes, (ant dans l,t Rt':Pllblique qll'en d'autres
lie:.tx. pour acqucrir son inclependance, et a tOIljaurs cnerche ales soutenir. Le GOllV~lT1elllent
des Etats·Unjs garde cette altitude et c'est ponr_
qUal il a. tte le premier, hUlt au Conseil de seCltrite qu'a la Commisison de bons offices, s'effOl"cer d'aplanir par des moyens pacHiql1es les difficUltes qui ont surgi entre la Rcpubliquc d'Indonesie et le GOllvernement des Pavs-Bas et de hire
ties Etals-Unis d'Indonesie l'un des peltples dll
monde qd aient Ullf sqllverainete et Llne independanLe pleines et entiere:.

Mr. NrsoT (Eelgium) (traas]ated from
Fn;nch) : I wish to make;) comment of a purely

M. NIS<Yt (Ee1glql1e): Je presenterai
remarque d'ordre put'ement juridiq1.le.

;md known to the world, and which reveal that

a

a

a

a

a

a

une

juridical nttl1re.
E I h~ve uodf'rst(]nd ,:orrectly the United
States representative stated that- 'tl:e Security
Council resohtticns of 1 August and 1 November

Si j'aj bien entendu, le representant des Etats-Cnis a declare que 1e~ resolutiollS du Conseil dE"
securite des 1er aout et ler novembre 1947 avaient:

11
1947 had been adopted in pursuance of Article
40 of the United Nations Charter. 11r. Jessup
wili allow me to contest that interpretation.
The resolutions of 1 August and I November
1947 do not make the slightest mention of Article
40 of the United Nations Charter. There is no
doubt whatever that if the members of the
Security Council had intended to take such a
serious step as to apply Chapter VII, they would
have felt it necessary to s3y so and tc justify
s~lch a step.
When tl1e resollltions of 1 August and 1 No·
vembcr were adopted, there were some extremely
spirited debates on the question of the corope·

tence of the Security Council; it was even agreed
that that question remained entirely unprejudiced.
It wOltld therefore be imposisble to accept as
well-founded the explanation that the Security
Council passed those resolutions under the conviction that it was applying Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter.
The Security Council could not possibly be
bound by the interpretation g'iven by the United
States delegation; such an interpretation must
be considered as the opinion of its author, and
his alOlle.
Mr. TSIANG (China): In the latter 'part of
December, the Security Council had several meetings in Paris on tile Indonesian question. In
those meetings, the statements ami votes of the
Chinese delegation indicated clearly enough the
general attitude of my delegation with regard
to the question before the Council. Last Friday
[397th mct!tittg] , important statements were m<lde
by the representatives of the Philippines, India
and Australia. To much of what they had to
tell us on that occasion I can subscribe, I shall
not repeat what has been said here so often, nor
do I wish at this stage of the debate to press
the question of responsibility for the present
state of affairs in Indonesia,

ete adoptees en application de I' Article 40 de la
Charte des Nations Unies. M. ]essup me permettra de contester ceUe interpretation.
Les resolutions des 1er a06t et 1er novembre

1947 ne font pas la moindre mention de l'Artide 40 de la Ch<trte des Nations Unies. Il est
indubitable qtte, si les membres du Conseil de
secllritc avaient eu l'intention de prendre la mesure grave consistant a faire application du
Chapitre VII, i1s auraient eprouve le besoin de
le dire et de justifier cette mesure.
LorsqLle les resolutions des 1er aout et 1er novembre furent ac1optees, la question de la competence du Conseil de secLlrite faisait l'objet des
plus vifs debats; il avait meme tte entendu qtt'elle
serait considen':e comme entierement reservce.
On ne saurait, par consequent, tenir pour fondee l'explication consistant a dire que le Conseil
de securlte a vote ces reso111tions dans la cOIlviction qn'il appliquait le Chapitre VII de}" Charte
des Nations Unies.
L'interpretation CJu'invoque la delegation des
Etats-Unis ne saurait donc Her le Conseil de
securite; elle doit etre consideree comme propre
a son allteur.
M. TsrANG (Chine) (tmduit de l'anglais):
Entre le 1.~ et le 31 decembre, le Conseil de securite a tenu a Paris pll1sieltrs seances sm la
question illdonesienne. Au cours de ces reunions,
les declarations et les votes de la.. delegation de
la Chine oot clairement 1110ntre SOIl attitllde a
l'egard de la qucstlon soumise a l'examen du
Conseil. Vendrecli demier [397e11l'<' seance], les
representants des Philippines, de l'Inde et de
l'Anstralie ont fait d'importan~es declarations. ]e
souscris a une grande partie des vues qu'ils nOl(S
ont exposees a cette occasion. J e ne repeterai tJ1lS
ce que l'on a si sonvent dit ici meme et je ne vettx
pa::, a ce point de la discussion, insister sur la
qllestion des rcsponsabilites en ce qui concerne
ia situation en Indonesie.

I have asked to speak in order to present to
J'ai demande la parole afin d'exposer au Conthe Council what I consider to he the essenti.al seH ce qne je considere comme les elE~ments
elements of a constructive and definite solution essentie1s d'une solution constructive et precise
of this problem.
de ce -probleme.
In the first place, we are all agreed-including
En premier lieu, nOtlS sommes taus d'accord the parties to the dispute~that Indonesia shonld y compris les parties all differend - POUI' que
enjoy freedom, that this freedom should take the l'Indonesie soit libre, qu'elle forme .llne federaform of an independent federated United States tion independante, les Etats-Unis d'Indonesie, et
of Indonesia, and that that federation should que ceUe federation s'assode <lUX Pays-Bas dans
be a partner, with the Netherlands, in the estab- la constitution cl\me Union neerlando-indonelishment of 11 Netherlands Indonesian union. sienne. Tout cela est prevu dans I'Accord de
These points were a part of the Linggadj<tti Linggadjati et aussi dans l'Accord du Rellville.
Agreement. They also form a part of the Ren- Le represer.tant des Pays-Bas a confirnle id
,<->ill!' Agreement. They have been restated here meme que ces trois pl"incipes constituaient touby the representative of the Netherlands as stil1 jours le iondement de la politique dll Gouverneconstihlting the fundamental policy of the Gov- meot des Pays-Bas.
emment of the Netherlands,
These political principles have not been disCes principes politiques n'ont pas ete contestes.
puted. 'They must of course form a part of the lis doivent, evidernment, entrer en ligne de compte
definite solution we seek, but the trouble hitherto dans la solution definitive ql'e nOll5 recherchons,
has been their implementation. Now, it is obvious mais la difficulte a ete jusqll'ici de les appliquer.
that an essential part in carrying these principles Or, i1 est evident que pour leur donner effet, it
into effect is a free plebiscite by the people ot fant avant tout proceder en Indonesie i un libre
Indonesia, a plebiscite to elect a constitutional plebiscite, qui aura pour objet l'election d'une
convention which will draft and adopt the future assembJee constituante chargee d'elaborer et
constitution of the United States of Indonesia.
d'adopter la future constitution des Etats-Unis
d'Indonesie.

12
It is very dear to my delegation that the plebi~­

Cite should not only be free in fact, but that 1t

must a:50 appear to everybody to be free. Furth~r­
more, it Ulllst, well in acvance of the actual pleblScite, .be known :0 everybody to be free.
In the. opinion of my delegation, any constr!-1ctive and definite ,solution of the IndoneSian
problem. ITUlst embrace;the most solid guarantees
of the freedom u~ election throughot~t lnnonesia
to that future constihlen: assembly. T11at is the
fir5~ element of the solution which I wish to set
before the Security Council.
The authorities of the Netherlands h:;lve t-.ri~d
to Justi fy their military action on the grounds of
so-:alled :llfiltrafon and sabotage by the Inco~
nesian Army. Such justification is not acceptable
to I1S. Tt is not borne out by the reports of cur
Committee of Good Offices on the spot. Neverth'e1ess the concern for peace and order in Indonesia on the part of the iUI:horities is n. legitimate
concern. It should be and has been shared by
the ;"e::;pcI15lb1c leaders of thf' Indonesian Republic. On th2t point, again, there is 1]0 difference
of opinion hetween the two parties to the dispute.
So far 0.5 we of the Security Council are concerned, we certainl), cannot desire to allow dis·
order,s to spread over In:1onesia. On the contrary,
the COlmc:il has every reason to support the forces
'wDrking for peace and order, both in ordinary
circumstances and especially at a time when an
all· important plehi.~c.i:f'. is about to take place.

Ma d:lcgatiol1 pense que non seu1ement ce
j'llebiscite doit e:re effectue en toute liberte, mais
qu'il doi: :ms~i ap?a~aitre libre. i.. tOtl3. En Qutre,
bien avant qu'il ait lieu, cbacun de,,·ra savDir qu'il
sera libre.
De t'avis de ma delegatio::l, :oute solution cons~
tructive et definitive du pmbleme indonesiell doit
pre-voir, dans toute I'Indonesie, ?our l'elect:on

de cette future assemblee cons:ituante, :es plus
sotdes garantie:i ee Jibertc. Tel e:;t le premier cle·
ment de la so:ution que :e desire proposer au
Conseil de ::;ecurite.
Les autorites neerla:1daises od essaye de justi.
fie, leur action rdlitaire el~ alleguant l~s infiltrations et le sabotage dont l'armee indonesienne se
serai: rendue cOL:pable. Nous ne pouvons accep~
ter <:es raisons, dent nous ne trouvons pas la
cO:lfirmation dans les rapports :le la Commission
dE: bons offices. It n'en reste pas mains qLle les
antorites se p~euccupent ii. juste ti:l'e du main.
tien de l'ordre public en Indonesie. Ce SOUcl lIoit
et:e partage, et :'a ete en falt par Les dirigeants
responsables de la Repub;hlue ir:doncsienne. L3
encore, allCUne divergence d'opinions ne separe
les partie~ a.l differe.nd. Pour ce qui est du Couseil
de secllrite, nous ne saurions evicemrr:;ent sou·
haiter qu'on laj~ge le desordre gagner tDlite l'In~
donesie. Bien au contraire, le Conseil a toutes
r:tisons :le SOlltenir les forces qui travaiUent
pour la paix e: pour l'ordre dar.s des circonstanccs
ordinaires, e11 it i)lus fcrte raison, a la veille
cl'un plebiscite :re.s important,

D'a?res ma delegation, le second element essen~
In thE opinion of my ddegation, the second
essenfal element to a constructi.ve solution ef tiel d':me solution constructive est I'e,ablissc:ncnt
lhb proble.-n is the estab1i~hmf'.nt of guarantees de ga~'anties en ce qui COtlce:ne le ;llaintieu de
in regard to peace and order in Indonesia. If l'ordre public en Indonesie. Si l'nnalyse que. j'<li
the analysi~ that I ha-ve attempted to produce is tente de p:esenter est exacte, elle signifie qL.1e le
correct, it mear,s that the Security Council here- CQnseil de sccurire devr:c clans ]'avenir jouel· en
after mt:st p1:J.y a more positive role in Indones:a Indones:e un role plus cancret qll'iJ ne l'a fait
flan hitaerto. After the signing of the Linggad- jl1sqn'ir.i. Apres la signature de rACCOfe. de Lingjati Agreement, the two parties themselves mig:-tt gadjati, les deux parties auraie:Itptt aboutir
ha\c worked O:.1t a so]tlt:or., bllt that turned out d'eiles-memes ~ tne solution. ~i eIles n'ont pas
not to be the case j and this was not because we abouti, on ne ;Jeut dire qll\lrIe poHtisue inconhere in tJ-:F. Security Council wished to go out sideree :I'intervention dans Ies affaires interieures
of our way to interfere in Indone~ian affairs. de l'Indow:::;:e de la part du COllseij en Rnit la
Af:er the signing of the RellviUe Agreement, with cause. Apn~s la 3ignature de l'Accorc du Renthe help of :he moderate <.JuLh<Jrit:r of the Com· vitre, les deux partieR auraient pu encore cherchcr
mitte~ of Good Offices, ti1e two parties again
l1ne solntioll sans <Lutre intervention du Conseil
mighl llave worked OUt a solution wihotlt further I :le sec.ucite, avec l'appui de l'autorite mains eten:nter:erence from the Securiey Council. But as due de la Commission de bans offices. Toutefoi~,
conditions st~l1c1 to date, after the breaking out da:1.s \'etat actuef des cr.oses, les hostilites ayant
of hostilities for a secw.cl time, it seems to roe repris pour la seconde rois, il ne pent plus etl'e
:0 be entirely Ollt of tr.e question that the tIVO question, semble-:-il,<::;.ue les det;x parties arrivent
parties by themselves today could worl( oltl a maintellant iJ. une solution p2.citiq·Je ;;i le Conseil
peaceftl solution withollt th:s 'Council's playing ne joue pas U:1. :-61e ?It.s posid. C'est pourquoi
a more positiye ro:c. It is ior this reason that j'adjure le representant des Pays-Bas de ne pas
I plene with the representative of the Nether- maintenir l'argument cl'incompetence q'j'il '3lauds not to emphasize ":lis objection to the com- oppose a:1 Conseil de secmite en cctte affaire.
petence of the Security COl.:ndl· in this matter. ]'ai toujours regrette que les at~toritf.s net:r1allI myself always regretted that reservation on the daises aient formulecette reserve.
part of the Netnerlan~s autiorities.

Ma delegatiol: afl1rn:e q~e, dans' la situation
My rldegatioll tak~ t~e. s.:anu that, in present
world cor.ditions, any Member State which denies <l,l.:tudle du O1ondc, tout Etat M emhte c;ui nie la
the competence of the United Nations in an com;:H~tence de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
effort to make peace, is taking a reaction:try .nlors ql1'elJe s'dlorce d'etabh la pa;x, adopte une
positio:1. It celi<tinly has not proved helpful in attitl1de reac:tionnaire. Ce genre d'attitude n'a pas
Cotmexioll with the Indones:an problem_ 'the.re· contribl1e a l'esoudre le probleme :nc.onesien. Je
fore, 1 ,say tbt the third essential element,in a , declare d011C que la troisieme co~diiion essenconstructive soltltion of this problem is the adop- . tielle.d'tme sc-lution wnstructive de ce problf:me,
tion of a more posit:ve role in Indonesia in the est que le Conseil joue dcsormais en In:ionesie
ft:wre, both :0 respect of the plebiscite and in un role plus pc.sitif, tant en ::e qui concerne le

JJ
Te$pect of the maintenance of peace and order.
If we should remain negative or dilatory in regard
to the problem. I am very much afraid that even
greater interests than tnose which now exist in
the problem would be affected. Failure ill. the
Indonesian question would be as fatal to the
United Nations as was failure in the Abyssinian
and Manchurian questions to the League of
Nations.

plebiscite qu'a l\~gard du maintien de l'ordre
public. Si nous restons passifs et ne prcDoDs que
des dcmi-mesures, je crains fort que cc ne soit
au detriment d'inteTets encore sltperieurs a ceux
qui SOl1t actuellement en jeu. Un echec dans la
solution du probh~me indonesien serait, pour
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, aussi fatal
que l'echec subi par la Societe des Nations lors
des affaires cl' Auyssinie et de Mandchourie.

Having presented to the Security Council the
essential elements of a constructive solution as
my delegation sees it, I should like to conclude
my statement with one further observation. Unfortunate, indeed, tragic, as this conflict in
Indonesia is, it has not assumed the nature
of a conflict between the East and the West.
I am very glad to note that a number of
representatives of Governments in Europe and
in North and South America have spoken
in favour of a just solution of the problem
in Indonesia. In the Security Council, at least,
the division on this qnestion has not been along
geographic, religious or racial lines. I wish to
point this out because any misunderstanding by
the world on this point would be very serious.
The world has enough divisions as it is. We
should not add to them by bringing here a conflict between the East and the West, because that
is not the nature of this problem.

Ayant presente au Causei! de secu rite ce que
ma delegation consid(~re comme les eh~ments
essentiels d'llne solution constructive, je voudrais
conc!tlre man expose par une derniere observation, Aussi malheurell){, aussi tragique meme
que soit Cl' conflit d'Indonesie, il n'a pas pris le
caractere d\m conflit entre l'Orient et 1'0ccident. Je suis heureux de consb.ter qu'un certain
nombre de repl'esentants des Gouvernements de
l'Europe et de I'Amerique du Nord et du Sud
pTeconisent une solution equitable du probleme
indo~esien, Au Conseil de securite tOllt au moins,
les cbvergences d'opinicns en la matiere ne dependent pas de considerations geographiques, raciales 01.1 religieuses. le tiens a le signaler, car il
serait tres grave que le monde se llH~prenne sut'
ce point. Le monde est trap divise en Cl' moment
pOllr que nous ajoutions a la Iiste des causes de
dissension LlD conflit entre l'Orient et !'Occident
- telIe n'est pas, en effet) la nature du probleme
qUJ nous occupe.

For our part-that is, for the part of the representatives from Asia-I am glad to point out the
statement of the representative of India [397th
meeting] in which he called the attention of the
Security Council to the fact that the A&ian
Conference to be convened in Delhi on 20 1anuary
is calculated and planned to be within the frame~
work of the United Nations,

En ce qui nous concerne, nous, les representants de I'Asie, je suis heureux de rappeler que
le repr~sentant de l'Inde a attire l'attention dtt
Conseil de securite [397enl-€ seance] SlIT le fait
que la Conference asiatique, q\li doit se reunir
a New-Delhi le 20 janvier, a ete preparee et doit
se tenir dans le cadre de I'Organisation des
Nations Unies.

\Vhatever our differences of opinion may be in
regard to the Indonesian question, I am glad to
note that every delegation has tried to treat this
question as a ql1estion by itself without reference
to racial, religious or geographical prejudices.
This is something which is entirely to the good.

Quelles que soient nos divergenres d'opinions
sur la question indonesienne, j'ai plaisll'a noter
Cll1e toutes les delegations se sont efforcees de la
traiter C01TIme un pro1.Jh~me en .soi, sans faire
etat de prejuges l'acial1X, religieux ou geogl"a~
phiqlles. 11 y a lieu de nons en feliciter.

M. MOE (Norvege) (traduit de l'anglais):
MT. MOE (Norway).: It would not be of any
use for a new member of the Security Council 11 ne servirait a rien qu'un nouveau membre dn
to enter into a discussion of all the aspects of Conseil de sccmite reprenne la discussion de
the case now before the Council. It has unfortu- to,lS les aspects de l'affaire dont g'occupe actl1el~
nately been on the agenda of the Council for. a tement le CousEil et qui est malheurellsement a
considerable time. I should like, however, to say j'Ol'dre du jour depuis longtemps dej,t le vou~
a feyv words in order to explain the attitude of drais toutefois dire quelques mats afin d'exposer
l'attitude de mon GOllvemement.
my Govel·nment.
A notl'e avis, les meSl1res militaires prises en
In our opinion, the military actiori undertaken
by the Government of the Netherlands in Indo- Indonesie par le GollYerneml'.n~ des Pays-Bas
nesia is not justified and is not in accordance with ne sont pas jtl.stifiees et ne sont conformes ni
the spirit and the letter of the Charter. As to la lettre, ni a l'esprit de la Charte. TOlltefois. si
th!' background of the military action, it seems on considere les circoI1stances dans lesqllelles ce
to my Government that we are faced with a case Gouvernement a agi, je ne crois pas qu'en I'occurwhere it is evident that all the wrong is not on rence tous les torts soient du meme cote et qlL'une
one side and all the right on the other. One side partie ait entierement rnison et 1'a11t1'e entiere~
1I is' not entirely black, nor the other side entirely inent tert.
white.
:l,
11 fallt de[llorer que le Gouvernement de la
[)(
It is deeply to be regretted that the Govern- .
Repl.lblique indonesienne, qtli a fait un gros effort
.! m~nt of the Republic of Indonesia, which has
Jt made a great effort to organize the new Republic .pour hien organiser la nouvelle R~publigue, n'ait
manifestement pt'. contenir tont a fait les forces
~~ ina proper way, has evidently not been able to
ne control entirely the political, military and semi~ politiques, militaires et semi-militaires existant
sur son territoire, Le GOltverneme-nt'de'laRepu~>i, military forces within its territory, The Gov: I emment of the Republic of Indonesia is certainly. blique indonesienne comprend' certainement que,

a

"

14

du fait qu'i[ rt'a pll ~tre cOlllplc,te~l~nt mai~re
de la situation sur son proprc tcrnt\lu"e elu P?1nt
de vue militaire, les observatenrs nf.utn~~ et b.ltUveillants ne sont pas sfus qu'une RepublJllUC
indonesienne Illdepend:l.llte pnisse assumer, ses
responsabilites. Il est regL"Clta~le, qu 'il Y ~lt ell
des bfiltrations dans le terntom.: SOUllllS nu
controle des forces neerlandaiscs, qlle des trouc.Dmfol of Nethcrlanc.s forces; that the Republic pes re~l1b1icai~es y n.ie,nt ,ete lai~sec~:_ que. l.a.
has failed to release prisoners of war; and that Republ1ql1e n'alt pas relache tous les pllS0l1l11el~
the Republic has not been aLlc to put an end de guerre et qn'elle o'ait jJU mettt'c un lrl'lllC ,l1lX
to aU-too-many terroristic acts. It must, there- actes de tenenr, dont on n'a vu que trap (,I:ex.t:~ll­
fore, be admitted-ar.d I sin~ere1y hopf' t~at e ples, I1 faut par conseqnent admettl"e, c~ J espere
rep~esentatives of the Repubhc of IndonesIa will sincerement quc le representant de la Repl1bltql1e
admit it-that the Ndher);mcl, Government, had d'lnclonesie I'admettra, que le GOllvcrmmcnt elt's
several reasons for complaint about the attltuc1e Pays-Bas avait plusieurs raisons de se plaindre
de l'attitude d·~ la Republiql1e.
of the RepuJlic,
Si ::m en jr.ge par les elements d'in:onnatioll
The contention of the Netherlands Gov~rn­
dont
:1l1 dispo.ie. le GotlvCrncn:ell! llcs Pays~B::ls
ment that the Republic has not adhered st:'lctly
to the tma agreement seems" on the Ilasls. of n'a pas tOut fait tort de dire qlte la RejlubJiqll'~
available ll1tterial, to be not wIthout foundatIOn, n'a pas strictement observe les dispositions de
The attilllde of Dutch public opinion a::ld of the l'Accord de treve, L'attitllde de l'opiniOl: pnblifJu~
et du Gouvefnement des Pays~nas est dOllC, (j;\Il~
Ne~herlands Governnent is, -berefore,. to a cerun!'
certaine lTlP,Llrr:, col11prehcl:sible. POUl" <llllallt
tain extent -Jndcrstandable, BLIt even If onf' car.
understand this attitude it is impossible to con- C]ll'elle le sait, 011 ne sauI'ail paurt<tllt excuser l'~
done the so-called police action, It is rather qui a ete appele des ll1esures de poli'~e, I1 c~t
astonishing and depre~sing that ~he Netherlands assez surprenant et navrant de voir le GOl1VerllCGOl'ernment and Parltament, whIch my Govern- ment et le Parlement des PCi.ys-Bas, que ll10n
ment hold in such high esteem, have deli~rately GOllvemement tient en si lmute estime, delibechosen military action to remedy an c.dmlttedl)' rement choisL' ['actim: ll1.ilitaire camn:c rCl11cde
c1ifl\cult situation, This action is, as I have alune sitl1ation evidenunent diffidlc, ees meSllrcs
ready stated, contrary to the lelLer and ~pirit oi sont, je l'ai d~ja dit, contralres it I'esprit et II la
the Charter We had thought that the tIme had lettre de la Charte, NOl1s croyions flue le temp"
passed when armed force Was llsed as an instru- etait passe 01' la force des arl11CS servilit d'ill'·
mellt in international negotiations, We thought trument de negociation intem3tiollalc. Naus
that the establishment of th United Nationa croyiDns que la ereatlon de l'Organisation des
meant that internatimal disputes should be solved N atians Unies signifiait qt1e les difFerCll,ls inter·
by negotiation, mediation or arbitration, and not natio:laux senlient regJes par neg"O~i<.tion, meby force, and tl1at the Netherlands, with it,S tra- diation ou ar')itrage e~ non P<'..l' la for~c, et que
dition of peace and democracy, should be In the les Pays~Bas, nation tmditionneJlelllellt dcmovanguard of those nations trying to practise cratique et pacifique, seraicnt a l'avallt-ganlc
tolerance and to live together in peace with one des I:ations qui cherchent a faire preLlVe de tole·
another as good neighbours. It is with deep ranee et it vivre en paix les uncs avec lcs autrcs
so~row that I have to give expression to the
dans tin espr:t de bon voisinage, C'cst avcc 1111
profound disappointment of my GoverlUnent in vif chagrin qllC j'exprime la proionde Mception
que man Gouvernement eprouve a ect cgarcl.
this respect.
In launching the so~called police action, the
En lalll;ant cette rretendue cpcratic}l1 de police,
Netherlands Government has also ignored and le Gouvernen~ent des Pays-Bas a Ollhlie cc Iju'il
delied the United Nations. As .11reaJy pointed devait it l'Org-anisation de:; Nation!; Unies ~t a.
out by several speakers previously in the Council, brave son autorite. Comme 1'ont deja fait re·
it is impoSi.ible to understand why the Nether~ marquer plllsieurs orateurs Et une autre seance
lands Government, when it found that it had du Conseil, il est impossible de comprendre pou:-reaSOn to complain about the attitude of the quoi le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas, lorslju'il
ReplJbJic, did not bring its complaint before the 3. rnnstate_ <IU'il avait des raisons de se plaindre
CommlUee of Good Offices or before tr.e Security de ['attitude de la Republique, 11'' - pas parte sa
Council. My Government associates 'Itself fully plainte devant la Commission de bons offices DU
with the statement made by he representative of deva:tt le Conseil de securite, Mon Gouvernethe United Kingdom at the 392nd meeting of the ment s'associe pleincment it la ded<ln.lion fai~e
Security CDuncII, a statement to the effect tllat: par le representant du Royal1lue-Uni la 392cme
seance du Conseil, lorsqu'il a dH:
" "if, for any reason, the Netherlands GOl~
", , , Si, pOUr une raison q~ekonqlJe, le Gou~
emment felt una ble any longer to condur.t direct vernement neerlandai~ a estirne ne plus potlvoir
negotiations with the Repubjc of Indonesia it mener des negotiations directes aVEt; la Rtflllshould have availed itself of the services of 'the bliqce d'Indonesie, il aurait cia [aire appel ar,~
Committee of Good Offices before resorting to service!? de la Commi3sion de bOlls oGees ava~t
action by ferce of arms, which has inflamed world de recomir a la for<:e des armes, ce qui a sou[eve
op:nion and can only embitter relations between l'opi:lion m<:>ndiale et ne peut qu'envenimcr les
the Netherlands Government and the Republic," rapports eXlstant entre le GOllvernement neerbndais et la Republique,"
In acting otherwise, the Netherlands GovernEn agissant differeniment, le GOuvernemcnt
ment has not only shown its disregard for the d~s Pays-Bas a non settlement montre qu'il ne

aware that its inabihy. to control the military
situation in its own territory, even, among many
neutral and friendly observer~, ralses doubts as
to -.he responsibility of an mdependent ludo·
. sRepublic
tll;1t
ne
l a n · It is to be regretted
.
cl •there
th
have heen infiltrations into territory tn Cl. e
C0I1:r01 of Netherlands fO.fees,; that .RepublIcan
troops have been left behind In terntol)' und~r

0

a

a

a

I'.
.

I';
.
r
~.
,r

~.

;'

15
united Nations and its efforts to solve the diffi~
culties in Indonesia, but it has done a disservice
to the cause of the United Nations. The military
action by the Netherlands Government is the
more perturbing as it is not easy to see what the
N cthedands expects from it. It is an old truth
that coercion is no basis for friendship and cooperation. The police action has already caused,
and will continue to cause, only resentment and
bitterness.
We fail to understand how anybody believes
that the clock of history can be turned back and
thnt force will succeed in subjugating democratic
aml nntional aspir<ttiom which, in the opinion of
my Government, should be encomaged, since
national freedom is the only solid foundation for
international co-operation.
In his very moving letter to the President of
the Security Council [5/1179J the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, Sir Mohammed Zafrullah
Khan, expresses the fear that this so-called
police action may leave bchind a legacy of hatred
and enmity, and that such a prospect must be
viewed as a grave threat to the restoration of
peace in SOltth East Asia, That is why, in the
opinion of my Government, it is the dtlty of the
Secnrity Council to take effective measures which
will, as far as this is possible, remedy tbe possibly
serious conseqllences of the Netherlands military
action.

teoait pas comptc de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies et des efforts qu'clle a faits pour res(;udre
les problemes d'Indonesie, mais i1 a encore desservi la cause des Nations Unies. L'action militaire du GOtlyernement des Pays-Bas est d'antant
plus troublante qtt'on ne VQit guere ce: flue 1f'~
Pays·Bas en attendent. C'est un principe bien
connn que l'amitie et la cooperation ne pen vent
se fonder Sur la contrainte. Cette operation de
police n 'a erlgendre et ne pOllrra engcndrer i
l'avenir que rcssentiment et amertume.
NOllS n'arrivons pas it comprendre comment
on peut croire possible d'entravcr la marche
inexorable du temps et esperer que la force etouffera des aspi:·ations nationales et democratiql1cs
qui, de l'avis de mon GOLlvernement, devraient
ctre encouragees puisql1e la liberte nationale est
la seule base soEde de cooperation internationale.
Dans la lettre tres. emouvante qu'il a envoyee
au President dtl Conseil de securite [5/11791,
Sir Mohammed Zafn111an Khan, Ministre des
::J.ffaires etrangeres du Pakistan, exprime la crainte
que cette pre.tenduc operation de police laissc
derriere el1e des haioes et des inimitU~s tenaces
et cstime qu'une telle perspective doit etre consi~
deree comme une grave mena.ce au retablissement
de In. paix dans l'Asie sud-oricntale. C'est pourquai, de I'avis de man Gouvernement, le Conseil.
de ~ec:urite, a le df'voir de prendre des mesures
efficaces pour parer, dans la mesnre ou i1 peut le
faire, aux graves consequences que pourrait avoir
l'action militaire des Pays-Bas.

POllr ces raisolls, le COllseil de securite n'a pas
seulement le droit, mais atlssi le devoir, de veiller
d'abord a ce que l'application des modalites
prevues dans I'ordre de 'cesser le feu ne puissent
donner lieu a de nouvel1es hosti.lites. Les <lppre~
hensions qu'eprotlvent a ce sl1jet les represcntants
de la Republiqne d'Indonesic 50nt tOllt a fait
comprehensibles. La Commission de bons offices
devrait done avoir JJom- tache ill111I<::diate de Yeiller a ce qu'Otl ne poursuive pas les hostiHtes !lOUS
le pretexte de sevir contre des bandes armees.
Par ailleurs, en ce qui concerne la mise en liberte
des prisonnjers, nOtlS sommes tres surpris d'apprendre que ie Gonvernement des Pays·Bas c1'Oit
pouvoir declarer qt1e le.s prisonniers ont ete
relicbes alors qu'en fait ils ont ete internes.
Pader de "negodations" en de tenes drcons~
tances, c'est vraiment donner a ce mot un sens
tOllt nouveau,
It is also inconceivable that any advantage
Il est e,galement inconcevablc que l'une Oil
should be allowed to result for either one of the l'autre partie puisse tirer un avantage CJl1elconque
parties as a consequence of what has taken place. de ce qui s'est passe. Cela signifie qu'en piinThis means that in principle the Netherlands cipe les forces armees neerlandaises doivent se
armed forces must be withdrawn from Repub- retirer du territoire nipublicain. Je dis "en prinlican territory, I say "in principle" because the cipe", car le retrait des forces militaires sur leurs
withdrawal of the mililary forces to their former andennes positions devrait etre He a un arranposltions would have to be subject to a satisfac- gement satisfaisant pOllr le maintien .de l'ordre
tory arrang-ement for the maintenance of law and public, et j'insiste sur ce point. Les representants
order-and I insist on this. The representatives de la Republique devront admettre que le Gou~
of the Republic will have to admit that the Nether- vernement des P<tys-Bas a raison cl'insister SUi
lands Government is right in insisting on the l'extreme gravite de ce probleme. Non seulement
extreme gravity of this problem. Not only would la Republique devra donner des garanties suffi·
the Republic have to give sufficient guarantees santes a ce sujet, mals elle dcvra le hire en coope,in this respect, but it would have to do so in ration avec le Conseil de securite ou la Com-co-operation with, and, to a certain extent, under mission de bans offices creee par cc dernier, et
the wotrol and supervision of, the Security .dans une certaine mesure sous leur contr61e et
Council or its Committee of Good Offices. It, leur haute atttorite. Il devrait at1 mains etre pos~
should at least be possible to work out an arrange- sible d'aboutir a un arrangement qui assllrerait
ment whereby the necessary secuiity would be le maintien par des forces militaires neerlan~
For these ~easons the Securitv Cotlneil has not
only the right but also the duty· first of all to see
to it that the qualifications attached to the cease~
fire demand do not give rise to new hostilities.
The doubts of the representative of the Republic
of Indonesia in this respect are fully understandable. It should, therefore, be an immediate
tnsle for the Committee of Good Offices to ensure that, under the guise of action against roving
groups, hostilities are not continued. As to the
other point-the release of the prisoners-we are
astonished to hear that the Netherlands Government is able to state that prisoners have been
released when in fact they have been interned;
and to talk about negotiations under such circumstance is really to give an entirely new mean~
ing to the word "negotiations".

16
daises et l"epublicaines des conditions de securite
necessaires pOUl"VU qu'on ~gisse, l,a e~~ore, en
cooperation avec le Consell de secunte DU .la
Commission de bons offices et sous 1eur contr?le
et leur haute autorite. SeIon la Iettre du PremIer
Ministre Hatta., en date du 13 decembre [Sjl129J,
it ne devrait pas etre impossible d'arriver a une
solution de ce genre.
Un tel arrangement rela~if a,l1x forces n;~lit,ain:s
doit neanmoins etre envlsage COtnme he a un
arrangement general tendant ~ concilier les di~
verg,ences qui separent .les partle~ et, .avec la per~
msision du President, Je voudrals falre quelques
remarques sur la solution possible,
Vne veritable cessa.tion des hostilites et ll11e
veritable mise en liberte des prisonniers sont 1es
conditions prealab1es indispensa?les a t.out~ autre
action de la part du Consell, malS ce qt1~ SLtIVra, la
deuxieme phase. est de beaucoup pIllS Important.
Je veux parle; des mesur.es (jlli deyront ~tre p:ises
pour aboutir a une Sol\1tlon des dlfficultes qUl ant
surgi entre les Pays-Bas et la Repl1blique d'Indonesie. De l'avis de mon Gouvernement, on ne peut
le faire qu'en reprenant les negociations sur la.
base des principes originaux et des principes p~li­
tiques supplementaires de l'Accord du Renvll!rr
[S/649, annex-es VIII et XIII]. I1 est toute,£ols
evident que le Conseil de securite des NatIons
Unies, par l'intermediaire de sa Commission de
bons offices, devra cette {ois prendre beal1COllp
plus d'initiatives dans les negociations et, a ce
propos, je desire m'associer entierement a ce {Jue
vient de dire le representant de. la Chine. It ne
faut pas que la Commission de bons offices se
borne, comme la derniere {ois, 8. hciliter la reprise
des negotiations et a servir d'intermediaire; elle
devrait avoir des pouvoirs beaucot1[J plus etendus.
I1 est evident, pour ql1ieonque a etLtdie ['evolution
des relations entre le Gouvernement des Pays~
Bas et la Republique, que l'une des raisons prin·
cipales de l'absence de resultats positifs ;\ la
suite des negociations est la profonde meh<l.nce
qu'eprouve chacl1ne des parties vis-a.-vis de l'antre. Chacnne argue de violations de l'Accord cle
treve ou d'autres actes comme preuves de la
mauv\iise volonte de l'al1tre partie a s'en tenir
al1X Accords de Linggadjati ou du RCllville. La
Republiqt1e craint que les Hollandais ne reta~
blissent le colonialisme en Indonesie; les Hollandais craignent que les n,ilieux dirigeants de la
Republique ne soient composes d'etements irresponsables qui ne cherchent qu'a les expu1ser
d'Indonesie.
This distrust is probably also the reason for
C'est probablement cctte mefiance qui a fait
its having been impossible to arrive at an inter-' qU'Oll n'a pn arriver it une interpretation des
pretation of the negotiated agreements to which accords souscrits acceptable pour les deLlx parties,
both parties should adhere, and this inability to ce qui a cree de nouvelles sllspicions et augfind a common interpretation has again given mente enC01·e la mefiance. C'est dans de tenes
rise to new su.~picions and to more distrust. It is . .circonstances que, de l'avis de ma delegation,
in these circumstances that, in the opinion of my l'Organisation des Nations Unies pourrait jOller
delegation, the United Nations could play a very Ull role tres utile dansla solution du difIerend.
useful part in the solution of the dispute.
First of all the Security Council, acting through
En premier lieu, le Conseil de securite, agissant
its Committee of Good Offices, or directly, should directement 011 par l'intermediaire de sa Commisbe given the power to mediate between the parties sion ell" bons offices, devrait se voir attribuer le
011 its own initiative in order to arrive at an
pouvoir d'agir, de sa propre initiative, comme
interpretation of the Renville politica.l principles mediateur entre 1es deux parties, afin d'arriver
acceptable to both parties. Fmther, if the parties a une interpretation des principes politiques de
are unable to agree, the Committee of Good l'Aceord dl! Rc'I1'uitlc acceptable poltr toutes deux,
Offices should have the pown to arbitrate the En outre, si les parties ne peuvent se mettre d'acdifferences. To all who study the documents and ·cord, la Commission de bons offices devrait etre

maintained by Netherlands and Republican !Uil.i~
tary forces, provided this could be done agatn Id
co~operation with and under th~ ~o~trol an
supervision of the Security Conncd or Its ?rgan,
the Committee of Good Offices. Accordmg to
the letter of Prime Minister Hatta of 13 pe~
cember [8/1129] a solution along these Imes
should not be impossible.
Such an arrangement as to the military forces
must, however, be seen as part of an. over-all
arrangement for the solution of the .dlfft,rences
between the parties, and with the Preslde~t s per~
mission I wish to make a few remarks aGout the
possible solution.
The real cessation of hostilities and the real
release of prisoners are the first and necessary
conditions for any further action on the part of
the COlmci1 but the next step-the second phase
-is by
the more important. I ref~r to the
step which has to be taken in order to brmg about
a sollttion of the difficulties between the Nether·
lands and the Republic of Indonesia. In the
opinion of my Govern,?e~t this can be d.one only
by resuming the negotiations on t~e ?<lSlS of the
original and additional political prmclp!es of }he
Renvillc Agreement [S/649, Appendtc~s. I'.lJI
and XllI]. It is, evident, h~wever, th~t thIS tlme
the United Natlons Security Conned, thrmtgh
its Committee of Good Offices, will h~v~ to take
a muc:h more leading part in th~ negotiatIOns, ~nd
in this respect I '.vant to assocmte my delegatIOn
fully with the statement just mad~ by the representative of China, The Comrruttee ?£ Good
Offices should not as on the last occaSion, only
facilitate the resU1~ption of negotiations and act
as a go-between j it should have far grea~er
powers. It is evident to everyone who has studied
developments in the relations between the Nether~
lands Government and the Republic that one of
the main reasons why negotiations have not had
'any positive result i~ t~e de7P~seated distrust
which each party mamtams With regard to the
other. Each side points to v'lOlations of the truce
agreement or to other ac:~s as a p.roof of theynwillinliness of the other slde to abide by the Lm~­
gadjati or Renville Agreements. The Republtc
fe<lrs that the Dutch will restore colonialism in
Indonesia; the Dutch fear that the leadership of
the Republic is composed of irresponsible elements whose aim is to exclude the Dutch from
Indonesia.

fa;

17
reports of the Committee of Good Offices, it
seems that this would not be an impossible task.
As a matter of fact it appears that the di.-fferences
had been narrowed down to a few pomts, and
that a peaceful settlement was net impossible
when the Netherlands Government suddenly,
without warning and without bringing the dispute
before tlle United Nations, embarked upon its
military action.

habilitee i arhitrer les desaccords. Pour tous ceux
qui etudient les docllments et les rapports de la
Commission de bons offices, il semble que ce ne
soit pas la ~ne tache impossible. En fait, il semble
que les divergences ne portent plus que sur
ql1elques points et qU'lJn reglement padfique
l1'etait pas impossible lorsque le Gouvel'llement
des Pays-Bas, tout a coup) sans avertissement
et sans porter le differend devant I'Organisation
des Nations Unlcs, s'est engage clans une action
militaire.

The task of the Committee of Good Offices
would also be very much facilitated if, as suggested by the representative of the ~nited States
in his remarks, the Security Council would· fix
a date for free elections and a date for the
surrender of sovereignty. It is evident, however,
that it would be far from sufficient to arrive at
an agreed interpretation of the Renmll.e principles
by active mediation under the auspices of the
Security Council. As I have tried to point out,
the main reason for the impossib1ity of arriving
at a peaceful settlement is not so much the failure
to agree as the deep-seated distrust of the parties
for each other. It is for this reason that the most
useful function which the United Nations could
undertake in the solution of tllis dispute would
be to act as the trustee of the agreement al'Tived at
and as the supervisor of its implementation. The
Secttrity CO'lncil would be responsibJ.e to each
side for ensuring that the other side abided by
the agreement. Even if the parties do not trust
each other, tiJey shonld trust the United Nations.
I do not see why the parties should not accept
this way ont of the difficulties.

Ce qui faciliterait grandement la tiche de la
Commission de bens offices c'est que, comme l'a
suggere au COllfS de son intervention le representant des Etats-Unis, le Conseil de securite
fixe une date pour des elections libres et une
date pour le transfert de souverainete. I1 apparait qu'il ne suffirait pas, tant s'en faut, d'arriver
par un travail de mediation accompli sous Ies
auspices du Conseil de secUl'ite, aune interpretation des principes d\! Renville acceptee par les
deux parties. En effet, comme j'ai essaye de le
montrer, ce qui empeche tellement d'aboutir a
Ull reglement pa.cifique n'est pas tant l'impossibilite
d'arriver a un accord, que la proionde meflance
qu'eprollvent ['une pour l'autre les deux parties.
Ce que l'Orgallisation des Nations Unies a done
de mieux i faire pour la solution de ce differend,
c'est de s'eriger en gardienne de ]'accord et de
presider a son application. Le ConseiI cie securite serait responsable devant chacune des parties
da respect de I'accord par I'autre. Meme si les
parties n'ont pas conflance l'une dans l'autre, elles
devraient se fi{or i 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Je ne vois pas pourquoi les parties n'accepteraient pas cette solution des difficultes.

There is agreement as to the aim: the establishment of a Netherlands-Indonesian union
headed by the Netherlands Sovereign and composed of two equal partners, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands and a United States of Indonesia. I take it from statements by the parties
that they still consider this to be the goal; the
difficulties concern only the interim period,
the interim arrangments necessary to arrive at
the establishment of the Nether1ands·lndonesian
union.

11 y a accord sur le but: la creation d'une
Union neer1ando-indonesienne, ayant i sa tete
la sOl1veraine des Pays-Bas et comprenant deux
partenaires egaux: d'nne part, le Royaume des
Pays-Bas, d'autre part, tme Union indonesienne.
Je crois comprendre, d'apres les declarations des
parties en presence, qu'elles n'ont pas cesse de
considerel' que c'est la le but. Les difficult.es ne
portent que sur la periode de transition, Ies arrangements provisoires necessaires pour aboutir a
la creation de l'UniOll Pay's-Bas-Indonesie.

IJ me semble que les parties devraient savoir
It seems to me that the parties should be
~ une tierce partie, l'Organisation des Nagre
grateful for the assistance of a third party, the
surmontel' ce!> diffiUnited Nations, in overcoming these diffiCtllties. tions Unies, de les aider
If they do not accept this offer of assistance, cultes. Si e1les n'acceptent pas ·cette offre d'assismany will certainly have doubts whether the tance, beaucol1p, certes, douteront {]u'elles
repeatedly pmcJaimed aims are seriously meant. veuiIlent vraiment realiser ]'ideal tant de fois
The assistance of the Security Council is, as far proclame. L'assistanct' du Conseil de securite est,
as I can see, the orily way to eliminate or at pour autant que je sache, le seu1 moyen propre a
least to reduce the distrl1st which the parties have faire disparaitre OU, tout au mains, a calmer la
for each other, dist111St which is the reason why ffil~fiallce qui anime 1es parties l'une contre l'alltre
it has not been possible to arrive at a peaceful et exp1ique pourql1oi i1 n'a pas ete possible
settlement. The Netherlands Government would d'aboutir a un reglement pacifique. L'Organihave the guarantee of the United Nations tllat sation des Nations Unles garantirait all. Gouverany possible violation of the truce and the agree- nement des Pa.ys-Bas que tonte violation even~
melt on the part of the Republic would be ttlelle de la treve et de l'accord, de la part de 1..
marked and that pressure would be bFought to Republique d'Indonesie, ser.ait notee et que le
bear by the Security Council on the Republlc in Consei1 de secllrite ferait pression sur la Repuorder to put an immediate end to such a possible blique POLlf qu'elle mette Ull terme immedia~
violation; and vice versa, the Republic would a cette violation; inversement, elle garantirait ~
have the guarantee of the United Nations that la Republiqueque le Gotlvernement des Paysthe Netherlands Governn.lent would not, as the 'Eas s~abstie:ldra d'intel'prCter I'accord d'une
Republican leaders fear it does, use a: different. autre maniere, comme1e craignellt les chefs repula
interpretation and take action to" undermine the bliql.ins, et qu'il ne fera rien pour nnire
, Republiqtte et la priver de son il1depemlance.
Reptlblic and deprive it of its jmlependence.

a

e
e

,
le
~.

e-

,e

a

18
Permit me to return to the question of the
withdrawal of military forces. I would say thaJ
an arrangement as to the maintenance of law an
order by the Republic or by Netherland.s. ~nd
Republican military forces, under the supe! vlsl~n
of the Committee of Good Offices and wlir ,t t e
Security Council as trustee, fits very we l.n 0
the framework of the proposed general solutIOn.
I am fully aware that I have not entered into
many details which will have to be carefully
considered, but the det~ils can be worked ot;t
later. The main questton. at the moment IS
whether the principle i~se1f, can be accepted by
the parties. My suggestlOn IS that w~ should. try
a solution along tho~e lines if t?e ,umt,:d NatIOns
is not to abdicate entirely and ehromate Its~lf from
this dispute, which is so full of far-re~c~mg.an,cl
dangerotlS consequences, In our opmlOn lt lS
more important to find a sol?tion t~~ to. try
to fix responsibilities and, to :'Olce recnmmatlO~s.
In our opinion the solution IS to get ,the partle.s
to resume negotiations, with the Security COllncII
or the Committee of (':rOod Offices empowered to
mediate, to arbitrate and to act <IS trustee between
the palties.

Je voudrais revenir a la question ~u retrait
des forces militaires. I1 me semble qu un .arra~­
gement en vue du mai~tien de l'ordre pubhc, S?lt
par la Republiqtle, salt par de~ f.orces armees
mixtes neerlandaises et repubhcames, sous le
contl'cle de la Commission de ~ons o~ces. ~t
sous la hattte autorite du Cansed de secul';te,
entrtrait tres hien dans le cadre de la solution
generale envisagee.
Je sais parfaitement que j'ai l<li~se de cote ?es
points de detail qui appellent tine etu,de att~ntlve,
mOllS les details pcuvent attendre: L. essen.tlel. est
pem le moment de savoir si. le P?nc;pe IUI-meme
peut etre adopte par les parties. J estlffie que nous
devons essayer de resoudre la questi~n dans ce
sens, si l'Ol'ganisation des Nations Un,le.s ~e yeut
pas se declarer impuissante et ~e desmteresser
de ce differelld si lourd de consequences dangereuses et profondes. A notre avis, il importe
davantage de trouver une soll1tion que d'ess<lyer
de determiner des responsabilites et de fOl"ffiuler
des recriminations. Pour nol1S, la solution cOllsiste
a obtenir des parties qu'elles l'eprennent leurs
pourparlers en habilitant le Cons~il, de secur!te
et la Commission de bons offices a Jouer le role
de mediateurs, d'arbitres et de gardiens des
principes.

:Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Soci~ist Repu,blics) {trmlslaled from Rlusja11~: .Durml'! the dlscussion in the Security Councd 11l Pans of the
aggreSSIOn of the Netherlands Government
against the Republic of ~ndon~sia, the. USSR
ddegation fully set forth Its pomt of view and
submitted draft resolutions [Sj1148 and S/1159]
designed to put an end to that aggression. H~w­
ever, since the general debate on the question
has been reopened, the USSR delegation feels
oblige(l to make a few additional remarks.

M, MALIK (Union des Republiques sodalistes
sovietiques) (tradl~it du rasse): Lors de la discussion an Conseil de secl1rite, a Paris, de la
question de I'agressiotl commise contre la Republiql1e d'Indonesie par le Gouvernement neerlandais, la. delegation de l'URSS a expose, en
detail son point de vue et a depose des proJets
de resolutions [S/1148 et 5/1159] tcndant u
mettre effectivement fin a. cette <lgression. Nean~
moins, puisquc I'on reprend la discussion generale de ceUe question, la delegation de l'URSS
estime indispensable de faire quelques observations complementaires.

The substance of the question under discussion
is simply that the Netherlands Government has
committed an act of aggression against the Republic of Indonesia in violation of the well-known
Rellville Agreement previously concluded between
the Netherlands and the Indonesian Republic,
under the terms of which all controverial questions arising between the Netherlands and the
Indonesian Republic, as weB as the question of
the governmental structure of Indonesia, must
be settled by political negotiation between the
Netherlands Government and the Government of
Indonesia.
One of the reasons for this Netherlands aggression against Indonesia has been that the Security
Council has, from the first, failed to fulfil its
obligation to maintain the peace. Instead of setting up an authoritative commmittee composed
of all its members, the Security Council contented
itself with establishing the so-called Committee
of Good Offices, which turned out to be merely
a screen to help the Netherlands authorities prepare new acts of agg.ression against the Republic
of Indonesia. The Secmity Council, which, under
Article 24 of the Charter, has primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security and must ensure prompt and effective
action in that respect on behalf of the United
Nations, did not take appropriate steps to stop
the new aggression by the Netherlands against

Le fond de la ques(101l que nOllS diseutOllS en
ce moment se reduit a ceci: le Gouvernement
neerlandais a commis un .'lcte d'agression contre
la Republique d.'Indonesie en violation de l'accord bien connl1 du Renville qui avait ete precedemment conc111 entre les Pays·Bas et la Republique d'Indonesie et en vertu dllquel toutes les
questions de la structure gouvernementale de
l'Indonesie devaient etre resolues au moyen de
conversations politiques entre le Gonvernement
des Pays-Bas et le Gouvernement de la Rept1~
blique d'Indonesie.
L'une des raisons pour lesquclles les Pays-Bas
ont lance leur agression en Indonesie a ete que
le Conseil de securite n'a pas, des le debut, rempli
Ies obligations qui IUl inconlbaient pDur maintcnir
la paix. Au lieu de creer une Commission ayant
de l'autorite et d'y faire partieiper taus ses membres, le Conseil de se-write s'est contente de
former la Corrunission dite de bans offices qui
a montre qu'elle n'a fait que servir d'ecran a
l'abri duquel les autorites neerlandaises ont pu
preparer de nouveaux ades d'agression contre
la Republiqtle d'Indonesie. Le Conseil de secu,rite a qui incombe, en vertu de l'Article 24 de la
Charte des Nations Unies, la responsabilite principale pour le maintien de la paix et de la. s6curite
internationales et qui, conformement a cet Article,
doit assurer l'action rapide et efficace de l'Orga-

19

the Republic of Indonesia or to protect the nisation pour maintenir la paix et la securite,
legitimate interests of the Republic. The explana M n'a pas pris les mesures qui s'imposaient pour
tion for that is that the representatives of certain mettre fin a la nouvelle agression des Pays-Bas
States on the Securi~y Council, primarily the contre la Republique d'Indonesie, n'a pad pris
representatives of t:te United States and the les mesures neecessaires pour proteger les inteUnited Kingdom, have in fact chosen to shield rets legitimes de la Republiglle. La raison en est
and consequently to encourage the Netherlands que les representants au Conseil de securite de
Government's <lggression against the Republic of certains Etats, et tout d'abord les Etats·Unis
Indonesia. They opposed the proposJ.! of the d'Amerique et du Royaume~Uni, ant en fait
USSR delegation that the Security Council should adopte une aUitllde visant a couvrir et par la
condemn this aggression committed by the Nether~ meme a encourager l'agression du Gouvernement
lands Government against the Republic of Indo- neerlandais contre la Republique d'Indonesie.
nesia, and should require the Netherlands Gov- lis se sont opposes a Cl' que le Canseil de secuernment immediately to cease military operations rite condamnat, comille le proposait.la delegation
and to withdraw its troops to the positions they de I'URSS, l'agression du Gouvernement neeroccupied before the renewal of these operations. landais contre la Republique d'Indonesie et exigeat que le Gouvernement neerlandais mit
immediatement fin aux operations militaires et
retirit ses troupes sur les fXJsitions qt1'elles OCCUM
paient avant la reprise des operations militaires.
Au lieu de ces propositions concretes et justes,
Instead of accepting such just and concrete
proposals, the Council contented itself with on s'est contente d'adresser aux deux pal·ties un
addressing a completely abstract appeal to the appel purement abstrait, les invitant a cesser les
two parties asking. them to end military operations operations militaires et a liberer les detenus.
and to free prisoners. Nothing further was done. Ricn d'autre a'a ete fait.
Toute personne objective et impartiale a pu se
The injustice and absurdity of such an appeal
to both "the parties" \vere obvious to any objec- rendre compte de l'injustiee et de I'absurdite
tive and unbiassed pel'son, for the whole world que constituait un semblable appel aux "deux
knows that it was not Republican troops that parties", car le monde entter sait que Cl' ne sont
had attacked and invaded territory controlled pas les troupes republicaines qui not attaque le
by the Netherlands authorities but that, on the territoire soumis au controll' des auto rites neercontrary, Netherlands troops had attacked the landaises et ont envahi Cl' territoire mais que Cl'
Indonesian Republic and invaded its territory, sont, au contraire, les tl"Oupes neel'landaises qui
and that the President and other political leaders ant attaque la Repllblique d'Indonesie et qui ont
of the Republic had been arrested not by Repub- envahi son territoire, que ce sont les autorites
neerlandaises et non les auto rites repubticaines
lican, but by Netherlands, authorities.
qui ont arnhe le President et cl'autres chefs politiques de la Republiqlle d'Indonesie.
En deposant son projet de resolution, qui
By submitting its draft resolution containing
the appeal to "the parties" [5/1142J the United comportait un appel allX "denx parties" [5/1142],
States delegation in fact side-stepped the sub- la delegation des Etats·Ul1is d'Ameriquc, .en
stance of the question and shielded t11e Nether- fait, estompait l'element principal de la questwn
lands Government's aggressive acts against the et cotlvrait l'agression du Gouvernement necrlanRepublic. What is more, the results of the voting dais contre la Republique. Bien pIu", les resultats
o~ that draft resolution [392nd meeting] even du vote sur c!'. projet tendant a adresser un
showed that the proposal call1ng upon "the appel allX "deux parties" pour les inviter a. retirer
parties" to withdraw their armed forces, had leurs troupes [392eme seance], a montre que
been presented by the United States delegation la delegation des Etats-Unis d'Amerique n'avHit
only in order to have it rejected. The machinery plresente cette proposition que pour la faire
of voting in the Security Council was deliberately echouer. Pour Cl' faire, on a tire. pleinemeet parti
used for that purpose. I: was only necessary des particularites de la procedure de vote au
fOJ: two delegations of the Anglo-American bloc COllseij de securite. Pour que ccUe proposition
to abstain, for that point not to obtain the ne re.;ut pas le nombre de voix suffisants et, par
requisite number of votes and, consequently, not consequent, ne fut pas adoptee, il suffisait que
to be adopted. The representative of the Ukrain- deux des delegations du bloc anglo-americain
ian SSR had been detained in New York, having s'abstiennent.· Le representant de la RSS
been refused the eatry visa to France, and was d'Uhaine etait retenu a New-York on ne lui
unable to take part in the vote. Among the dele- :wait pas donne de visa d'entree pour la Fl'ance
gations that comprise the so-called Americ:m et il n'a pu prendre part au scrutin. Au nombre
majority in the Security Council, there were two des deleg-,ations qui forment ce que 1'on appel1~
delegations that would not, in any event, wnnt la majorite americaine au Conseil de securite, It
the proposal to withdraw armed forces-namely, s'en est trouve deux qui ne voulaient, en auctln
thosc of Canada and Argentina. They abstained cas, soutenir la proposition tendant au retrait
w]-len those proposals were voted upon, together des troupes. C'6taient les delegations du Canada
with 111e representatives of the colonial powers, et de l'Argentine. Lors clu vote sur Cl'S proposiFrance and Belgium. The result was that the tions, eUes se sont abslenues avec les representants
. proposal to withdraw troops could not possibly des pays coloniaux - la France et la Belgique.
be adopted. Thus, by making use of the voting Ainsi, I'adoption de la proposition tendant <tU
macllinecy, the Anglo-American majority scuttled retrait des troupes devenait absolument imposthat point.
sible, En tirant parti des dispositions sur la procedure de vote, lamajorite anglo-americaine a
fait ech01ler cette proposition.

20
It becomes perfectly obvious that the object in
submitting it was not that it should be accepted,
but that it should be rejected. It will be remembered that the next vote [392nd meeting] was
taken on the USSR draft resoh:tion [5/1148]
which condemned the aggression O! the Netherlands Government and required the immediate
cessation of military operations on its part andas the first step towards the settlement of the
conflict-the withdrawal of the Netherlands
troops to the position they occupied before the
renewa1 of military operations. According to
that resolution, the Security Council was also to
reqnire that the Netherlands Government shonld
immediately set free the President and other
political leaders of the Republic arrested by the
Netherlands troops.

Finally, the USSR draft resolution provided
for the est<1blishment of a commission of the
Security Council composed of representatives of
all the States members of the Security Council,
which was to supervise the fulfilment of the
Cotlllcil's resolution on the cessation of militarv
-operations and the withdrawal of Netherland"s
troops, and also to assist in settling the conflict
as a whole between the Netherlands and the
Republic of Indonesia.
That draft resolution was, however, rejected
by the Anglo-American majority. It is worth
pointing out that, when the item dealing with
the withdrawal of Netherlands troops was put
to the vote, the representatives of the United
States and the United Kingpom abstained from
voting, thereby preventing its adoption. The
United States representative declared, in this
connexion, that he was unable to vote for that
proposal because his own proposal for the wit~,~
drawal of troops by both sides, which was identical with this one, had been rejected. It is doubt~
fu] whether anyone, with the possible exception
of the speaker himself, could take such an argltment seriously. It was quite clear that, if the
United States representative had really wished
to put an end to aggression, he should, after the
defeat of his own proposal, have supported any
other identical proposal. He failed to do so, however, and the United Kingdom representative
f(Jllo:wed his example. Hiding behind the purely
fafJclful pretext we have just mentioned, they
turned down the USSR proposal dealing with
the withdrawal of Dutch troops. As a result the
Council adopted a weak and Illlsatisfactory ;esolutlOn [S/1150J from which the basic point
dealing with the withdrawal of Dutch troops had
been excluded deliberately.

It has become obvious that some members of
the Security COlmcil shield the Netherlands
Govel'l1rnent's aggression against the Republic of
Indonesia and that the United States and the
United Kingdom did not wish to take measnres
for the withdrawal of Dutch troops from the
territory of the Republic. Is it unjust and premature to df<.lw such a conclusion? No. This
opinion is fully borne out by the events which
soon followed.

I1 devient tout i fait evident que ce point a ete
presente, non pour qu'il {Ut accepte .111ais all
contraire pour qu'il ftlt rejete. Apn~s 1Ul, comme
on le sait, on a nUs aux voix [392emB seance]
le projet de res01l..:tion [Sj1148] depose par la
delegation de l'URSS et qui condamnait l'agres.
sion commise par le GOl1vernement neerlandais,
exigeait qee le Gouvernement neerlandais mit
fin imm6diatement atlX operations militaires et
demandait, comme premier pas vel'S le rkglement
du conBit, que les troupes neerlandaises ftlssent
ramenees sur les positions gtl'elles occupaient
avant le commencement des operations militaires.
Ce pro jet prevoyait egalement que le ConseiI
de sectlrite devrait exiger du Gouvernement neerlandais la liberatioll immediate dll President de
la Repl1blique d'Indonesie et des atttres chefs
po1itiques repllb1icains arretes par 1es troupes
neerlandaises,
El'.fin, le projet de resolution depose par la
delegation ele l'URSS rrevoya\t la creation d'lIne
commission du Conseil de secmite, composee de
representants de tous les Etats mcmbres du
Conseil, chargee, d'lme part, de surveiller la mise
en ceuvre de la resolution du Conseil tendant a
la cessation des operation, militaires et au retrait
des troupes neerlandaises et, d'alltre part, de
cooperer all reg1ement d'ensemble du conflit entre
les Pr.ys.Bas et la Republique d'!ndonesie.
Ce projet a ete rejete par la majorite ang10americaine. 11 est a remarqller que, lorsgue la
question du retrait des troupes neer1andaises a
cte posce, les representants des Etats-Unis d'Amer\qne et du Royaume-Uni se sont abstcnus de
prendre part a'.1 scrutin et, par la meme, ont en
fait rejete cc point, A cc prapos, le l'epresentant
des Etats-UnlS cl'Ameriqne a declare ClU'il ne
potlvait voter en favclIr de cette proposition
parce que, a~t-il dit, 1'00 n'avait pas adopte son
propre projet qtli avait ete mis aux voix auparavant, et qui etait semblable a la proposition de
l'URSS ptlisqu'il tendait egalement an retrait
des troupes des deux parties. 11 est diffici1e de
croire qu'il se trouvera qnelqtt'un, si l'on exclut
peut-fure l'autel1r de cette declaration, qui puisse
prendre au serieux un argument de ce g-e:1re. 11
est tout a fait evident que, si le representant des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique voulait reellement mettre
fin a l'agl:ession, il amait, apres le rejet de sa
propre proposition, vote pOllr toute autre proposition similaire. Neanmoins, ni lui, r.i le representant du Royaume-Uni qtil a suivi son exemple,
ne !Jont fait. S'aDl'itant derriere le pretexte purement imaginaire que nous venons d'indiC]uer, i1s
ont rejete la proposition de la delegation de
l'URSS tendant all 1'etrait des troupes neerlandaises. Aussi, le Conseil a-t-il adopte une resolution [5/1150] faible et peu satisfaisante ql1i,
a dessein, ne comprenait pas le point fondamental que constitlle le retrait des troupes neerlaodaises.
I1 est devenu evident qlle certaios membres
du Conscil de securite C011Vrent l'agression du
Gouvernement neerlandais contre la Republique
d'!ndontsie, et que les Etats-Unis d'All1crique et
le Royaume-Uni ne vettlent pas prendre de
meSl1res en VIle du retrait des troupes oeerla1\daises du territoire de la RepubEque. Est-il
injuste et preIT.ature de tirer une telle conclusion?
NOli. Les evenements qui se S011t dercules peu
apres ont pleinement confirme le bien-fonde de
cette opinion.

21
Comme je l'ai deja indique, le representant
de la RSS d'Ukraine a ete fort complaisamment
retenu a New-York, juste assez longtemps pour
ne pas pouvoir paniciper a. la seance du Crmseil
de securite au cours de laquelle le scrutin sur la
question indonesienne a eu lieu [392eme Sea1tce].
Des son arrivee a Paris, il a, a la premH~re seance
du Conseil de securite a laquelle -it a partidpe,
c'est-a.-dire le 27 decembre [393~;ne siana],
depose le projet de resolution suivant [5/1158] :
"Le Conseil de securite
"The Security Council
"Conside1's it necessary that the Netherlands
"Estime indispensable que les troupes neertrooIJS should be withdrawn immediately to the lnndaises soient retirees immediatement sur les
positions whic.h they occupied' before military positions qu'elles occllpaient avant la reprise des
operations against the Indonesian Republic were operations militaircs contre la Republique d'Indonesie."
renewed".
Cing delegations ont vote en faveur de cette
The delegations of the following live States
voted for this draft resolution [393rd meeting]: resolution [393hne seallie] , a savoir I'URSS,
the USSR, the Ukrainian SSR, Syria, China and la RSS d'Ukraine, la Syrie, la Chine et la Co.Colombia. Two more votes were needed for its Iambic. I1 a rmmqlle deux voix poru· que cette
adoption. Yet this time, too, the represent~tives proposition fut adoptee. La aussi, les represenof the United States and the United Kingdom tants des Etats-Unis d'Amerique et du Royaumeabstained, thereby making adoption of the reso- Uni se S011t <J-bstenus et par la meme ont l'endu
lution impossible. Thus for the second time they I'adoption de ce projet impossible. Ainsi, une
prevented the adoption Df a proposal the imple- seconde fois Us ont rendu impossible I'adoption
mentation of which might have forced the aggres- d'une proposition dont la mise en ceuvre aura-it
sor to withdraw his troops from the territory of pu forcer l'a.gresseur a retirer ses troupes du
his victim and consequently migl1t have made the territoire de la victime de l'agresslOn et par la
resolution and the actions of the Security Council meme donDer i cette resolution et aux decisions
truly efiective, as the Charter requires.
dl1 Conseil de securite l'efficacite que prescrit la
Chillie.
It was precisejy the delegations of the United
Ce sont precisement les deU~gations des Etats~
.States of America and of the United Kingdom Unis d'Amerique et on Royaume-Uni qui, par
that, by the way they voted, determined the la fat;on dont elles ont vote, ant detennine l'issue
decision: that is to say that, for the second time, du scrutin, c'est-a.-dire ont rejete. pOUI' la seconde
they turned down the proposal for the withdrawal fois, la proposition tend,mt all rctrait des troupes
neerlandaises.
of Netherlands troops,
I1 est devenu tout a fait evident que la deleIt has become quite obvious that the United
States delegation, with the aid of the United gation des Etats~Unis d'Amerique, aidee pal' la
Kingdom delegation, first utilized the machinery delegation du Royaume-Uni, a tout d'abord, en
of voting to have its own proposal for the with- faisant 11sage de la procedure de vote, fait echouer
drawal of armed forces by both "the parties" sa propre proposition tend ant an retrait des
rejected; then the two delegations, by twice ab- troupes "des dellx parties", et qn'ensuite ces
;
staining from voting, rejected first the USSR delegations, q'1i, par (leux fois, se sont abstenues
proposal and next the proposal of the Ukrainian de prendre part all scrutin, ont rejete, d'une part
SSR that the Netherlands troops should with- la proposition de la delegation de l'URSS et,
draw from the Republic:an territory they had d'alltl'e part, la proposition de la delegation de
la RSS d'Ukraine tenJant aU retrait des troupes
seized.
neerlandaises uu territoire de la Republiqlle
occupe par elles.
Voila done qnelle est la situation a. propos de
Such are the facts about the vote in the Security Council on the proposal to withdraw la mise aux voix au Conseil de securite de la
troops. This situation is not what certain people proposition tendant all retrait des troupes. Cette
who have spoken here would like to paint it- situatioll n'est pas du tout telle qU'ont VQulu la
" people w110 sound the trumpet of Jericho when depeindre celiains de ceux qui ont pris la parole
";
they [Jour out calumnies and fabrications upon ici et qui ont embottche la trompette de Jericho
the USSR. but, when they pretend to criticize pour deverser des calomnies et des prop'os defai·es the position taken by the United States, sink to a tiste.s sur l'lJRSS et qui, pourtant, ont baisse
~
la voix, jnsqu'a un mtlrmure leger et timid~, je
.soft, timid, even caressing, whisper.
dirai meme tenrlre, aIors qu'ils ont Youllt. donner
l'impression Cju'ils critiqtltlicl1t la positron des
Etals-Unis d'Amerique,
,be
Cette seame du COllseil, du 27 decembre
ni
At that same Council meeting 27 December
,li~
1393rd meeting], it al~o became dear that the [393eme seance], a egalemt'llt montre avec evidence que le GOllverncment neerlandais a enfreint
uel Netherlands Government was violating the Coune ~ cil'.;; resolution of 24 December [5/1150] on the la resolution du Conseil de securite du 24 decembre [S/115(l], tendant i la cessati.on des ope~rI~ cessation of military operations. The representaE):.. tive of the Netherlands stated cynically that his rations mi1itaires. Le repn£sentant des Pays-Bas
siet Government did not consiuer it possible to a declare avec cynisme que son GOTIvernement
51. stop military operation~ against the Indonesian n'estimait pns possible de cesser les operations
militaires contre la Republique d'Indonesie.
:le: -Republic.
As I have mentioned, some one very obligingly
detained the representative of the Ukrainian SSR
in New York just long: enough to keep him from
attending the meeting of the Security Council at
which the resolutions of the Indonesian question
were put to the vote [392nd meeting]. When he
arrived in Paris, however, he submitted the following resolution [S/1158] at the very next [393rd]
-meeting of the Council, held on 27 December:

,

,,
:.

••

"

"'

The USSR delegation, holding bat such a
position on the part of the Netherlands Government meant a direct refusal immediately to cease
ho~tiIitics agabst the Indonesi2n Republic, sub~
mitted a draft resolution [S/lD9] ordering the
:;:-.,retherlaods Gov~m:nent to Cease military operatiom:: within twenty· four hOlIrs of the adoption
of that resolution -by the Security Council.

Under the pretext that the Cound must wai:
until the Net,erlands Government had studied
the Council's resolution [5/1150J and had given
its final answer, ~he representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom, and with them
the majority of the members of the Council who
fonaw their lead, dSQ rejectec that proposai of
the USSR, fair thot:gb it was. The Security
Council wait!"d fnr that answer from the Netherlands Government until 29 December. On that
date, however, 1396th 11lu#ng] the Netherlands
Governl11l'.nt once mQre announced throegh its
representative that it still needed some time for
the completio:J of its milit:ll)' operations, in other
W,]H!"" for the final strangulation of the Indonesian Republic and tbe occnpation of its whole
territory.
The USSR delegation proposed to the Ang[oAmerican majo~ity in the Council that effective
and decis:ve steps should be taken to ca:! to
o:,der the shaITleless ~ggressor and to force him
to respect and carry out the resolutions of the
Security Council. That proposal, however, was
not supported by the Anglo-American majority,
in F<lrticlllnr by the United States and United
Kingdom delegations. The United Kingdom
delegation st;1teil th.at its Government was satisfied with such a reply of the Netr.erJands Government, while the United States representative,
though pretending to be dissatisfied with that
Government's position, said nevertheless that his
delegation was satisfied with the fatt that t:1e
Primt: Minister of tf:e Netherlands intended
sho:-tly to go to Indonesia in person.

All these fact3 show that the nelf'gations of
the United State3 md United Kingdom in the
Security CO~1neil have adopted a po:icy not oerely
of shielding, but of givitg ontright support to,
the Netherlands GOvernment's acts of aggress~on
against the Inconesian Republic. It was they who
scuttled the resolution on tl1e withdrawal of the
Netherlands troops frorr. the teritory of the
Republic and who did not allow effecfive
meaSt:res to be tHke~ tn curb the aggressor.
In its stattmect nladc :n the Security Couttril
on 24 December [392nd meeting). the USSR
del<;gation has already cited facts showing, :hat
Umted States representatives on the so-eillpd
Committee of Geod Offices had, during their so~
journ in Indonesia, on tlle one hancl, forced the
G(.l\'emmCllt of the Republic to m2ke ever gTe:'lter
concessions to tlle derna.nds of the Nethel"lands
Government-concessions w:"ieh meant a virWal
t:apitulation to the cynical demands of the. Ncber~
lands aggressor-anel, on the other hand, had
urged it to ref.n:ss the. activities of the democratic

Considernnt que (eUe posltton du Gotlverne;llent nccrlandais COllstitlle lJn refus direct de
mettre fin sans retard aux operations militairEs
CDntre la Reptlbl:ql.le d'lndonesie, la de!l~gatiol'l
de I'URSS a depose lln projet de resolution
[S,t1159] tel1dant :e que le Conseil de secur;te
orconnat at: Gouvernement neerlandais de ceS8er
les operations militair!".:; dam:: Ies vingt~quatre
heure5 suivant I'adoption. par le Conseil, de ce
pl'oje: de resolution"
S011S IJn~le-xle qu'il etait necessaire d'attl'.ndrf
que le Gouvernement neerlandais ait pu etudier
la re50lution du Conseil de securite [S/l1jO]
et dcnner a celui·ci une n§por,se definitive, les
rcpre5cntants des Etats-lTni5 d'Anleriqlle et du
Royaume-Uni et, avec eux, les membres de la
majo~ite dt: Conseil qui les sUlvent, ont egalf':ment
rejete ceUe proposition equitable soumise par
!'URSS. Jusqu'au 29 decembre [3968me seance],
le COllSeil de securitc n attendu la ,epoMse clu
Gouvernerr.e.nt neerlandais, A cette date. le Gau:"
vernement nee.rlandais a declare une" fois de
plus, pa;" le trucherr.cnt de son :-eprec:entant, qu'il
lu! faIlait quelque temp~ pour r:1ettre fin .'!11X
operations militaires, c'est-a.-dire pour etouffer
dfflllitivemcnt In Republi'1ue d'Jnnon~sie et pour
occuper el1tieremellt son territoire.
La deUigation de I'URSS s'est adressee a. la
majQrite anglo-americaim: aU Consei: de securite
en p~oposallt de prend~e des mesu~es immecliates,
l'ordre
efficaces et (lecisives, an."l de rappeler
respecter et
l'agresscur ehonte et Je le forcer
a mettre a execution les resolutiJUS du COJlseil
de securite. Cependant, ceUe proposition 11'a pas
trouve de soutien <luprt:~ de :a rnajor:te .:ltlglo.
a:nericdne et, en premier lieu, aLlprh de;; delegations des Eta:s-Unis d'Ameriqne et du
Royaume-Ulli. La delegation du Royamne·Uni
a declare que le GouvernelUent du RoyaumeUui se considerait satisfait de cette l'eponse de
la part du Gouvememcct ncc:'lanclais. Quant an
representant des Etats-Unis, tout en faisant mille
de n'etre pas satis:ait de I'attitude cn GO'..1.veme·
Der.t neerhuld<'lls, il n'cn a pas moins declare qlle
la delegation des Etats-Unis d'Ameriqt:e eLait
satisfaite d'aprrendre (]ue le Premier Millistre
des Pays-Bits avait l'intention de se rendre prow
chnineme:lt ell Indollesie.
Taus ccs faits montrent que les delegations
des Etats-U nis cl' .A..meriql1e et du Royalln\e:Jni au CO~lseil ::le secnr:te, non contentes de
cot!vrir la politique agressive du GOltvernement
:lecrlande.is contl·e la R.epubJique d'lllLluaes:e, se
30r:t mises a sotltenir directemer.t cette poiitique.
Ce So:1t predsement ces delegations Cjui ont fait
echouer au CO:lseil de securite le projet de n~so­
lution tendill1t all retrait des tz·oupes neerlanda:ses du territoire de la Repl1bliqtce et ('cui n'ont
pa3 permis que des mestlres eff!cac(:s Eu~scnt
pr:ses afin ue rappeler L'~gresseur a la rr.isOll.
Da."ls la declaration qu'eUe avait faite au Conseil
de securite, lE 24 c1ecembre 1392eme seance),
la delegaticn de \'URSS avait deja preSente des
faits Qui montl'aiellt que les rep:,esentants des
Etats-U:lis d'Ameriqlle a la Commission ditc de
bons office", ant, au CQnts de lcl.ll" sejoul' en Indonesie, d'une part, oblige le Gouvernement de la
R.~pl1bl iquc
faire des eoncessiorls de plus en
pbs gr:mdes aux exigences du GOllvernement
neerlandais - concessior.s qlli, en fait, equiva~
talent a une capitulation du Gouvernement de la
R~pt1b1iql1e dev~nt les exigences cyni:]ues des

a

a

a

a

23
Indonesian patriots who were selflessly lighting
for the freedom and independence of their
country.

Dy so doing, the United Statrs representatives
on the Committee of Good Offices undermined
the strength of the Republic and played into the
hands of the Netherlands aggressors.
The United States Press cites data proving
that the United States, in point of fact, financed
Netherlands ag~ression in Indonesia. According
to this Press, it was the Marshall Plan which
enabled the Netherlands Govemment to prepare
and carry out its attack against the Indonesian
Republic. For the first year of operation of the
Marshall Plan, the Netherlands obtained credits
of <lpproxirnately 270 million dollars, with an
additional 84 million dollars provided for Netherlands pl·operty-owners in Indonesia. Not one
cent of those funds was allocated to the Republic
of Indonesia, the people of which have for long
been endming severe hardships as a result of the
cruel economic blockade imposed by the Netherlands authorities.

Thus the Marshall Plan gives the Netherlands
Government in 1948 credits totalling 354 million
dollars. According to other information furnished
by the United States Press, the Netherlands
spends 365 million doUars a year on the maintenance of its army, navy and air forces. Consequcntly, the maintenance of the armed forces
used by the Netherlands to attack the Republic
of Indonesia is practically financed· by the credits
received under the Marshall Plan. This was
recognized by Unitcd States Senator GeOl'ge
Malone, who was reported in the New York
Times of 23 December as saying:

"Without the money we gave the Dutch untler
the Marshall Plan, they could not do what they
are doing in Indonesia. They have blockaded
those little Indonesians and now they are going
to whip them."
As everyone knows, the Netherlands is a
member of the military alliance of the Western
Union. Other members of it are the United
Kingdom, France and Belgium, which were
members of the Security Council at the time
when the Netherlands attack on the Indonesian
Republic was planned and executcd. The Treaty
under which that Union was formed provides
for consultation among its members regarding
any situation which might constitute a threat to
the peace, no matter where that threat may
arise.
According: to this and other provisions of the
Treaty of alliance, the members of the Western
Union could not fail to consult on the question
of the preparation by the Netherlands of an
attack on the Indonesian Republic. Does not
that mean that the United Kingdom, France and
:1 Belgium have given their consent to this aggres·
~ sion by the Netherlands GOvernment agaill5t
.; Indonesia?

,
"

agresSeltrs neerlandais - et, d'autre part, lncite
le Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie
a reprimcr l'activite des patriotes democrates
indonesiens qui menent une lutte hero"jql1e pour
la liberte et pour l'independance de leur IJatrie.
Par la meme, les representants des Etats-Unis
d'Al1lerique a la Commission de bons offices oat
sape les forces de ]a Republique et ont fait le
jell des agresseul"s neerlandais.
La presse des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, de son
dte, a produit des faits qui montrent que les
Etats-Unis ant, en realite, finance l'agression
neerlandaise en Indonesie. Selon les informations
de la presse, c'cst preeisement le Plan Marshall
qui a permis au Gouvernement neerlanclais de
preparer et d'accolllplir son agression contre la
Rcpubliq',le d'Indonesie. Le Plan Marshall accordait aux: Pays-Bas une somme d'environ 270 mil~
lions de dollars a titre de credits l)our la premiere
annee de ce plan et unc somme suppJementaire
de 84 millions de dollars [Jour les proprietaires
neerlandais en Inc!011esie. Or, pas un cent de ses
ressources n'etait af'fecte a la Republique d'Inclonesie, dont la population sottffre depuis Iongtemps de privations severes, en raison dt! cruel
bloctls economique etabli par les autoritcs neerlandaises.
Ainsi done, le Plan MarshaIl accorde au GOllvemement neerlandais pour 1948 des credits
s'elevant a un total de 354 millions de dollars.
D'apres d'autres informations de la presse americ:aine, les Pays-Bas depcasent pOl1r l'entretien
de 1eurs armces de terre, de mer et de I'ail',
365 millions de dollars par an. On peut en conclure que l'entretien des forces annees que les
Pays-Bas utilisent ponr ponrsuivre leur agression
c:ontre la Repnblique d'Illdonesic est finance, en
fait, par les dollars relfus all titre du Plan
Marshall. Ce fait est egalement Tec:onnn paT
M. George Malone, membre du Senat des EtatsUnis d'Ameriqne ql1i, selon le New York Times
du 23 decembre, a dec1an~:
"Si les Neerlalldais ne disposaient pas des
sommes qu'ils relfoivent au titre du Plan Marshall,
ils ne pourraient agir en Indonesie comme ils le
font a l'heure actllelle. TIs ont, tout c1'abord,
sOllmis les Indoncsiens au blocus; maintenant,
ils s'appretent it les fouetter."
On sait eg1l1ement que Ics Pays-Bas sont l'un
des pays membres de l'Alliance militaire de l'Eu~
rope occidenm1e, alliance dont font egalement
partie le Royaume-Uni, la France et la Belgique,
c'est-a.-dire des pays qui ant ete membres du
Conseil de securite pendant la l:l6riode de preparation de l'agression neerlandaise contre la Republique d'Indonesie et la perio<1e d'execution de
cette agressioll. Les termes de cette alliance pre·
voient que les Etats signataires se consulterorit
sur toute situation qui peut creer une menace
a la paix en quelque lieu que cette rneltaCe puisse
surgir.
En vertu de cette clause et d'autres clauses
encore, du Traite d'alliance, les membres de
l'Union de l'Europe occidentale ont eu, sans
aucun doute, des entretiens sur la preparation de
l'agression neerlandaise contre la Republique
d'Indonesie. Est-ce que tout cela ne signifie pas
que le Royaume-Uni, la France et la Belgique ont
donne 1eur consentement a l'agression commise
par le Gouvernement neerlandais contre la Repn'blique d'Indonesie?

En tout cas, la position adoptee par les repreIn any case, the position taken by the repn:se.ntatives of those States in the Security Council sentants de ces pays au Conseil de securite, lors
during the· discussion of the question of the de la discussion de la question de l'agression
Netherlands aggression, shows that that aggres- neerlandaise en Indonesie, montre que cette
sion was committed with-at the very least- , agression a ete lanceetont au mains avec le consenthe tacit consent of the Governments of those tement tacite des Gottvernements de ces trois
three States. In the ligllt of all this, the aggressive pays. De ce fait, le caraetere agressif de cette
character of this notorious Union becomes even fameuse alliance devient encore plus manifeste.
more obvious.
Tous ces faits pris ensemble montrent, de toute
All this taken together bears dear testimony to
evidence,
qu'il y a etltente au sujet de la question
the existence of a preyious agreement on. the
fait clair que s'il
Indonesian question, for it is perfectly obvIOUS indonesienne, car i! est tout
le
soutien
tacite ou direct
n'avait
pas
compte
sur
that if the Netherlands Government had not been
able to COllnt on tlle U oited States and the United des Etats-Unis d'Ameriq~e et du Royaume-Uni,
Kingdom to cover up and support its acts of le Gouvernement w~erlandais n'aurait jamais ase
aggression, it would har,dly have. dared to attack attaC]uer la Republique d'Indonesie, violer I' Ac~ord
the Indonesia.'1 Republic, to vlOIate the ~ell­ du Rcnv-ille, faire fi de la Charte des NatIOns
known Rrnvilte Agreement and the Unl~ed Unies et refuser d'executer les resolutions du
Nations Charter and to disobey the resolutIOn Conseil de. secLlrite tendant a la cessation :immeof the Security Council on the immediate cess~­ diate des operations militaires et a la liberation
tion of hostilities and the release of the Presi- du President et des autres hommes politiques
dent and other Republican leaders. It was only republicains. Cc n'est que parce qu'il comptait
because it relied on that support, only because sur ce soutien, ce n'est que par s~ite de }'attittlde
of the attitude taken in the Security Council by adoptee par les delegations des Etats-Unis d'AmeLie. United States and United Kingdom delega- rique et du Royaume-Uni au Conseil de seeutions that the Netherlands Governmerlc elected rite que le Gouvernement neerlandais a lance
to m~ke a treacherous attack on the Indonesian son agression cynique contre la Republique d'InRepublic in violation of the Charter and of its donesie, qu'il a "iole la Charte des Nations Unies
et agi atl mepris de ses engagements internainternational obligations.
tional\x.
Such are the facts, and no amount of slander
Tels sont les faits, et aucune calomnie, aucune
la pretendue "attitude de
and insinuation com:erning the "attitude of insinuation quant
Moscow" and the "communist menace in Indo- Moscou" ou a la non mains pretendue "menace
nesia" will help the United States representative tommuniste en Indonesie" ne sauront permettre
to divest his country and its representatives on aux representants des EtatshUnis de d6gager la
the Committee of Good Offices and on the Se- responsabi]jte que Ies Etats-Unis d'Ameriqtte et
curity Council of the responsibility' for the leurs representants a la Commission de bans offi~
aggression committed by the Netherlands Gov~ ces ont clans l'agression commise par le Goueroment against the Republic of Indonesia and vernement neerlalldais contre la RepubIique d'Inits peace-loving people, or for the attempts to doneSle et son peuple pacifique, ainsi que dans
prevent the Security Council from putting an tout ce qui a ete fait pour empecher le Conseil
de securite de mettre fin a cette agression.
end to that aggression.
En reprenant, au cours de la presente seance,
By repeating, in the speech he made today, the
tales spun by the Netherlands aggressors about les contes que' les agresseurs neerlandais ant
the pretended eommttnist threat in Indonesia, the repandus sur une pretendue menace communiste
United States representative has, openly and be- en Indonesie, le representant des Etats-Unis a;
fore the whole world, tried to justify Netherlands ouvertement et devant le mondc. entier, tente
aggression in Indonesia and to defend the aggres- de justifier l'agression neerbndaise en Indonesie
sor. The reason for that is that United States et de de£endre l'agresseur. Ce qui explique cettemonopolists need, not a free and independent sitttation, c'est que les monopoles des EtatshUnis
Indonesia, but a colonial Indonesia, in which it d'Ameriqlle ant besoin, non point d'une Indowould be easier to hold the people in servitude nesie libre et independante, mais d'une Indonesie
and grow rich on the country's abundant natural coloniale dans laquelle il serait plus facile de tenir
resources.
la population en selvitude, et de realiser des
benefices au moyen des immenses richesses nat!lrelle~ de ce pays,

a

a

A scientific genius of the past century wrote
the following about the seventeenth century
Dutch colonizers in Indonesia;

L'un des genies de la science du siecle dernier
a ecrit les lignes suivantes au sujer des coloni~~~~~~s neerlandais du XVIIeme siec1e, en Indo-

"The history of Dutch colonization presents
an incomparable picture of betrayal, corruption,
murder and villainy. Wherever the Dutch
colonizers set foot, they left only corpses and
ruins."

"L'histoire du colonialisme neerlandais presente un tableau unique de trahison. de concussion, de meurtres et de lachete. Partollt Oll les
colonisateurs neerlandais ont mis les pieds, ils.
n'ont laisse ql1e cadavres et ruines."

No matter what excuses are given by the
aggres30rs and those who aid and abet them, no
matter what powers of invelltion they may display to cover up and justify aggression, they will
never be able to deceive either the peoples of.the

QueUes que soient les fxttlSeS que presentent
l'agresseur et ceux qui le protegent et qui l'aident.
(]uel fjllC soit l'espri-t cl'invention dont ils pt1isscnt
pour
justifier cette agression ' ils
faire
, . preuve .
.,
n arrlveront lamals a tromper les pCllples dl1~

25
world or the billion people in East Asia who
aspire with all their being to freedom and inde.pendence.

monde, le milliard d'hommes qui vivent en Asie
orientale et qui aspirent de toutc leur force a la
Iiberte et a I'independance,

Is it not monstrous that in the twentieth cenN'est-il pas monstrueux de voir qu'au XXeme
tury, at a time when there is an international si?de, alars qu'il existe line Organisation interOrganization, the Ullited Nations, designed, as nationale des NationsUnies, ~yal1t pOltr tache,
stated in the Charter, "to save succeeding genera- comme I'indique la Charte de cette Organisation,
tions from the scollrge of war" and "to re-affirm de "preserver les generations futures dufleau
faith ... in the equal rights, .. of nations large de la guerre" et de "procl<lmer notre fa! dans
and small", the Nethel'lands aggressors should l'egalite des droits • ' . des nations, grandes et
still try to foist colonial slavery upon the Indo- petites", les agresseurs m!erlandais s'efforcent,
nesian people by means of treachery and aggres- tout comme avant, d'imposer, all moyen de
sion? Has the Security Council-the organ of, l'agression et de la mauvaise fai la servitude
the United Nations bearing primary responsibility coloniale au peuple d'Indonesie? Le ConseU de
for the maintenance of international peace and securite, a qui la Charte confie la tache du mainsecurity and for the protection of the legitimate tien de la paix et de la securite internationales et
interests of countries and nations which are vic- de la protection des legitimes interets des pays
tims of aggression-the right to take no steps to et des peuples victimes d'une agression, a-t·il le
compel the aggressor to desist? The Security droit de ne pas prendre de mesures en vue de
Council has taken no such_ steps. In dealing with forcer l'agresseur a rnettre fin a ses agissements?
the Indonesian question, it has demonstrated to Cependant, i1 n'a pas adopte ees mesures. Par
the peoples of the world, most flagrantly, how son examen de I'affaire d'Indonesie, le Conseil de
the international Organization, the United Na- securite a montre de mani~re flagrante devant
tions, is being \lsed by a group of States, under tOllS les peuples de l'univers que I'Organisation
the leadership of the United States and the United internationa1e des Nations Unies est utilisee dans
Kingdom, for narrow, selfish ends. It has re- des buts purement egoistes par un groupe d'Etats
vealed how these States, which claim to represent diriges par les .Etats-Unis d'Amerique et le
the majority in this Organization, try to guide Royaume-Uni. n a rnontre comment ces Etats,
work along lines inconsistent with its basic pur- qlli pretendent former la majorite de cette Orga~
poses and to utilize it not to maintain peace and nisation, tentent de donner aUK travaux d~s
security, not to protect the lawful interests of Nations Unies une direction qui ne correspond
States and peoples that are the victims of nulleme~t aux buts fondamentaux de l'Organi~
aggression, but to lend support, open or tacit, sation, comment ils s'efforcent de se servir de
to those who are guilty of aggression against cette Organisation, non pour assurer la paix: et la
peace-1.oving peoples.
securite internationales, non pour proteger les.
legitimes inten~ts des Etats et des peuples vietimes de I'agression, mais pour accarder un appui
direct ou tacite a ceux qui sont cDupables d'agression contre des peuples pacifiques.
Avec taus Ies autres Etats pacifiques et demoTogether with all other peace-loving democratic States which are Members of the United cratiques Membres de !'Organisation des Nations
Nations, the USSR insists on the strict observ- Unies, I'URSS insiste pour que les dispositions
ance of the provisions of the Charter dealing de la Charte relatives at: maintien de la paix et
with the maintenance of international peace and de la securite internationales, a la lutte contre
security and with the resistance to aggression toute agression, quelle que soit sa forme, soient
anywhere in the world and in whatever form it observees d'une maniere rigoureuse. L'histoire
takes. History shows that the USSR has always montre que l'URSS a taujours candamne les
condemned deals with aggressor nations at the transactions de certaines grandes Puissances avec
expense of peace·loving peoples, The USSR des pays agresseurs au detriment d'autres Puisdelegation thinks it imperative strongly to con- sances paeifiques.. La deleg-,ation de l'URSS estime
demn the aggressive acts of the Netherlands Gov. flU'il est indispensable de prononcer une con·
t'.rnment against the Republic of Indonesia, as damnation formelle contre le GOl1vernernent
well as the actions of those who connive at and neer1andais qui s'est rendu coup able d'agression
encourage those acts and who make deals with contre la Republique d'Indonesie, ainsi que contre
the aggressor. at the expense of the peace-loving ceux qui soutiennent et encouragent cctte agression, qui passent des compromis aver: l'agresseur
Indonesian people.
au detriment du pettple paeifique de !'Indom~sie.
If we wish to live up to the obligations assumed
by Our countries under the Charter to strengthen
and maintain international peace and security, to
put an end to aggression promptly and effectively
and to take decisive steps to protect the lawful
interests of States victims of aggression, we must
carry out the provisions of the Charter. We
must condemn the aggression committed by the
Netherlands Government against the Indonesian
Republic, demand the fulfilment of the Security
Council resolutions on the immediate cessation of
military operations and the release of the captured
poltical leaders of the Indonesian Republic, and
finally, compel the aggressor, the Netherlands

Si naus VOU10llS respecter les obligations que
nos pays ont contractees en signant la Charte
des Nations Unies et qui sont de inainteruret de
renforcer la paix et la securite -internationales.
de mettre rapidement et effectivement fin a
I'agression et de prendre Ies mesttres qui s'imposent pour la protection des Ie.gitirnes intere;is
des Etats victimes de l'agression, nous devons
mettre it execution la Charte des Nations Unies,
condamner I'agression comm\se par le Gouvernement neerlandais contre la Republique d'Indo·
nesie, exiger la mise en reuvre des resolutions
du Conseil de securite tendant a la cessation
immediate des operations militaires et a la libe~

26
Government, to withdraw its troops f~m. the
Republic's territory and to respect the pnnclples
of the United Nations.

That is the only way .to strengthen t~e United
Nations raise the prestige and authonty of the
Securit; Council, and mai?tain and promote
international peace and secunty.
The PRESIDENT: In view of the lateness af the
hour I should like to ask the representative of
FraC:ce whether he would consent to the post~
ponement of the French interpretation of the
remarks just made by the representative of the
USSR until our next meeting.
Mr. PAROD{
French): Yes.

(France)

(translated

from

ration des hommes politiques indonesiens qui
ant ete emprisonnes, et enfiu, forcer le Gouvernemen\t agresseur des Pays-Bas 3. retirer ses
troupes du territoire de. la. Repub!ique ~'In?o­
nesie et a respecter les prmclpes de 1 OrgamsatlOn
des Nations Unies.
Voil.a le seul moyen de renforcer l'Organi~a~
tion des Nations Unies, d'augmenter le prestige
et I'autorite du Conseil de securite, de maintenir
et de renforcer la paix et la sectlrite internationales.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Comme
it se fait tard je voudrais demander au representant de la France s'il consentirait a ce qu'on
remit a notre prochaine seance l'interpretation
en fran~ais des observations que vient de formuler le representant de l'URSS.

M. PARODI (France): Oui.

Mr. MALIK (Union cd Soviet Socialist Repub~
lics) (translated from Rus'sian): I do not agree
that interpretation into French is for the benefit
of the French representative only. Under the
rules of procedure, French is a working language
and all the remarks of the members of the Security Council must be interpreted into the
two working languages. That is what ottr rules
of procedure say. If the President of the Security
Council and the French representative think,
however, that this interpretation is given only
for the benefit of the representative of France,
and consequently decide not to have my speech
interpreted into French, I shall not insist on the
interpretation.

M. MALIK (Union des Republiqtle.S sodalistes
sovietiques) (tradt.it dlf Y1Isse) : ]e ne considere
pas qu~ I'interpretation en fran~ais soit uniquement destinee au representant: de la France.
D'apres notre reglement interieUf, le frall~ais est
l'une des langues de travail et toutes les interventions des memhres du Conseil doivent etre traduites dans les deux langues de travail. VoilA ce
que dit notre reglernent interieur. Cependant, si le
Pre.sident du Conseil et le representant de la
France estiment que cette interpretation n'est
faite que pour le representant de la France et
s'ils de.cident, par consequent, de ne pas faire
interpreter man intervention en fram;ais, je n'insisterai pas pour que cette interpretatiorl ait lieu.

Mr. PARODI (France) (franlsattd from
Frcmch): I do not think that the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has
quite understood, for unless I myself am mis~
taken, I understood that the interpretation was
to be postponed until the next meeting, not that
there was to be no interpretation. It Was on
that condition that I gave my consent and I
think that if the Soviet Union representative now
understands what the President was proposing,
he will realize that his remarks were pointless.

M. PARODI (France): Je pense que le repn~sen­
tant de l'Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques a mal compris, car, a mains que je n'aie
moi-meme commis une erreur, j'avais compri~
non pas que l'interpretation en fran91is n'aurait
pas lieu, mais qu'eUe serait remise a la prochaine
seance. Cest dans ces conditions que j'ai donne
man accord et je pense que si le representant
de I'Union sovietiqlle comprend maintenant ce
que le President a propose, il reconnaitra que ses
observations etaient sans objet.

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub~
lies) (trrmslaJed from Russia): I understood
the President's stJ,tement correctly and maintainmy opinion.

M. MALIK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (traduit du russe): rai bien corn·
pris la declaration du President du Consei] de
sikurite, et je maintiens man point de vue.

The PllES[DENT; I would say to the representat!ve of the USSR that all I asked the representative of France was whether he would object -to
postponing the interpretation into French until
our next meeting. There is no intention whatsoever, I assure him, of dispensing with the French
interpretation. Coming from a dual language
country, where French is' one of the languages
spoken, I should be the last person here to ask
that the French language be dispensed with.

Le PRE'.srm:NT (tyadllit de falt,rylais): Je VOlldrais repondre nu representant de l'URSS que
je me bornais it demander au representant de la
France s'il verrait un inconvenient a ce que l'interpretation en franc;ais soit remise :'t. notre prochaine seance. Je peux l'assurer qu'il n'etait
n\lllcment dans roes intentions de supprimer
l'interpretation en franc;ais. Venant d'un pays ou
I'on parle deux langues dont I'une est le franc;ais,
je serais le dernier ici a demander la suppression
de la langue franc;aise.

Under these circumstances, I would ask the
representative of the USSR whether he would
agree with the procedure which I have indicated.

Dans ces conditions, je demande au represen~
tant de I'URSS s'jl accepte qLle nous procedions
comme je l'ai propose.

Mr. 1fALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub~
lies) (translated from RussjaJ~): The USSR delegation holds the view that /he rules of procedure
must be applied and j,Herpreted by all the mem-

M. MALIK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiqttes) (traduit dll. nuS€'): La delegation
de l'URSS estime que le reglement interieur doit
etre applique et interprete par taus les mernbres

27
bers of the Security Council together with the
President-in other words, by the Council as a
whole, rather than by anyone member.

du Conseil de securite et par 50[1 President, c'esta-dire par le Conseil de securite tout entier et
non pas par quelques membres individue1s de ce
Conseil.

As regards the proposal that the interpretation
of my speech into French should take place at
the next meeting, I do not object, in view of the
lateness of the hour.

En ce qui concerne la proposition qui a ete
faite au sujet de l'interpretation de mon interyention en fran~ais, je n'ai pas d'objection, etant
donne l'heure tardive, ace que cette interpretation
soit faite a la prochaine seame.

The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
the USSR for his courtesy, which will facilitate
our business and enable us to expedite our work
tonight.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je remercie le representant de I'URSS de sa. courtoisie,
qui facilitera notre tache et nous permettra d'aIler
plus vite Cl' soir.

During the course of this meeting, we have
heard a number of most important statements,
indicative of the views of the members of the
Council as to the nature and scope of action which
should, in their judgment,be taken by the Council.
However, we have not so far had an opportunity
to hear the reply which the representative of the
Netherlands may wish to make, nor have the
various suggestions which have been made been
crystallized in the form of a draft resolution.
This, I think, is a matter of the most far-reaching
significance, as it is indeed most necessary that
the text of any resolution we may adopt should
be adequate to the complex circumstances with
which we are under obligation to deal, and that
it should be so precisely framed that it will not
only do full justice to both parties, but also will
command the widest measure of support. This
is necessary in order that we may obtain the
practical results we seek.

Au cours de cette seance, nous avons entendu
un certain nombre de declarations t.es importantes, dans lesquelles les membres du Conseil
ont expose 1eurs vues sur la nature et la portee
de I'action que le Conseil devrait, a leur avis,
entreprendre. Toutefois nous n'avons pas eu jusqu'ici l'occasion d'entendre la reponse que le representant des Pays-Bas tient peut-etre a donner.
Par ailleurs, les diverses propositions presentees
n'ont pas ete concretisees sous forme de projets
de resolution, Je crois que c'est la un fait extremement significatif, car i1 est certes indispensable
que le texte de tollte resolution que nous pouvons
etre amenes it. adopter tienne compte des circons~
tances complexes devant lesquelles nOllS nous
trouvons et qu'il soit etabli avec la precision
vou1ue, non seulernent pour rendre pleinement
justice aux deux parties, mais aussi pour etre
assure du plus large appui. It le faut. si nous
voulons abontir aulC resultats pratiques que nous
recherchons.

I would therefore propose that the Security
Council should now adjourn and that we should
meet again on Friday afternoon, when we should
hear any further statements which members of
the Council or the representatives of those nations
present at this table under the provisions of
Article 31 of the Chartl'r may wish to make.
Then, I would hope that we might be able to
carry forward our discussion within the framework of a specific draft text. I be1i~Ye that we
should thus be in a better position to determine
the action which the Council usefully can, and
appropriately should, take in regard to the situation in Indonesia.

Je propose donc que nous levions la seance et
nous reunissions de nouveau vendredi apres-midi,
pour entendre les autres declarations que les
membres du Conseil ou les repre:sentants des na·
tions presentl's a cette table en vertu de l'Ar
tide 31 de la Charte pourraient avoir a faire.
respere qu'ensuite nous paurrons continuer ootre
discussion dans le cadre d'un projet de texte precis. Il me semble que nOllS serions ainsi mieux. a
meme de detenniner queUe action appropriee le
Conseil devrait et pourrait utilement entreprendre
en ce qui concerne la situation en Indonesie.

As regards the time for the next meeting, I
am, of course, in the hands of the Council. If
members think we could have the tl'xt of a proposed draft resolution by that time, we might
meet tomorrow afternoon or Thursday morning.

Quant au jour et a I'heure de la prochaine
seance, je suis, bien entendu, aux ordres du
Conseil. Si ses membres estiment possible d'avoi.
alors en mains le texte d'un projet de resolution,
nous pourrions nous reunit" demain apres-midi ou
jeudi matin.

M

," As there -are no comml'nts, the Council will Puisque personne ne demande la parole, la
,, now adjourn and will meet again on Friday at seance est levee; le Conseil se reunira de
3 p.m.
veau vendredi a 15 heures.
,"'.
La seance est levee a18 h. 45.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p,m.
nou~

"

"
li~
