United Nations

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6427th meeting
Monday, 22 November 2010, 3.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Parham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Nguyen
Ms. Kuljanin
Mr. Vargas
Ms. Li Jijuan
Mr. Lebrun-Damiens
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Nishiumi
Mr. Karanouh
Ms. Montemayor de Teresa
Ms. Nwokonko
Mr. Chernenko
Mr. Sevi
Mrs. Kafeero
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-64740 (E)

*1064740*

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Since the Security
Council first took up the issue of protection of
civilians, the changing nature of armed conflict has
continued to have a profound impact on the situation of
civilians in armed conflict. The Council took an
important step forward through the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009), with its focus on humanitarian
access and protection mandates as well as monitoring
and reporting. We also welcome the establishment of
the Security Council informal Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians, as well as the growing
emphasis on benchmarks and clearer protection
language in country-specific decisions of the Council.
It is clear that the Council has paid greater attention to
this topic in the recent past.
To track progress in implementation, the
development of indicators for systematic monitoring
and reporting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict by the Emergency Relief Coordinator would be
helpful. When included in protection benchmarks, such
indicators could help us to assess the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions and identify remaining gaps
and challenges.
In spite of the Council’s stronger engagement, the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/579)
reveals the continued gap between the normative
advances and realities on the ground. To better protect
civilians and ease their plight, we must urgently
enhance compliance with international law by State
and non-State actors, continue to empower United
Nations peacekeeping operations to better implement
their protection mandates, improve humanitarian
access, and enhance accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law.
Among the core principles of international
humanitarian law are the distinction between
combatants and non-combatants, proportionality of the
use of force, and the imperative to take all feasible
measures to minimize civilian casualties. Violations of
these rules, such as the use of weapons of

2

indiscriminate effect in densely populated areas and the
denial of humanitarian access, warrant a clear response
from the Security Council. The Council must call for
compliance with international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict and ensure accountability in cases
where massive and systematic violations have
occurred.
Where
violations
of
international
humanitarian law routinely go unpunished, a climate of
impunity will prevail and lead to further violations.
We agree with the Secretary-General that
accountability mechanisms should first and foremost
be established at the national level. This is in line with
the principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to
prosecute and punish the most serious crimes under
international law. International accountability efforts
are required only when national systems are unable or
unwilling to fulfil their obligations. The Security
Council could establish commissions of inquiry or
similar accountability mechanisms, and of course also
make use of its competence to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court.
The effective delivery of humanitarian assistance
is intrinsically linked to timely access to populations in
need, as well as to the safety and security of those who
provide assistance.
The safety of humanitarian workers remains
precarious. The Council has a particular obligation to
provide for the security of United Nations staff and to
ensure that there is no impunity for attacks on
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel, which may
constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute. We
welcome in this regard the entry into force of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, which
expands the legal protection of the 1994 Convention.
Significant concerns often exist in relation to the
protection of civilians in situations that are not formally
on the agenda of the Council. It is therefore essential
for the Council to develop innovative ways to address
protection concerns in such situations and to enhance
its preventive and early warning capacities. The
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians
could play a central role in that regard by receiving
briefings and assessments on emerging violations of
international humanitarian law by non-State and State
actors.

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

The President: I give the floor
representative of the Republic of Korea.

to

the

Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by joining previous speakers in thanking you,
Sir, for organizing today’s open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation
also thanks the Secretary-General for his report on this
issue (S/2010/579). I believe that today’s debate offers
a valuable opportunity to take stock of what we have
achieved on key issues related to civilian protection,
such as the implementation of resolution 1894 (2009),
as well as to indicate areas where further work is
needed.
Recently,
United
Nations
peacekeeping
operations are taking on more responsibilities in the
protection of civilians. While recognizing that the
primary responsibility for civilian protection rests with
the nations and parties involved in conflicts, situations
of armed conflict often make it extremely difficult for
nations and parties in conflict to provide adequate
protection measures to civilians. Furthermore, we have
seen many occasions on which armed groups have
resorted to violence against innocent civilians,
particularly women and children, as a means of
combat.
In this connection, it is essential for peacekeepers
to have more responsibility for supporting and
providing security to civilians at risk through tangible
protection strategies. In addition, the Security Council
needs to establish clear, credible, and achievable
mandates to ensure the successful and effective
protection of civilians prior to deployment.
Additionally, as the Secretary-General has stressed,
increased political support must be employed to ensure
that mandates of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) are implemented.
Ensuring
compliance
with
international
humanitarian and human rights law is essential to
civilian protection in armed conflicts. The international
community should stand firm against impunity for
violations of humanitarian and human rights laws
whenever they arise. Compliance should also be
applied to non-State armed groups, since more and
more conflicts involve such groups. As such, the
Security Council and other relevant international
bodies need to devise measures to ensure full
compliance regardless of the status of the parties to
conflict.

10-64740

Access to civilians affected by armed conflict in
order to provide humanitarian aid and basic safety and
security also needs to be guaranteed. Unfortunately, we
have seen many cases in which humanitarian personnel
and supplies have failed to reach those in urgent need
due to the interference of certain parties concerned in
armed conflicts. Such acts should be condemned, and
those involved in such acts should be held accountable.
My delegation hopes that the Security Council, on the
basis of the relevant paragraphs of resolution 1894
(2009), adopted last year, can deliberate further on this
issue.
Women and girls deserve special attention. As
recent tragic incidents in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo show, there are still many cases in which
armed groups, operating in massive and widely
dispersed areas, employ horrific sexual and other
violence against women and girls. My delegation looks
forward to all states further enhancing their efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) with respect to
ending impunity and upholding accountability for
serious crimes against women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. Also we hope for
increased
coordination
among
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the DPKO and other concerned
organizations to better confront these atrocious crimes.
The protection of civilians is an ongoing task that
must be consistently strived for during any armed
conflict. The safety and security of civilians in postconflict situations must also be ensured, as these areas
are at risk of deteriorating and falling into a spiral of
recurrent violence. In this regard, due consideration
must also be given to civilian protection in the
peacebuilding process, and we would like to encourage
the Security Council to incorporate this element in
future discussion on this issue.
The President: I
representative of Chile.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the United Kingdom, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council for November, for having
convened this debate on such an important subject as
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/579)
and welcome the briefings we have heard from
representatives of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross on this issue.

3

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

Chile associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Human Security Network.

anti-personnel landmines and unexploded ordinance
left over from warfare. We also deplore the use of
civilians as human shields.

More than a decade has passed since the first
peacekeeping operation was deployed in Sierra Leone
with an explicit mandate to protect civilians. Through
these years, we have accumulated important experience
and, at the same time, established a broad legal
framework through the Council’s thematic resolutions
on the protection of civilians and other historic
resolutions. We have also made significant progress in
peacekeeping operations, virtually all of which are now
involved in activities related to the protection of
civilians and eight of which have specific physical
protection mandates.

Chile welcomes both the normative measures that
have been adopted and practices on the ground itself
aimed at preventing and attenuating the effects of
violence against civilians in armed conflict, as pointed
out by the Secretary-General in his report.

In that context, peacekeeping operations have
become
multidimensional
and
have
distinct
components linked to the protection of civilians, such
as the monitoring of human rights, humanitarian
assistance, capacity-building, the restoration of
infrastructure and services, and security sector reform,
among others. Chile believes that a comprehensive
approach is the most effective way to address and
respond to threats to the human security of civilian
populations in armed conflict.
However, despite the greater attention that has
been paid by the Council and the aforementioned
progress, the prevalence of civilian casualties and the
number of people affected by armed conflict continue
to be overwhelming. This is noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his eighth report. We also continue to see
the challenges that he noted in his report of 29 May
2009, in which he stressed the importance of
“enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law…; enhancing compliance with
the law by non-State armed groups; enhancing
protection through more effective and better
resourced peacekeeping and other relevant
missions; enhancing humanitarian access; and
enhancing accountability for violations of the
law” (S/2009/277, para. 5).
Chile condemns the recurring attacks on camps
for refugees and internally displaced persons and on
humanitarian personnel. We also reject the use of
sexual violence and forced displacement as tactics of
war, the widespread recruitment of children, the
proliferation in the illicit traffic and undue use of small
arms and light weapons, and the danger represented by

4

Chile also commends the establishment in the
Security Council of the informal Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians. We appreciate its excellent
work. We believe this to be an example to be
duplicated in other instances, such as in the area of
peacebuilding.
We also acknowledge the importance of including
civilian protection as a component of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, including clear guidelines
and intervention standards to effectively implement
that aspect of the mission. That must be done without
prejudice to the primary responsibility of host
Governments to protect their own civilians.
Increasing interaction between host countries, the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat could also help to narrow the gap between
the decision-making process and real implementation
on the ground. We were pleased to note the
independent study by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with regard to the
implementation civilian protection mandates in
peacekeeping operations.
Respecting and implementing international
humanitarian law are inextricably linked to combating
impunity. Eradicating impunity should be seen as part
of a comprehensive focus on seeking sustainable peace,
justice, truth and national reconciliation. Concerted
efforts are required in cooperating with national
judicial mechanisms in order to develop their
capacities and ensure that perpetrators are brought to
justice and tried in accordance with international
standards.
Restoring the rule of law, security sector reform
and transitional justice mechanisms are key areas in
which national systems should be strengthened and
supported through effective international cooperation.
The International Criminal Court and other “mixed”
tribunals and courts have an important complementary

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

function in trying persons suspected of having
committed international crimes. It is of the utmost
importance that national and international criminal
justice institutions have all the necessary support on
the ground. Chile supports all measures aimed at
combating impunity, both at the national and
international levels.

Red Cross, non-governmental organizations and
non-State armed groups must engage in renewed efforts
to reclaim the protection of civilians. Norway supports
the Secretary-General’s recommendations with regard
to the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas, including the need for further analysis and
research.

Civilians affected by violence in armed conflicts
have a right to reparations and compensation. In that
regard, we should not ignore the value of symbolic
reparations as a way to heal society’s wounds in postconflict countries.

Secondly, with regard to protection by United
Nations peacekeeping operations, Norway welcomes
the publication of Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence — An Analytical Inventory of Peacekeeping
Practice. We also attach great importance to the
ongoing work to develop training modules and
scenario-based exercises to strengthen missions’
protection capacity. Norway fully supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that specific
benchmarks should be developed for measuring
progress in the implementation of missions’ mandates
to protect civilians. This is not least important in exit
strategies for peacekeeping operations.

I should like to conclude by once again
emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility
to protect civilians.
The President: I again wish to remind
representatives to please keep their statements to four
minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): It is deplorable that so
many civilians suffer the consequences of armed
conflicts. Far too often, women, men, girls and boys
are directly targeted, killed, maimed or injured. We still
witness too wide an interpretation of what constitutes
legitimate military targets. The extensive use of
explosive weapons in densely populated areas and
imprecise targeting in connection with the use of
remote-controlled technologies, such as drones,
constitute grave risks to civilians.
However, over the past year we have seen
encouraging progress in efforts to enhance protection
measures in armed conflicts, such as the entry into force
of the Convention on Cluster Munitions and the recent
amendments to the Statute of the International Criminal
Court that extend individual responsibility for the use of
certain weapons and ammunition in non-international
conflicts. Those are concrete steps in the right direction.
I would now like to focus on three core challenges
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/579). The
first is compliance with international humanitarian law.
We believe that full compliance with existing
international humanitarian law is essential for
safeguarding civilians in armed conflicts. Our focus
must be on where the consequences of armed conflict
are felt, that is, on the ground. To that end, States as
well as militaries, the International Committee of the

10-64740

Thirdly, with regard to enhancing accountability,
the perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law must be brought to justice. Norway
firmly believes that we need to enhance the
effectiveness of accountability mechanisms. We
welcome the commitment of the Security Council to
establish a stronger protection framework for children
in armed conflict, most recently through resolution
1882 (2009).
Let me conclude by encouraging the Security
Council to invite all relevant actors to take part in a
debate on how to enhance the effectiveness of
accountability mechanisms, including the use of
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to commend you
for convening this open debate on the subject before us.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
continues to be a subject to which the international
community and my country in particular attach the
utmost importance. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has to continue to consider this issue owing to the fact
that today civilians still suffer greatly from the

5

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

consequences of armed conflict. The Security Council
must therefore remain committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, to promoting full respect
for humanitarian law, human rights law and human
rights in general, and to combating impunity.

under international humanitarian law, they must at least
do all they can to ensure access to shipments and
material, as well as first aid support. Furthermore,
people fleeing combat areas must be allowed to transit
safely to areas where they will be safe from hostilities.

Argentina would like once again to underscore
the value and significance of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, which represented a remarkable step
forward for the international community against the
backdrop of the dehumanizing experiences it had
suffered. Six decades later, conflicts continue to take
place. Regrettably, there are still many situations where
civilians are the targets of attacks and there are
unacceptably high numbers of civilian deaths; where
children are recruited as soldiers and girls are subject
to abuse, rape and all other types of sexual abuse;
where thousands and even millions of people are
displaced; and where access to humanitarian assistance
is impossible or seriously curtailed. Many of those
situations are made worse by impunity.

Action by the Organization is essential to prevent
the emergence of situations of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, and to
end them when such situations emerge. Those four
crimes, included in the concept of the responsibility to
protect, demand not only action, but also prevention.
The commitment of the Organization is needed to
prevent the recurrence of the horrors of the past. It is
often possible to detect in a society elements that set
off alarms regarding the possible emergence of
situations of massive and serious violations of human
rights and humanitarian law. Therefore, prevention
requires that the Organization be provided with
appropriate mechanisms to gather information on
present and potential situations that may trigger the
responsibility to protect.

Parties to an armed conflict are subject to the
basic obligation of international humanitarian law to
protect civilians from the effects of armed conflict.
Such an obligation, embodied in common article 3 to
the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, also applies in
the context of armed conflicts of a non-international
nature, that is to say, to non-States parties to conflict.
The Security Council is directly responsible for
matters of peacekeeping operations and the protection
of civilians. As I have pointed out on other occasions,
my country is convinced of the need to include in the
mandates of United Nations missions protection
activities that are clearly developed and receive the
necessary resources in an effective and timely manner.
In this regard, interaction with components on the
ground is essential to ensuring that mandates will be
clear and appropriate to the circumstances faced by the
peacekeeping operation.
Regarding the integration of the components, it is
important to bear in mind the need, where relevant, to
ensure the necessary structure for the protection of
women, especially from sexual violence. At the same
time, it is also worth bearing in mind the need to
protect children, particularly from being recruited as
child soldiers, and to rehabilitate former child soldiers.
Another critical aspect of the protection of civilians is
the need to ensure access to humanitarian assistance. If
the parties to a conflict fail to fulfil their obligations

6

Fact-finding is an important element. Argentina
considers it worth reiterating that there exists an
impartial body for fact-finding into possible serious
violations of the Geneva Conventions: the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
by virtue of Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of
1949. We welcome the Security Council’s recognition
in its resolution 1894 (2009) of the possibility of
recourse to the Commission for timely, objective,
accurate and reliable information.
Being a victim of an armed conflict is a condition
that usually extends beyond the end of hostilities. In
the case of women and children in particular, they
continue to be victimized after returning to their
communities by being stigmatized and subject to
retaliation. In this context, it is necessary to underscore
the role of justice. Perpetrators of war crimes, genocide
or crimes against humanity are responsible for serious
crimes and must therefore be held accountable before
justice.
This Council established two international
tribunals: the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Currently, we are transitioning towards an
international justice system for the most serious
crimes, including war crimes, based on a permanent
tribunal more than on ad hoc tribunals. That permanent

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

tribunal, which is fully functioning, is the International
Criminal Court, established by the Rome Statute in
1998.
I would like to end my statement by stressing
once again that, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and resolutions of this Council, any
kind of attack against civilians or other protected
persons in situations of armed conflict, including the
obstruction of access to humanitarian assistance and
the recruitment of children, is a violation of
international law. Thus, I would like to conclude by
urging once again strict compliance with the
obligations arising from The Hague Conventions of
1899 and 1907, the four Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their Additional Protocols of 1977, general
international law and the decisions of the Security
Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): It is an honour for
Costa Rica to speak in its capacity as Chair of the
Human Security Network and on behalf of its
members: Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand
and Slovenia, and South Africa as an observer.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
one of the priorities of the Human Security Network.
Therefore, we would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council for the organization
of this important debate, as well as the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2010/579).
In just over 10 years since the first peacekeeping
operation with an explicit mandate for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict was deployed in Sierra
Leone, we have accumulated valuable experience and
made important progress with a view to establishing a
comprehensive framework in the Security Council
through thematic resolutions on the protection of
civilians, as well as other milestone resolutions,
including 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008), 1882
(2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894 (2009). We
have entered a new era of multidimensional
peacekeeping
operations
with
large
civilian
components, including the promotion and protection of
human rights, the facilitation of humanitarian relief,
capacity-building, the restoration of infrastructure and
services, and security sector reform.

10-64740

However, despite the increased attention of this
Council, the prevalence of civilian casualties and the
number of people affected by armed conflict are still
appalling. We are deeply concerned about attacks
against refugees and internally displaced persons
camps, as well as against humanitarian workers; the
use of sexual violence and forced displacement as
tactics of war; the prevalence of child recruitment; the
proliferation of illegal trafficking and the misuse of
small arms and light weapons; and the danger posed by
explosive weapons, landmines and other remnants of
war. We also deplore the continued targeting of
civilians in situations of armed conflict, the
indiscriminate use of force and the use of civilian
populations as human shields in those situations.
Another challenge is the role increasingly played
by private security companies in situations of armed
conflict. In this context, the Human Security Network
takes note of the recent signature of an international
code of conduct by around 60 private security
companies, according to which they undertake to
respect human rights and humanitarian law in their
operations.
The Security Council, as the principal organ for
addressing threats to international peace and security,
should respond to prevent violations of international
law and to protect civilian populations in all situations
of armed conflict without distinction. This also
includes assisting in creating the conditions conducive
to the rapid and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance while ensuring the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel.
We also recognize the importance of including
the protection of civilians as a component of
peacekeeping mandates, as well as clear guidelines and
rules of engagement, without prejudice to the primary
responsibility of the host Government to protect its
civilians. In addition, it is also necessary to address
other major constraints faced by peacekeeping
operations, such as resources, equipment, the timely
disbursement of funding, predeployment and
in-mission training.
We welcome the Secretariat’s efforts in
establishing clear guidance and developing an
operational concept for peacekeeping missions on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Furthermore,
a stronger partnership on protection with troop- and

7

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

police-contributing countries, host Governments and
local populations should be developed.
Fostering international humanitarian law and
practices is inextricably linked with the fight against
impunity. Ending impunity for violations of
international law and human rights law should be seen
as part of a comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. The restoration and promotion of the
rule of law, security sector reform and transitional
justice mechanisms are also key areas where national
systems should be strengthened and supported by
enhanced international cooperation. The International
Criminal Court, as well as other mixed courts and
tribunals, can play an important complementary role in
prosecuting persons suspected of committing mass
atrocities.
Lastly, the Human Security Network notes with
appreciation the important work of the informal Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians, which was
established in January 2009.
The President: I call on the representative of
Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on an
issue to which Portugal attaches the utmost
importance. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/579), as well as Ms. Valerie
Amos, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Navanethem Pillay and
Mr. Yves Daccord for their very useful briefings.
We meet here today one year after the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009), which is rightly considered to
be a benchmark of the United Nations normative
system and the best reflection of the Security Council’s
long commitment to the issue of civilian protection in
armed conflict. That resolution is also an essential
development because it underlines the importance of
addressing the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operation mandates in a proper way. The United
Nations is now endowed with the necessary tools with
which to act in an effective and accountable manner in
protecting civilians in situations of armed conflict
wherever they are called on to take action throughout
the world.
The main responsibility to protect civilians lies
obviously with States, but it is also clear that, in some
cases, States need international support to carry out

8

that responsibility. United Nations peacekeeping
operations and United Nations missions, as well as
United Nations agencies in general, are crucial to
strengthening and helping national capacities to
exercise that fundamental responsibility.
We are aware that the very nature of armed
conflicts has changed. Armed groups roam
unchallenged within the borders of often vast
countries, sowing violence and death, and avail
themselves of the porosity of borders to further their
criminal intentions. This new reality adds significantly
to the complexity of the tasks of peacekeepers and
strains their capacity to enforce compliance with
international humanitarian law and uphold respect for
fundamental human rights.
Despite all the difficulties, the protection of
civilians — whether directly targeted or accidental
victims of conflict — must be of paramount concern,
and we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for its enhancement. Civilians continue
to account for the majority of conflict-related casualties
and are constantly exposed and fall victim to serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. It goes
without saying that we acknowledge the huge scale and
complexity of the task facing peacekeepers and United
Nations agencies and missions. Nevertheless, we must
strive to increase their effectiveness in protecting
civilians in conflict situations.
Allow me to mention, in this context, what we
believe to be three important issues: impunity and the
lack of accountability, the need to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping operations and missions, and,
finally, the need for an increasingly integrated
approach to peacekeeping.
Portugal believes that the lack of accountability
and the impunity that benefit many parties to armed
conflict throughout the world are extremely disturbing.
This situation obviously encourages perpetrators even
as it discourages victims from denouncing violations
and seeking redress. Furthermore, it renders the tasks
of peacekeepers even more difficult in protecting
civilians in situations of conflict. We believe that the
United Nations and the Security Council must show
their strong resolve as far as impunity is concerned,
addressing ways and means by which its action can be
more effective in bringing to justice those guilty of
deliberately targeting civilians and violating their
fundamental rights.

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

The report of the Secretary General points to
some improvements that have been made in this regard
through the actions of international institutions, such as
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and by national
institutions. Concerning the ICC and its specific role in
addressing the most serious crimes, we encourage
every effort to strengthen the Court and to reinforce its
credibility through enhanced cooperation among
parties and the promotion of the universal ratification
of the Rome Statute, especially now that the Kampala
Review Conference successfully contributed to a larger
international consensus around it through the
agreement on the crime of aggression.
Nevertheless,
as
the
Secretary-General
underlines, much more must still be done in this area.
That will require, of course, a much more effective
translation of rules and principles into applied actions
on the ground by those rightfully entrusted to do so. It
is clear that the normative framework we currently
have is adequate; what seems often to be lacking is the
political will to implement it effectively.
My second point concerns the need to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping operations and missions.
This requires clear, specific, situation- or countryoriented mandates, as well as training and resources, so
as to successfully fulfil our responsibilities to those
who suffer the most. Allow me to stress training. If
they are to carry out their tasks in an efficient way,
peacekeepers should be well acquainted with the
origins and reasons underlying a conflict as well as the
social, economic, ethnic and cultural patterns of the
country in which they serve. Recent experiences show
the importance and usefulness of engaging with local
communities and benefiting from their wealth of
knowledge of specific situations and conditions, as
well as the extent to which such engagement can
reinforce the sense of ownership by the people. One
must also bear in mind, however, that those
communities might be singled out as objects of reprisal
by warring factions, and act accordingly.
Finally, the growing complexity and diversity of
mission-mandated tasks demand an integrated
approach to United Nations peacekeeping. There is a
growing understanding of the concept of the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts, and in this sense the
guidance given to United Nations missions on how to
effectively protect civilians is particularly important.
We commend the work that has been conducted within
the United Nations towards achieving a shared

10-64740

understanding of this concept and developing a
strategic framework for mission-wide strategies on the
protection of civilians. Training modules and the
identification of resources and capacities required to
perform the tasks are also of the utmost importance, as
are scenario-based exercises for senior mission
leadership, as described in the progress report on the
New Horizon initiative. However, if missions are to
perform efficiently, adequate capacities have to be
deployed on the ground, with clearly defined and
achievable tasks and objectives, so as to avoid
capability gaps that would hamper missions.
To conclude, let me assure the Council that
Portugal will stay fully committed and actively
engaged in all efforts pertaining to strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. We look
forward to working closely with members of the
Council on this endeavour from the outset of our tenure
next January.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Peter
Schwaiger, Deputy Head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Schwaiger: Let me first thank UnderSecretary-General Amos for her first presentation to
the Security Council. I would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Le Roy, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and Yves
Daccord, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their participation in
the debate today.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement. In the
interest of time, I will deliver an abridged version of
our statement.
Like other speakers today, we are alarmed that
civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in conflict and by the historically high
numbers of displaced persons. As a key humanitarian
donor worldwide, the European Union (EU) is deeply
concerned by the frequency and gravity of attacks
against humanitarian personnel, as well as by problems
of safe and timely humanitarian access, particularly for
vulnerable groups.

9

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

We share the concern about the humanitarian
impact of explosive weapons, particularly when used in
densely populated areas, and we note the growing
recognition of the indiscriminate harm they can cause.
The suffering of hundreds of thousands of civilians in
the midst of conflict requires our rigorous attention,
strengthened resolve and decisive action.
The European Union commends the work
conducted within the United Nations on the protection
of civilians and the increased attention paid by the
Security Council to those issues. Resolution 1894
(2009) of last November has been rightly hailed as a
landmark development. We also wish to recall
important resolutions related to women and peace and
security and to children in armed conflict, and the
appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The European Union fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call to address protection-of-civilians
situations in a comprehensive way, to undertake further
action to address the five core challenges, and to
improve the coherence and mainstreaming of
protection. We support the systematic use of practical
tools, such as the aide-memoire of 2002, which has
now been updated. We commend the work of the
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians.
Like many speakers today, we believe that the
systematic monitoring of and reporting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is highly
important and that indicators could play a very useful
role in that regard. We also support the use of clear
benchmarks for peacekeeping missions, in particular
when it comes to their drawdown.
The European Union is grateful for the strong call
to improve accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in situations of
armed conflict, including for the deliberate targeting of
civilians and their use as human shields, indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks, and delays or denials of
humanitarian access. Together with targeted measures,
accountability would help to improve compliance.
We encourage the Council to further explore the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations,
including
referrals to the International Criminal Court, support to
national-level investigation and prosecution, and
increased use of commissions of inquiry or fact-finding
missions. We believe that such measures would also
help to contribute to prevention, which has recently

10

also been debated in the context of the responsibility to
protect.
Moreover, we welcome the initiative of the
current Security Council presidency to invite UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for a horizon-scanning
briefing at the beginning of the month. We encourage
incoming presidencies to do likewise.
Obviously, United Nations peacekeeping and
other operations have a significant impact on
enhancing protection on the ground. In view of that,
the comprehensive contribution on the protection of
civilians by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in its 2010 session was a significant
achievement. We welcome the development of
designated protection-of-civilians strategies by certain
United Nations peacekeeping missions and encourage
the engagement by senior mission leadership with
protection issues. We look forward to a more consistent
and systemic consideration of such issues in reports of
the Secretary-General as guidelines are under
development.
We also welcome the fact that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) carries work
forward on a strategic framework for mission-wide
protection and training modules, as well as for an
assessment of resources and capabilities, which will
help to improve the situation of civilians in armed
conflict and to develop a culture of protection.
Lastly, I would like to mention that the European
Union has reviewed its own guidelines in this area. On
25 October, EU Foreign Ministers adopted revised
guidelines on the protection of civilians in EU
Common Security and Defence Policy missions and
operations. They were developed in consultation with
the United Nations, notably, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO, as
well as the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The document provides practical guidance for
planning, conduct and subsequent lessons-learned
processes of our missions. In the future as well the
European Union will cooperate closely with the United
Nations and other relevant organizations.
The President: I will now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement just made by the European
Union.

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

Let me thank Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos for her statement on behalf of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs today. I also
thank Ms. Pillay, Mr. Le Roy and Director General
Daccord for their contributions. The voices of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations and the Director
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross are particularly relevant in this debate.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of violence
and abuse in armed conflicts. Women and children are
particularly vulnerable and often are directly targeted.
The mass rapes in Walikale in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo in July of this year — only days
after the last open debate on the protection of civilians
in the Security Council — serve as a stark reminder
that we must do more to ensure the safety and physical
integrity of civilian populations and to enhance full
respect by all parties to conflict for applicable
international law.
Over the last years, the Security Council has
developed a comprehensive normative framework on
protection issues. The Council has repeatedly made it
clear that the protection of civilians must be a priority
for peacekeeping operations. There is, however, an
implementation gap, which the Council and United
Nations missions must address in order to make a
tangible difference for the civilian population in zones
of conflict.
Protecting civilians from the direct threat of
physical violence in zones of conflict is not an easy
task, as we all know. Resource constraints, difficult
terrain and a sometimes tenuous consent of the host
country, but also a lack of conceptual clarity and
insufficient training and preparedness are challenges to
the effective protection of civilians by United Nations
missions.
The United Nations peacekeeping reform process
has acknowledged many of the shortcomings and has
taken first steps to address them. In that regard, we
welcome the progress made so far in developing an
operational concept for the protection of civilians in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, as requested
by Security Council resolution 1894 (2009) of last
November.
Military as well as civilian components of the
United Nations missions in the field must have clear
guidelines on their respective roles in the protection of

10-64740

civilians from physical violence and must work
together in achieving that. It is also imperative that
United Nations missions interact more with the
vulnerable communities that they are tasked to protect,
in order to better understand their specific protection
needs.
We welcome the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
(S/2010/579) and the conclusions and proposed
practical steps contained therein. We agree on the need
to develop quality benchmarks for the implementation
of protection mandates by peacekeeping missions and
on the need to assess and implement best practice.
We welcome the development of training
modules on protection issues for all peacekeeping
personnel and, in particular, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) cooperation with
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict to develop relevant training materials.
Germany is pleased to be associated with DPKO’s
important work on developing a specific United
Nations police standardized training curriculum on
investigating and preventing sexual and gender-based
violence.
We also recognize the important role the
Council’s informal Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians can play in incorporating protection issues in
the Council’s work, especially prior to the renewal of
peacekeeping mandates. In that regard, we particularly
welcome the updated aide-memoire endorsed today.
Germany looks forward to participating actively in the
work of the informal Expert Group during its tenure on
the Security Council.
The Security Council has also done important
work to enhance the protection agenda on specific
thematic issues like children and women in armed
conflict. Let me in that context briefly highlight the
action plans pursuant to Security Council resolution
1612 (2005), in which the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
is engaging non-State parties to conflict. In our view,
this is yet another practical way to enhance compliance
by those groups with applicable international law.
Here, as in other United Nations activities in conflict
zones, United Nations access to non-State parties to
conflict is key, and we would encourage Member
States to grant such access.

11

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

To conclude, let me briefly touch upon the need
to fight impunity. This past summer, the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement on children
and armed conflict (S/PRST/2010/10), which called for
increased exchange of information on persistent
perpetrators between the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and relevant
sanctions committees of the Security Council. We
believe that such a regular exchange of information
could be a step towards ensuring compliance with
applicable
international
law
and
ensuring
accountability for violations thereof.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): At the outset, I wish to
join previous speakers in thanking you, Sir, for having
convened this timely debate on a matter that
increasingly demands the focused attention of the
international community. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their helpful briefings.
We welcome the emphasis put by the SecretaryGeneral on the need to achieve a more tangible
improvement in the protection of civilians most
affected by conflicts. In that context, we would like to
propose that, where satisfactory and successful
experience exist with regard to the care and protection
of civilians, including in post-conflict situations, best
practices from such national cases should be compiled
as an annex to the Secretary-General’s future report on
the topic.
While encouraging non-State actors to adhere to
the principles of international humanitarian law in
order to better ensure the protection of civilians is a
laudable objective, this may prove to be a doubleedged sword, as it could also confer unintended
legitimacy on violent perpetrators of terrorism and
terrorist groups. That might pose a political dilemma
for legitimate Governments fighting terrorist groups
and seeking to protect their sovereignty, territorial
integrity and, in many cases, their cherished
democratic way of life, and might thereby add a further
confusing element to ongoing conflicts.
Despite the brutal onslaught unleashed by a
terrorist group that laboured for over 27 years to

12

undermine our Government economically and its
ability to function effectively as a State, my country,
Sri Lanka, has taken determined measures to establish
a credible national human rights framework through a
range of domestic legislative and administrative
measures that are fiercely enforced by the courts. The
legislation gives expression to seven core human rights
treaties and other related international instruments,
including the four Geneva Conventions, to which
Sri Lanka is a party.
Sri Lanka respects and firmly identifies with the
principles underlined in the thematic resolutions
adopted by the Security Council since 1999. It will
continue to strengthen its human rights framework as
the security situation further improves. Sri Lanka’s
commitment is illustrated by the manner in which
broad civilian protection issues were addressed during
the conflict and the speed and efficacy with which it is
now confronting the challenges of resettling internally
displaced persons (IDPs), rehabilitating former
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam combatants and child
soldiers, post-conflict reconstruction and development,
and accountability and reconciliation issues. Even
cynics will have to acknowledge the professional
commitment with which the Government has
approached those issues.
Sri Lanka’s decision to engage the Liberation
Tiger terrorists militarily in 2006 followed their
arrogant refusal to return to peace negotiations and
their persistent resort to unbridled terrorism. The
massive toll on civilian lives, public assets, religious
and world heritage sites, vital economic assets and the
immense suffering of civilians could no longer be
tolerated by a responsible and democratically elected
Government.
As has been repeatedly emphasized, our military
engagement with the Liberation Tigers was clearly
based on a well defined distinction between the
terrorists and the Tamil civilians, and its goal was a
humanitarian rescue operation to relieve approximately
300,000 civilians held as human shields and used as a
bargaining chip by the terrorists. The terrorists were
not averse to locating heavy weapons amidst those
innocent civilians.
The Government policy of zero civilian casualties
had a deep impact the country’s professional armed
services, which were trained in humanitarian standards
by the International Committee of the Red Cross

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

(ICRC). The ICRC also assisted in evacuating over
7,000 injured and their care-givers to Government-run
hospitals. These policies paid dividends as expected, as
thousands of Tamil civilians fled to Governmentcontrolled areas, once the terrorists lost their coercive
hold on the civilian population, and all were fed,
clothed, sheltered and otherwise cared for in camps
prepared in advance to receive them.
Pivotal to civilian protection is the partnership
based on trust that was established with United Nations
agencies and other humanitarian actors on the ground.
Trust is the first casualty of any subtle politicization or
assumption of a judgmental approach by external
entities, which invariably upsets the delicate balance
between the parties in such situations. It is therefore
imperative that humanitarian agencies and their
workers carry out their work on the basis of the
principles of neutrality and impartiality; that they
conform to national laws; that their activities match the
identified policy priorities of host Governments; and
that they be cognizant of local political, cultural and
social sensitivities. No one size fits all, and experience
and expertise gained elsewhere may not fit a given
situation on the ground. A tendency to grandstand or be
paternalistic
will
invariably
have
negative
consequences. Public perceptions matter enormously,
particularly where public opinion influences political
dynamics and where the public is literate and
politically conscious. Public order and political
stability are also critical. Therefore, neutrality,
impartiality, sensitivity and trust assume a seminal
importance in such contexts.
Today in Sri Lanka, 78 non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), including local NGOs, and 11
United Nations agencies, are working in partnership
with the Government on rehabilitation, resettlement
and reconstruction programmes.
Sri Lanka takes the policy view that NGOs
establishing parallel services to those of the
Government that are not sustainable cannot have long
term benefits for the welfare of the people. NGOs must
have the capacity to deliver programmes and selfgenerated funding to work with the Government on
prioritized policy areas and activities.
Post-conflict needs and requirements are even
more complex and sensitive than the needs that were
felt earlier. Sri Lanka does not fancy being converted
into a laboratory for an NGO industry, a testing ground

10-64740

for post-conflict theories or prime learning ground for
those seeking internships.
Sri Lankan society — which has experienced two
violent youth insurgencies and a 27-year terrorist
onslaught during the critical part of its development
trajectory — is one that is now gradually coming into
its own. Sri Lanka as a State party to seven core human
rights treaties and other related international
instruments in the area of international humanitarian
law, including the four Geneva Conventions, is deeply
committed to the principles underpinning those
instruments. The multidimensional revitalization
programme being implemented in the country is now
laying the foundations for fostering justice, security
and opportunity for all. The culture of respect for
human rights and humanitarian standards will be
revitalized in this progression, ensuring the further
consolidation of the protection principle in our law and
society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): Let me join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and for giving us this
opportunity to address the Security Council.
Georgia fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union.
More than a decade has passed since the Council
began deliberating this important subject. Throughout
the past 11 years, the Council has adopted six
resolutions and eight presidential statements on the
protection of civilians, but unfortunately these
measures are not sufficient. Civilians continue to be
severely impacted by armed conflicts around the world.
The deliberations of the Security Council clearly
indicate the need to further strengthen the protection of
civilians through compliance with the norms of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Every situation where civilians suffer from violence
caused by armed conflict requires more attention from
the international community.
I would like to take this opportunity to inform the
Security Council that Georgia recently became a party
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. By doing so, Georgia reaffirmed its

13

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

strong commitment to consolidated international
efforts aimed at protecting the rights of children
affected by armed conflicts worldwide.
Every time the opportunity arises to discuss this
important matter in open debate here in this Chamber,
my delegation provides the Council with detailed
information on the situation concerning civilians living
under foreign occupation in two regions of my country,
Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region.
Since our last address, nothing has changed on
the ground. Ethnicity-based and other gross and
massive violations of human rights law and
humanitarian law happen on a daily basis. The
population continues to suffer from insecurity and
discrimination; living under the threat of expulsion,
forced conscription and passportization; losing their
ethnic identity; and being denied their right to property
and education in their mother tongue, not to mention
the impact of conflict and violence, especially on the
younger generation. Moreover, the authorities in
effective control have taken measures to deprive these
individuals of their right to free movement across the
administrative borderline, which has turned into an
occupation line. We believe that such violence must be
seen as a fundamental violation of the right of every
individual to life and development, and universally
condemned.
Resolution 1894 (2009), adopted a year ago,
reaffirmed the need to focus on the issue of
humanitarian access. The very same message has been
reiterated in the Secretary-General’s most recent report
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579), in which the Secretary-General suggests
that humanitarian access is the fundamental
prerequisite for humanitarian action. A similar message
has been delivered by Mr. Walter Kälin, Representative
of the Secretary-General on the Human Rights of
Internally Displaced Persons, in his reports on Georgia
and its occupied regions.
I would like once again to draw the Council’s
attention to the problem of humanitarian access to the
Tskhinvali region of Georgia, where the occupying
Power continues to block humanitarian aid and
international humanitarian actors and demands that the
region be entered exclusively from its own territory.
This policy represents yet another clear infringement of
the principles of international humanitarian law, as well
as of paragraph 3 of the European Union-brokered

14

ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008 and paragraph 4
of General Assembly resolution 64/296 on the status of
internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region, Georgia,
of 7 September 2010. This resolution represents a
powerful manifestation of the will of the international
community to stand up for the rights of all who
continue suffer the consequences of armed conflict.
Here, I would like to stress that Georgia
continues to support the efforts of the United Nations
and its agencies to alleviate the suffering of civilians
on the ground. Let me assure the Council that my
country stands ready to work with the international
community in addressing current challenges and
ensuring genuine progress in this field.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having promoted
the convening of this open debate, and to express
Peru’s gratitude to Valerie Amos and Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretaries-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Peacekeeping Operations, respectively, for their
briefings on the subject before us today. I also wish to
highlight the statements made by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the protection of civilians (S/2010/579).
However, it would have been very helpful to have the
report far enough in advance to enable us to better
evaluate it.
The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has been addressed in this Chamber for over
10 years, and we have seen the subject evolve and
develop in that time. In this respect, we believe that
resolution 1894 (2009) and last year’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/1) to be of great value.
These debates are a useful opportunity to carry
out a critical reflection leading to a more analytical and
profound assessment of the progress made to date. To
that end, it is important that we be guided by the five
core challenges identified by the Secretary-General in
his 2009 report (S/2009/277), which clearly remain
valid, as reflected in the latest report. They are
enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law; enhancing compliance with the law
by non-State armed groups; enhancing protection

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

through more effective and better resourced
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; enhancing
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations of the law. In the same vein, we must take as
a basis the aide-memoire annexed to last year’s
presidential statement.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
identifies various areas where progress has been made,
but it also clearly notes that most of this progress is
still taking place within a normative or legislative
framework. Such progress contributes to the
development the common of conceptual framework we
all seek as the basis and guide for the protection of
civilians tasks that peacekeeping operations must carry
out.
However, we must remember that we have no
time to lose in improving protection on the ground. We
need to keep in mind both the multidimensional nature
of peacekeeping operations and their various civilian,
military and police components, as well as the essential
political commitment that such missions require. Such
commitment should be strengthened not only by the
parties to a conflict, but also by Headquarters, and
primarily the Security Council. The Council must
shoulder its main responsibility, which is the
maintenance of international peace and security, by
establishing clear mandates that facilitate the
preparation of operations in all their aspects and help
missions to fully accomplish their tasks.
As we have reiterated on several occasions, the
protection of civilians has become an essential element
for achieving peace and for the credibility and
legitimacy of the Organization. In that regard, the
Security Council has the capacity to adopt specific
measures coherently to promote orderly and systematic
compliance with international law by all actors in a
conflict, in particular the parties to the conflict and
armed non-State groups. This was illustrated by the
various examples provided by the Secretary-General in
last year’s report and in the preparation of the
aforementioned aide-memoire.
Other important measures are those taken to
punish non-compliance with international humanitarian
law in order to put an end to any possibility of
impunity. In the context of political support, of equal
importance are the role of regional organizations and
the contribution they can make to prevention, planning
and operations, as well as the support they can provide

10-64740

to national capacity-building for the protection of
civilians.
Peru reiterates its support for the promotion of
and respect for international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict, particularly non-State armed
groups. Peru is a party to the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and its Additional Protocols
relating to the protection of victims in international and
non-international armed conflicts, which are the
cornerstones of international humanitarian law on the
protection of civilians. That is why we reiterate our call
on States that have not yet become party to these
international instruments to do so.
In fulfilment of its international obligations, and
with the aim of raising awareness of the framework for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict among
public officials and civil society, my country has
implemented a policy of dissemination of international
humanitarian law across the board. We have stressed
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also
recently presented a detailed report to the SecretaryGeneral concerning the Peruvian Government’s actions
in this regard.
We consider it extremely important to develop the
preventive, analytical dimension of a mission before it
is deployed in order to best protect civilians and
achieve an optimum understanding of the parties,
reasons and circumstances of the conflict in relation to
the civilian situation. More specific and appropriate
mandates can be arrived at when they are developed on
a more informed, case-by-case basis. This will also
make it possible to fill in the gaps in terms of political
guidelines and the planning and preparation of
missions. It will improve orientation on the ground in
the coordination needed to address problems that arise
with the arrival and deployment of humanitarian aid, as
well as with trafficking in small arms and light
weapons.
As part of this preventive analysis, it will also be
necessary to carry out an ongoing evaluation of the
risks faced on the ground both by civilians and by
those protecting them, particularly in peacekeeping
operations. In this regard, we thank the informal Expert
Group for its work. We suggest that the Group might
also assess the lessons learned from missions carried
out to date. It would also be helpful to continue to
strengthen coordination among the Office for the

15

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support. We also believe
that the membership should have more information at
its disposal on the successes, challenges and lessons
learned along the way. That is why we would ask for a
briefing concerning these lessons in the framework of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
For the credibility of the United Nations, once the
task of protection is accepted and taught, it is of capital
importance to have clear, precise and adequately
resourced mandates that also reflect limitations and
existing conditions, in order not to raise expectations
that exceed a mission’s capacities, particularly in
regard to the use of force. Coordinating the tasks of all
stakeholders involved, particularly the efficient
dovetailing of responsibilities relating to the need to
protect civilians, is also extremely important.
Finally, while Peru supports the adoption of
presidential statements at the end of debates of this
kind — believing that they are instruments of value
and utility to the matter under discussion — we also
believe it very important that, before any such text is
adopted, we also listen to and consider the opinions of
the membership on the issue at hand. My delegation
expressed this concern in the General Assembly’s joint
debate on the report of Security Council and Security
Council reform (see A/65/PV.50). If it is our genuine
intention to give added value to these debates, they
should not be a mere formal exercise. On the contrary,
they should be substantial debates where the
presidential statement is drafted after the debate has
taken place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): Mr. President, I would like to
avail myself of this opportunity to express our
appreciation for your able presidency of the Council
this month.
We listened attentively to the briefings by the
Under-Secretaries-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Peacekeeping Operations, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
The Government of Pakistan strongly condemns
attacks on civilians under all circumstances. Pakistan
has been a strong and active supporter of the protection

16

of civilians in armed conflict. Over the years, Pakistan
has contributed to international efforts, particularly
those led by the United Nations, for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The most tangible
demonstration of this, as the Council is well aware, is
our participation as the top troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We are very keen to
make this debate more useful and to work together in
focusing our energies to enhance implementation
capacity to ensure more effective protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
Objective reporting is a basic prerequisite for the
consideration of this important issue. Systematic and
consistent violations of the rights of civilians are
frequent and pervasive around the world, especially in
situations of foreign occupation. In our view, the report
(S/2010/579) should have informed us more
objectively about parts of the world where innocent
people continue to suffer every day, including in
situations that are on the agenda of the Council.
The
report
contains
unwarranted
and
unacceptable references to Pakistan, for which there is
no justification whatsoever. The assertions made
therein are completely misplaced and factually
incorrect. Pakistan is a vibrant democracy. By no
stretch of imagination can the situation in Pakistan be
described as an internal armed conflict. Pakistan has
successfully confronted terrorism, which has roots in
the conflict and strife in Afghanistan resulting from
cold war dynamics. It is a lethal nexus of drugs and
organized crime gangs, funded and supplied with
weapons that pose a threat to Afghanistan’s neighbours
and to the global community as a whole. The
consequence is that innocent civilians across the world,
including in Pakistan, have been targeted.
Pakistan will continue to do all it can to eliminate
terrorism. This we do to protect our people from
terrorists and criminal gangs. We seek peace,
prosperity and stability in order to achieve our
development goals. We have, in this struggle, the full
support of our people.
On a different plane, the report seeks perhaps to
build an argument for allowing contact with non-State
armed groups. This raises many serious questions,
including that of the applicability of international
humanitarian law to counter-terrorism. Certainly, no
one would wish to advocate contact with or sympathy
for Al-Qaida and hard-core criminal gangs.

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

We are perplexed when we see that many
countries across the world that are facing situations
involving insurgencies, and where protection of
civilians has been a concern, fail to rate even a passing
reference in the report. It is also a matter of grave
concern to us that the report omits any reference to the
serious and systematic violations of human rights and
humanitarian law in Indian-occupied Kashmir that
have been widely reported by the international media
and civil society.
We hope that future reports on this agenda item
will be balanced and more carefully drafted. It is
important to address these issues objectively and to
avoid politicizing questions relating to international
humanitarian law.
The President: I give
representative of Slovenia.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
the United Kingdom for organizing this open debate on
the protection of civilians. Slovenia would like to
congratulate Ms. Amos on her appointment as UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator. I would like to thank
her,
Under-Secretary-General
Le
Roy,
High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay and the
Director General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Daccord, for their presentations today.
Let me stress that Slovenia fully aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the representatives of the
European Union and, on behalf of the Human Security
Network, of Costa Rica.
Last year was an important year in the Security
Council for the issue of the protection of civilians.
Resolution 1894 (2009) introduced new provisions that
focus on humanitarian access, the implementation of
protection measures in peacekeeping missions, and
monitoring and reporting. In the past year, the Council
also took several important decisions related to the
special protection needs of women and children. We
welcome the fact that the Council has started to address
the concerns of the protection of civilians more
systematically. We encourage it to continue to address
those concerns consistently in its country-specific
resolutions and presidential statements.
However, the situation of civilians in armed
conflicts around the world remains alarming. As
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General

10-64740

(S/2010/579), civilians continue to account for the
majority of casualties in conflicts and are often the
deliberate targets of different forms of violence by all
parties to conflict. Special attention should be paid to
the most vulnerable, namely, women and children, who
continue to suffer extreme violence and hardship
during conflict, in particular sexual violence, including
rape.
Slovenia believes that the Council must
increasingly focus on preventing conflict, including
through early warning, as failure to do so bears only
grave consequences for the affected civilians. The
Council must respond to situations where civilians are
at risk of systematic and widespread violations of
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
in particular to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Grave violations of international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law should be properly
addressed and the perpetrators of, and those
responsible for, such violations should be found
accountable. Impunity presents a major obstacle to the
prevention of the grave violations committed against
civilians in armed conflict. The Council should be
sensitive to the issue of accountability, including in the
country situations on its agenda.
Situation-specific resolutions have increasingly
called for prioritizing the protection of civilians in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. They have
requested missions to develop protection strategies.
The role of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support in
developing an operational concept on the protection of
civilians in United Nations peacekeeping operations is
of great importance in that regard. Lessons learned and
the best practices of regional organizations are at our
disposal and must be utilized.
The challenges ahead also concern the
implementation of normative standards. We support the
use of benchmarks, which would facilitate monitoring
the implementation of those standards and
peacekeeping mandates.
Slovenia shares the concerns over the impact of
explosive weapons on civilians, in particular when
used in densely populated areas. We are also deeply
concerned about the tremendous challenges still arising
from the presence of mines and other unexploded
ordnance, which continue to constitute an obstacle to

17

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

the return of refugees and other displaced persons,
humanitarian aid operations, reconstruction and
economic development, as well as the restoration of
normal social conditions. They have serious and lasting
social and economic consequences for the populations
of mine-affected countries. Slovenia is active in the
area of mine action, especially through the
International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victims Assistance, established by the Slovenian
Government.
Let me conclude by stressing that the
international community should not and must not be
indifferent to the plight of civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to convey the
gratitude of my delegation to you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would also like to thank
all the speakers at the morning portion of the meeting.
We believe that this important topic cannot be
approached in a selective or biased way. For that
reason, we believe, together with the entire
international community, that protection of the
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese civilians living under
Israeli occupation is a crucial part of the international
effort.
While the Council has discussed that important
issue for decades, we appreciate it all the more at a
time when serious violations affecting the Syrian
citizens in the occupied Golan and the Palestinian
populations in the West Bank, Jerusalem and the Gaza
Strip persist, owing to the barbaric Israeli aggression.
That aggression includes continuing the settlements,
aggression against civilians, imposition of the
blockade, prohibition of civilian access to humanitarian
aid, and attacks on the humanitarian assistance flotillas
and the international peace activists aboard them.
Among the extraordinary paradoxes that have
confronted the international community for decades,
since the development of the concepts of international
law and international humanitarian law, the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict continues, despite the
increased frequency of Security Council meetings
devoted to such issues. The international community
has made exceptional progress in international

18

humanitarian law over the past centuries, but that law
must not be implemented by applying it to the weak
but not to the strong, nor by exonerating authorities of
foreign occupation from the consequences of violating
the rule and principles of international law.
Israel has committed crimes for decades and has
violated the most basic principles of international
humanitarian law. It is not held accountable for its
activities and its barbarous occupation and military and
political leadership. The international community is
reluctant to address Israel’s violations and to put an
end to them and is powerlessness to tackle Israel’s
practices and violations because of its impunity or
exemption from implementing some international
resolutions. All those factors have enabled the Israeli
occupying forces to continue to disregard international
law and to persist in settling the territory, imposing the
blockade on Gaza, stealing land and preventing
humanitarian aid from reaching the besieged people of
Gaza.
Amid its aggression in international waters
against the Turkish freedom flotilla — which was
bringing humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza,
besieged for four years — the bombing of the United
Nations headquarters and the death of civilians
sheltered there, today Israel openly states its rejection
of all humanitarian principles of international
humanitarian law and conducts its feverish quest to try
to reverse humanitarian and legal advances by talking
of the need for Judaism in that racist State so as to be
able to continue its purging, racist policies of collective
punishment, which, moreover, are punishable by law. It
seems that there are different laws for those who are in
favour of double standards, double standards that
exempt Israel from being brought to account for its
behaviour.
Israel’s aggressive behaviour means that this
country is able to achieve what no other country or
usurper in history has ever achieved. This aggressive
behaviour violates the legal legacy and heritage of all
humankind, straightforwardly without exception, and
enjoys, despite all that, some sort of protection.
The occupation of the Syrian Golan is similar to
the picture that I have just drawn. Israel refuses to
restore the occupied Syrian Golan to its motherland,
Syria, and refuses to accept international resolutions,
including resolution 497 (1981). In this context, we
call upon the international community, in particular the

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

General Assembly and the Security Council, to
shoulder their responsibility to prevent Israel from
continuing its violations, such as pillaging natural
resources in occupied Arab lands, including the Golan.
In conclusion, we simply do not know how long
eyes will be averted from the Israeli occupation of
Arab territories and its anti-humanitarian actions there.
We simply do not know when the positions that are
regularly expressed will be made real on the ground.
Will the Security Council progress from debates and
statements to actual implementation of its obligations
and resolutions? That is the only question to which we
must respond, for that is what is at stake when we talk
about the defence and protection of civilians. It is an
extremely important question.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Mahmood (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating the delegation of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting.
Civilians continue to suffer the brunt of violence
during armed conflicts. It is against that backdrop that
Member States of the United Nations pledged in the
Millennium Declaration “to expand and strengthen the
protection of civilians in complex emergencies”
(resolution 55/2, para. 26).
The protection of civilians is a basic principle of
humanitarian law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their 1977 Additional Protocols contain specific rules
for the protection of civilians. In situations that are not
covered by those treaties, in particular internal
disturbances, civilians are protected by the
fundamental principles of humanitarian law and human
rights law.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important tools available to the United Nations for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. The Security
Council’s thematic resolution 1894 (2009), as well as
its resolutions relating to children and armed conflict
and to women and peace and security, the mandating of
peacekeeping missions to protect civilians, the
adoption of the aide-mémoire on the protection of
civilians contained in document S/PRST/2009/1 and
the creation of the informal expert group on the

10-64740

protection of civilians, have been important steps
forward. However, at the same time, the gap between
the words in the protection mandates and their actual
implementation still seems to persist. In that regard,
my delegation would like to re-emphasize the
importance of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, as endorsed in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1), in preventing harm to
civilians in armed conflict.
My delegation urges all parties to conflicts to
ensure protection of the lives and property of civilians.
My delegation condemns all violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law and stresses the
need to combat impunity, safeguard access for
humanitarian assistance and protect the safety of
humanitarian aid workers.
My delegation welcomes the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as contained in document S/2010/579. The
report highlights three action areas, namely, ensuring a
comprehensive approach (ibid., paras. 102-103),
ensuring a consistent approach (ibid., paras. 104-105)
and ensuring an accountable approach (ibid., paras. 106110) in order to enhance the protection of civilians.
The vulnerable situation of civilians in postconflict societies needs special attention. For peace to
be sustained, civilian victims must be rehabilitated and
reintegrated into their communities more effectively,
and the perpetrators must bear the resultant cost.
The presence of uniformed female personnel may
play a pivotal role in protecting civilians in armed
conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to refer to
the efforts of the all-women Bangladesh police
contingent working in a peacekeeping mission in Haiti.
We believe that a female police force could also play a
critical role in a State’s ability to protect its citizens.
Finally, we would like to mention what my
delegation considers to be two overarching themes for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The first
relates to prevention and the building of a culture of
peace. Prevention is at the heart of protection. The
preventive capacity of the Organization must be
enhanced. At the same time, Member States need to
take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony, which contribute to long-term
prevention.

19

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

The second theme is that of coordination among
all stakeholders. We believe that the protection of
civilians is the primary justification for a United
Nations presence in the field. My delegation stresses
the importance of effective coordination, particularly
among the various United nations entities, namely, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs.
In conclusion, my delegation expresses its grave
concern over the violations and breaches of
international law, including international humanitarian
law. For example, the total disregard and rejection of
humanitarian and international law and their
underlying values shown by the occupation forces in
the occupied territories of Palestine for years now is a
disgrace to all humanity. My delegation wishes to draw
the international community’s attention to the fact that
the occupying State, as a signatory of the relevant
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
stipulate the responsibilities of an occupying Power,
cannot legally or morally absolve itself of its
responsibilities to guarantee the basic human rights of
the people under its occupation. The occupier State
must comply with resolution 1860 (2009). My
delegation strongly urges the international community,
and in particular the Council, to take effective steps to
ensure respect for and compliance with the Geneva
Conventions in such a situation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): We thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland for organizing this important debate. Ghana
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/579) and thanks Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos for her statement this morning. We also
acknowledge the Security Council’s long-standing
commitment to addressing this issue.
Since the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) and other relevant resolutions,
the protection of civilians has remained a major issue in
the Council’s work. While we note the progress made,
it needs to be said that events on the ground show that
more attention has to be paid, especially as regards the
full implementation of the resolutions adopted to
protect civilians caught in conflict situations.

20

Resolution 46/182 adopted by the General
Assembly in 1991 places the responsibility for the
protection of civilians, first and foremost, with their
respective States, which are also expected to facilitate
the work of responding organizations in times of
conflict. However, it is not unusual to find that the
State whose responsibility it is to protect its own
populations is the perpetrator of the crimes against
civilians. It is thus imperative for the Council to
address impunity and ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law and improve access for
and safety of humanitarian personnel.
Ghana continues to advocate the concept of the
responsibility to protect recognized and adopted by
world leaders in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1), which was a call to action
that emphasized the need for preventive measures and
for the delivery of international assistance to States in
order to enhance their capacity to fulfil their primary
responsibility to protect their own populations against
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing.
In that regard, on 24 September 2010, Ghana
co-sponsored a ministerial meeting on the
responsibility to protect under the theme “Fulfilling the
responsibility to protect: strengthening our capacities
to prevent and halt mass atrocities”. What emerged was
the clear commitment of participating Member States
to prevent and halt atrocious crimes and the need for
intervention by the international community. We
therefore welcome ongoing discussions within the
General Assembly with a view to clarifying and
forging consensus on the scope and modalities for the
practical application of the responsibility to protect.
We also note with appreciation the Council’s
commitment to the special protection needs of women
and children in armed conflict. In 2008, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1820 (2008), which
for the first time identified as an impediment to
international peace and security the use or commission
of sexual violence as a tactic of war in order to
deliberately target civilians or as a part of a widespread
or systematic attack against civilian populations. The
Council’s intention to consider targeted sanctions and
other measures against parties in situations of armed
conflict who commit rape or other forms of sexual
violence against women and girls was very much
welcomed. Regrettably, the Council has yet to
designate sanctions for any perpetrators of violence

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

against women, in spite of widespread reports that
much abuse has taken place.

Union. I would like to make a few additional remarks
in my national capacity.

Ghana, which has remained among the top 10
contributing countries in peacekeeping and has also
fulfilled its obligations with respect to the ratification
of the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions,
is particularly concerned about the reported
involvement in that regard of peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel deployed by the United
Nations to prevent, recognize and respond to sexual
violence and other forms of violence against civilians.
We urge the Security Council to take a firm stance in
ensuring that such perpetrators are appropriately
brought to justice.

The attention of the Security Council to the
situation of civilians in armed conflict remains vital
and must be at the centre of the Council’s deliberations
and actions. As the Secretary-General pointed out in
his report, that is particularly the case in the many
protracted violent crises and conflicts with little
prospect of a peaceful resolution in the near future.

Ghana remains committed to regional initiatives
to deal with the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. The African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa, adopted in October 2009 to promote
and strengthen regional and national measures to
prevent or mitigate, prohibit and eliminate root causes
of internal displacement, is a good case in point.
Among other things, member States undertook to
prevent violations of international humanitarian law
against displaced persons. The African Union’s
continued presence in Somalia is therefore partly in
recognition of that mandate, which requires the
continued and increased support of the international
community.
In conclusion, Ghana wishes to encourage greater
participation by the international community in the
work of regional organizations in order to strengthen
the capacity of such bodies to enhance their protection
of civilians and ability to intervene in conflicts. We
also stress the need to prosecute and punish
perpetrators as a deterrent to crimes committed with
impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Let me also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his eighth report on this topic
(S/2010/579), and Under-Secretary-General Amos for
her presentation. Azerbaijan aligns itself with the
statement delivered today on behalf of the European

10-64740

Indeed, civilians continue to suffer from
inadequate protection in situations of armed conflict. A
defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts remains
the failure of parties to respect and ensure respect for
their obligations to protect civilians. The heightened
vulnerability of civilians in wartime — in particular
that of forcibly displaced persons, refugees, women
and children — brings an element of urgency to our
protection efforts and to the imperative to restore the
rule of law.
Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts aggravated by
population displacement and foreign military
occupation. There is increased recognition of the need
to address the impact of conflict on housing, land and
property, in particular in relation to the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees.
More focused efforts are necessary to end illegal
policies and practices in occupied territories, including
forced demographic changes and the destruction and
appropriation of historical and cultural heritage, as
well as various forms of economic activity that directly
affect the property rights of inhabitants who are
considering returning to their places of origin.
It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation, be applied by the international
community with more systematic regularity, including
concrete measures to overcome obstacles that prevent
return. Ensuring the right to return is to categorically
reject the gains of ethnic cleansing while at the same
time offering an important measure of justice to those
displaced from their homes and land and deprived of
their property, thereby removing a source of possible
future tension and conflict.
Azerbaijan is of the view that the lack of
agreement on political issues should not be used as a
pretext to ignore problems caused by continued and

21

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

deliberate disrespect for international humanitarian and
human rights law in situations of armed conflict and
foreign military occupation. The fact that illegal
situations continue because of political circumstances
does not mean that they should be tolerated and
allowed to continue forever. In that regard, my country
considers it important to reaffirm the continued
applicability of all relevant norms of international
humanitarian and human rights law to such situations
in order to invalidate activities aimed at consolidating
military occupation, initiate urgent measures aimed at
eliminating the adverse effects of such activities and
discourage any further practice of the same or similar
nature.
The need to enhance accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
is fundamental to enhancing compliance with
international law by parties to conflict. In that regard it
is important to emphasize that ending impunity is
essential not only for the purpose of prosecuting those
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide or other serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, but also for
ensuring
sustainable
peace,
justice,
truth,
reconciliation, the rights and interests of victims and
the well-being of society at large.
Any steps aimed at promoting a culture of
impunity — including measures to promote a war of
aggression — or to glorify perpetrators of the most
serious international offences or promote the odious
ideas of racial superiority can contribute to further
violations of humanitarian and human rights law, in
particular with respect to peoples uprooted from their
homes through continued acts of foreign military
intervention, aggression or occupation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We also join previous
speakers in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/579) and his active involvement in
addressing this important subject. Armenia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make some brief
remarks in my national capacity.
The Council has significantly developed its
thematic work on the protection of civilians since the
last time we held a similar debate (see S/PV.6354). As
we mark the first anniversary of the Council’s adoption

22

of resolution 1894 (2009), it is important and
commendable that this body has continued its practice
of holding annual open debates on the protection of
civilians featuring briefings by the Under-SecretariesGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations. We were also pleased to hear presentations
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross offering analysis of the Council’s actions in
recent years and touching upon important developments.
With the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009)
exactly a year ago, the Council introduced new
provisions focusing on humanitarian access in the
implementation
of
protection
mandates
in
peacekeeping operations. Armenia welcomes the fact
that the Council also took several important decisions
relating to the protection needs of vulnerable groups
during armed conflict, and we are grateful to have had
the opportunity to contribute to the debates on children
and armed conflict, the protection of civilians, and
women and peace and security in June, July and
October, respectively.
Today’s debate offers another opportunity for the
Council to evaluate the progress made on key issues,
such as the implementation of resolution 1894 (2009),
and to indicate areas where further focus is needed,
including the enhancement of compliance with
international humanitarian law and the strengthening of
accountability for violations thereof. Ensuring such
accountability and enhancing compliance with the
international legal obligations of parties to conflict
should be viewed as key elements of the Council’s
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. In that context, it is important to improve the
use of established sanctions regimes and to implement
the binding resolutions that call on all States to adopt
national legislation for the prosecution of individuals
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
In the lessons learned process, this debate should
also enable the Council more effectively to address the
specific concerns related to the protection of civilian
populations. The Council has to send a clear message
to all parties to armed conflict, reminding them of their
obligations and condemning violations of international
humanitarian law.
The concept of the protection of civilians is
founded on the universally accepted rules of

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian and human rights law, which are set
down in a range of international legal instruments. For
that reason, we believe that the Council could more
effectively seek thorough compliance by all parties
with the norms of international humanitarian law.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue signifies the urgency of the matter
and the need for the international community to fulfil
its commitment to protecting civilians. We therefore
share the views expressed by Council members and
other speakers calling for more systematic attention to
be paid to protection. We strongly believe that
increased efforts to fight impunity at the national and
international levels are essential.
Armenia therefore welcomes the initiative of the
United Kingdom to hold this debate, and is committed
to working with the Council and other Members on
addressing the challenges to the Council’s work on the
protection of civilians.
The President: I
representative of India.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you very much, Sir, for convening today’s
thematic debate and for reminding us very explicitly of
the four-minute rule. I shall try to do my best on that.
I of course express appreciation to the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie
Amos, and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, for their
briefings. We also welcome the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2010/579).
India firmly believes that it is the solemn
responsibility of the international community to protect
civilians and safeguard their human rights. Naturally,
this also entails that the peacekeeping missions that we
mandate
should
be
adequately
resourced.
Notwithstanding the development of International
humanitarian law, United Nations human rights law and
Security Council resolutions and mandates, civilians
continue to suffer. Even more unfortunate is the fact that
civilians suffer a disproportionate share of casualties as
compared to belligerents. It is they who bear the brunt
of violence in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Efforts to protect civilians may be hampered by a
variety of reasons, such as the unwillingness of parties
to a conflict to abide by international humanitarian law,

10-64740

the lack of resources, information gaps, or the lack of
understanding about what peacekeepers should and can
do to protect civilians. In such a situation, new and
innovative approaches are required that are
comprehensive in nature. The essential elements of
such an approach include, inter alia, strict compliance
with and respect for international humanitarian law,
human rights law and international law; no impunity;
the prosecution of those responsible for committing
serious crimes; the development of country contextspecific United Nations mandates; the development of
requisite benchmarks to assess progress; the
predeployment training of troops; and a well-charted
mandate, along with appropriate guidelines to guide
the mission in its work.
India believes that the primary gap is that of
resources. First of all, the number of troops sanctioned
for a peacekeeping mission should be such that it is in
a position to provide meaningful support to national
authorities. Similarly, those responsible for the
development of normative frameworks and guidelines
for the mission should invariably include the protection
of civilians as necessary component.
The roots of peacebuilding go deep into Security
Council mandates on peacekeeping. In providing
mandates, the Security Council needs to get a clearer
idea of operational realities. No achievable mandate
can be finalized without the meaningful involvement
and substantive consultations with troop- and policecontributing countries. In this context, it is absolutely
necessary that unachievable mandates not be generated
for the sake of achieving political expediency.
Mandates must be driven by national requirements and
not by the priorities of others. In working on mandates,
emphasis should be on understanding and providing
what host Governments require, not an exercise in
collating can be given to them.
Another important aspect of the protection of
civilians in the armed conflict is the strengthening of
national capacities. The protection of civilians is a
national responsibility and requires institutions and
conditions that are conducive to their functioning.
Peacekeepers must be there to aid in the development
of these national capacities.
In the view of my delegation, more serious
consideration and thought need to go into the manner
in which these capacities may be developed. Such
capacities and institutions must be relevant to the

23

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

realities of the area in which United Nations operations
are deployed. In this regard, the experiences and
capabilities of developing countries, particularly those
that have gone through successful nation-building
exercises, would be of immense value. The Security
Council must find ways and means to harness these
capacities.
The Security Council must also be in a position to
give clear policy guidance to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). The independent
study commissioned by DPKO last year succinctly
stated that the confusion over the Council’s intent is
evident in the lack of policy, guidance, planning and
preparedness. We stand ready and willing to engage in
the development of this process.
India is committed to contributing, through its
peacekeepers and its national capacities, to the
promotion of peace and security and to the role of the
United Nations in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Before I conclude, I must state that the
references made to the Indian state of Jammu and
Kashmir by the representative of Pakistan were not
only untenable, but also had no place in today’s debate.
The President: I give
representative of the Philippines.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): The Philippines is
grateful for this opportunity to address the Security
Council on today’s open debate on the agenda item
“Protection of civilians in armed conflict”. The
Philippines has always considered this issue to be of
special importance, taking into account its national and
international dimensions. The Philippine Government
continues to work seriously to protect civilians in
armed conflict not only in its own national territory,
but also the overseas Filipino workers who are
sometimes caught in fighting in areas of conflict or
potential conflict in other parts of the globe. Thus,
ensuring their safety is a top priority for the Philippine
Government.
I wish to thank the various speakers this morning
for their very useful briefings. The Philippines
associates itself with the position of the Non-Aligned
Movement delivered earlier by the Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
I wish to commend you, Sir, and the United
Kingdom delegation for putting the protection of
civilians in armed conflict on top of the Council’s

24

agenda. At the same, I commend the United Kingdom
for its able and competent chairmanship of the
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians
since its establishment in January 2009. I also wish to
express our appreciation to the Security Council for its
consistent and untiring engagement on this issue, both
at the thematic level and in country-specific cases,
since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) in
September 1999 — the first resolution on the
protection of civilians.
The adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) on
11 November last year once again reinforced the
Council’s commitment to the protection of civilians by
taking concrete steps towards this end by ensuring
humanitarian access, providing protection mandates to
peacekeeping missions, and recognizing the need for
the effective monitoring and reporting of cases.
Despite the advances achieved in recent years,
however, more challenges remain to be addressed, as
pointed out by the United Nations officials concerned
who have shared their insights on this issue. The open
debate today therefore provides a good opportunity for
us to take stock of the progress made on key issues and
come up with new approaches to resolve them.
In recent years, the various reports and
recommendations on the protection of civilians caught
in armed conflict have given us a good panoramic view
of the problems associated with this issue. Among the
relevant recommendations are the need to include the
protection of civilians in any conflict-resolution
strategy, improving humanitarian access, the role of
United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions in the protection of civilians and the
establishment of commissions of inquiry to reinforce
accountability.
The Philippines has taken those recommendations
into account. In fact, we have taken appropriate
measures to integrate them in the implementation of
our national policies and work plan. I am therefore
pleased to inform the Council of the following concrete
steps that the Philippines has taken.
First, as the Philippine Government continues to
engage in peace talks with the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front and the New People’s Army, it has also taken
every measure to ensure that, until lasting peace is
achieved, civilians are properly protected and those
who commit violence and wrongdoing against them are
held accountable.

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, the Philippines has consistently called
for a system-wide approach where the work of United
Nations bodies — namely, that of the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council — on this issue is effectively integrated into
the work of other entities, specialized agencies and, in
applicable cases, non-governmental organizations and
civil society.
Thirdly, the Philippines has supported a more
proactive approach through concrete efforts to protect
civilians in the face of imminent conflict. This
proactive way of protecting people will save more lives
and reduce their vulnerability to the grim consequences
of conflict. In that regard, the Philippines actively
provides protection during armed conflict, especially to
women and children, who are the most vulnerable
segment of society.
I cannot overemphasize the commitment of the
Philippine Government to ensure the protection of
civilians caught in armed conflict. We have put in place
mechanisms for investigation and prosecution to deal
with such cases. In that context, the Philippines enacted
a new law in December of last year, namely, Republic
Act No. 9851 — the Philippine law on crimes against
international humanitarian law, genocide and other
crimes against humanity — which mandates the
protection of civilians and provides for the criminal and
administrative liability of commanders and other
superiors under the principle of command responsibility.
I would also like to assure Council members that
the new Government of President Benigno Aquino III
continues to adopt measures and implement good
practices on the protection of civilians as a matter of
priority.
In conclusion, the Philippines strongly believes
that a culture of protection of civilians can be truly
instilled if there is genuine domestic ownership of a
culture of protection. In that regard, the Philippines
will continue to work with the United Nations to
promote and strengthen this culture of protection,
which is actually rooted in the sanctity of human life
and respect for the human rights of every person on the
planet, especially in conflict areas.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to associate my delegation with the

10-64740

statement delivered by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Eleven years have passed since the SecretaryGeneral submitted to the Security Council his first
report (S/1999/957) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We continue to have high hopes that
the Council’s ongoing deliberations on this issue will
lead to a comprehensive approach and far-reaching
objective vision on the best means to protect civilians.
My delegation believes that first and foremost in that
effort should be the elimination of the root causes of
armed conflict. Avoiding the causes of conflict and
supporting lasting and comprehensive political
settlements are the best guarantees for ensuring the
protection of civilians. Protection is always more
effective than the cure.
The recommendations of the Secretary-General in
his various reports on this issue have focused on the
need to reactivate and improve the capacities of United
Nations peacekeeping operations with regard to the
protection of civilians. However, realities on the
ground and practical experience in many countries
have clearly confirmed that, in the absence of any
peace to be kept, peacekeeping missions will not
achieve the desired goal, regardless of the level of their
capacity to protect.
The enjoyment of peace by all is what primarily
protects civilians. That includes the speedy
implementation of development, economic recovery
and reconstruction programmes, as well as programmes
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
provision of services and quick-impact projects to
ensure stability and the speedy resettlement of
returnees. Peace also guarantees that civilians can
leave refugee camps and return to their homes to
resume ordinary lives.
Against that backdrop, peacebuilding must be the
primary priority and concern of the United Nations,
which should not be distracted from it by dealing with
other symptoms of conflict. Moreover, I wish to
reiterate that we must take advantage of regional
organizations with proven ability and capacity to build
and maintain peace, given their direct link to the causes
of conflicts and their comprehensive understanding of
them. In that regard, I would also like to point to the
decisions taken at the meeting organized by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Dakar
in April 2007 on the role of regional organizations in

25

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

the protection of civilians and on peacebuilding
overall.
The principle of protecting civilians in armed
conflict is a noble one to which we all aspire. However,
we are concerned by attempts by some countries to
utilize that goal to serve particular political aims, such
as the ongoing campaign on the so-called responsibility
to protect. In that regard, I would like to reiterate that,
although referred to in the 2005 Summit Outcome, the
responsibility to protect is still the subject of divergent
interpretations on the part of Member States. In that
connection, we must bear in mind the established
principles of the Charter of the United Nations vis-à-vis
the sovereignty and legitimacy of Member States and
their full responsibility for the protection of their
citizens.
I would also like to note that the right to protect
civilians in armed conflict is but one aspect of an
integrated and interconnected system of rights and
duties, as reaffirmed by the 2005 Summit Outcome.
The main thrust of the Summit was to follow-up the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
foremost among which are development, combating
poverty and preventing conflicts by dealing with their
root causes. The protection of civilians must therefore
take place in the context of a comprehensive and
integrated approach that is primarily focused on
dealing with the root causes to conflict from the
earliest stages, with the Security Council playing an
active role in leading and supporting efforts at political
mediation, reconciliation and compromise. That should
be complemented by a parallel role for the United
Nations Secretariat and its agencies vis-à-vis
humanitarian considerations and promoting economic
growth, recovery and sustainable development. In
particular, donors should honour their development
pledges.
Ultimately, the protection of civilians is the
responsibility of individual States themselves.
Therefore, we should improve the capacities of the
concerned States so that they can assume their
responsibilities ably, rather than weaken those
capacities through sanctions, despite the fact that those
who support sanctions try to portray them as either
smart or targeted or by using other evasive
descriptions. None of those descriptions alter the
reality that sanctions cause undeniable harm to the
ordinary people of the country targeted.

26

In its section II, the report of the SecretaryGeneral mentions attacks on humanitarian workers in
Darfur, including incidents of kidnapping, robbery and
the looting of assets and mobile units. While we share
the Security Council’s concern over this phenomenon,
we would also like to draw members’ attention to the
fact that the perpetrators of such attacks are most likely
members of armed rebel movements and gangs of
thieves and bandits affiliated with the rebels, or of a
number of groups that are offshoots of the armed rebel
movements, which carry out these robberies and
attacks in order to fund and provision their members
and to destabilize the situation throughout Darfur in
order to send a deceptive message to the international
community, as is currently the case.
We believe that the personnel of humanitarian
agencies and organizations have a primary
responsibility to coordinate with local authorities
before going to any areas to which they want to deliver
aid so that the Government can offer them the
necessary protection. We have recently noticed that
many humanitarian workers do not abide by safety
procedures or coordinate with the authorities, making
them vulnerable to such attacks. Allow me to provide
two striking examples of this. Humanitarian workers in
Darfur have agreed with us to abide by three rules, one
of which is to put insufficient fuel in their vehicles so
that car thieves cannot drive them to distant locations.
However, humanitarian workers have not followed this
advice. That is the first example. Another point that we
agreed upon was that they would lock their vehicles
when they parked them, but they continue not to do so,
which has encouraged many rebels to take advantage
of their lax behaviour. These workers are often the
personnel of United Nations agencies. Therefore, we
want to reaffirm the need to abide by safety measures
and to coordinate with the authorities, which would
greatly reduce the robberies and attacks against
vehicles and minimize the kidnapping of humanitarian
workers.
In closing, we confirm the need to adopt a
comprehensive approach that would deal primarily,
without selectivity or discrimination, with the root
causes of conflicts in addressing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also affirm the need for
the Security Council to demonstrate in practical terms
the extent of its support for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict by supporting comprehensive
political settlements of conflicts. The Security Council

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

must support all mediation efforts in order to resolve
conflicts and address their root causes and motives.

the input of the stakeholders involved, could be an
important step forward in this regard.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.

There is a world of difference between the will of
the Council and the effective implementation of
protection, not only in terms of the geographic
separation between Headquarters and the areas of
conflict, but also because of the lack of understanding
and coordination that may exist between those who
establish mandates and those who implement them,
given the difference between our desires and
expectations here and the reality of scarce resources
and wide-ranging difficulties on the ground. For this
reason, which we perceive primarily from our
perspective as a contributor of troops and police, our
country has attempted to play a constructive role at
Headquarters, particularly in the General Assembly,
which is the body that represents us, with the aim of
bringing those who establish mandates and those who
implement them closer together in order to reach the
broadest possible consensus on these issues.

Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for the
constructive work that your delegation, Mr. President,
has been doing to advance the subject that we are
discussing today.
The delegation of Uruguay welcomes the
significant progress that has been made since the last
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277), which
helps in various ways to improve the situation of
civilian populations in armed conflict. This includes
the entry into force of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions in August; the progress made at the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute in extending criminal
individual responsibility to various circumstances;
recent developments with regard to the prevention of
genocide and other mass atrocities; and, in general, the
important normative progress made at Headquarters
with regard to various areas that pertain to innocent
civilians, particularly the most vulnerable, such as
women and children.
Despite this progress, Uruguay believes that there
is a wide gap between the legal developments that have
taken place in recent years with regard to the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, and the real
situation of civilian populations affected by such
conflicts, including in those places where the United
Nations is represented by peacekeeping operations.
This is why we can only endorse the approach
suggested by the Secretary-General that we concentrate
on making a tangible difference on the ground and take
into particular account the situation as it is experienced
before we make critical decisions with regard to the
future of the United Nations presence on the ground.
On the one hand, we should avoid the premature
withdrawal of missions when we have yet to
effectively stabilize the security conditions. On the
other hand, we must reconcile this with the principle of
the consent of the host State, which has the primary
responsibility to provide such protection — a crucial
aspect that constitutes one of the pillars of the
legitimacy of this system and sets it apart from other
alternatives. The existence of realistic indicators, based
on the well-being of the population and prepared using

10-64740

In this regard, we believe that we should
recognize the valuable progress that has been made
over the past two years in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. It is in our interest to
continue working constructively along these lines. To
that end, on 6 December, together with the Mission of
Australia, we will organize a third workshop on the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations. This
time, we will focus on the strategic framework for the
protection of civilians, as called for last March by the
Special Committee.
Finally, my delegation stresses the importance of
all parties in all situations preserving, strengthening
and complying with the standards of international
humanitarian law in order to ensure full respect for the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, as well as the absolute necessity of
facilitating access for humanitarian workers and of
ensuring adequate security for the fulfilment of their
tasks. In this regard, dialogue with armed non-State
groups should not be understood as a legitimization of
such groups; rather, it should be sought in order to
foster their understanding of and respect for
international humanitarian law.
Similarly, we reiterate that all humanitarian
responses must be sustainable and take the
development perspective into account so as to ensure
the required capacity-building at the national level in
this critical area. Uruguay believes that the protection

27

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

of civilians in armed conflict is a multidimensional
issue that feeds and is fed by other different but linked
issues, such as children in armed conflict and women
and peace and security, among others. For that reason,
it is critical to maximize coordination, produce
synergies, avoid duplication of efforts and make the
most effective use possible of the means at this
Organization’s disposal on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to express on
behalf of the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela our gratitude for the opportunity to
participate in this debate. My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
No one can dispute the need to protect all
vulnerable civilians from the effects of armed conflict,
pursuant to the relevant instruments of international
law, international humanitarian law and, in particular,
the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. Those instruments should be applied equally
to all cases involving threatened civilian populations,
ensuring full transparency in the application of the law
and eliminating the ongoing impunity of those States
whose aggressions against unprotected civilian
populations have been condoned for too long.
The protection of civilians in the context of
peacekeeping operations is one of many tasks
established in Security Council mandates. It is related
to other equally important tasks and its implementation
is viable only within the regulatory framework that sets
out the guiding principles for such operations: the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force. The protection of civilians cannot be conducted
outside the political and legal bases accepted by States.
A successful strategy for the protection of civilians
demands that the root causes of conflict be
systematically addressed through actions that have a
positive impact on development and using appropriate
channels for the peaceful resolution of disputes.
As established in international law, States or
parties to a conflict have the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians under the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Peacekeeping operations are in certain
limited cases assigned the task of protecting physical

28

well-being in situations of imminent danger to life,
always within the ground deployment of a mission and
when required to facilitate humanitarian aid.
We note the significant risks inherent in any
initiative that seeks to operationalize the protection of
civilians, especially in the light of the coexistence of
divergent, mutually exclusive conceptual approaches to
the problem and of the individual nature of each armed
conflict. In this context, the issue of civilian protection
forces us to reiterate the questions formulated in 2005
by President Hugo Chávez during the discussions on
the responsibility to protect, which have yet to be
answered. Who defines — and how — what is
necessary to protect civilians? What is the body
responsible for identifying the potential players —
“spoilers” — threatening the fulfilment of the
mandate? Finally, what risks do these issues present for
the impartiality of a peacekeeping mission? It is
necessary for the Member States to deliberate these
issues in the General Assembly as a basic prerequisite
for progress in the formulation of policies that bring
about genuine and broad consensus.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation’s participation in this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is based on the
importance that my country attaches to this goal and on
its commitment, alongside the United Nations, to
ensuring its implementation.
Immediately after having suffered the horrors of
the Second World War, the international community
established important legal standards to protect
civilians affected by armed conflict. These include the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, the Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees and various international
human rights instruments, whose main objective is to
spare civilian populations from suffering, especially
women, children and the elderly. For over 11 years, the
Council has addressed this issue and has thus enriched
the debate and created worldwide support for a
sustained and concerted effort of the international
community on the issue.
Despite this progress, we are unfortunately forced
to note that civilian populations continue to be the first
victims of armed conflict. That reality requires all
parties to armed conflict to abide by international law
and refrain from any actions that cause harm to

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

civilians. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/579) pursuant to resolution 1894 (2009) notes
a number of positive international developments as
well as the many challenges that remain.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We would,
however, like to address some aspects of the issue
under consideration.
The best way to protect civilians in armed conflict
is to prevent conflicts from erupting and to find lasting
solutions to those that exist. In many situations, it is
important that the parties involved demonstrate the
political will and resolve necessary to finding lasting
compromise solutions to end the suffering of affected
populations. Neighbouring States — which, in a
number of cases, are parties, in name or in fact, to
conflict — must act responsibly to that end.
The Security Council and the international
community must support parties in this process by
creating conditions conducive to putting an end to
these conflicts. Primary responsibility, however, falls
on the nation State to protect its citizens and other
peoples living in its territory. It should do so, of
course, in adherence to current international
obligations, rules and laws.
We commend the Council’s efforts to provide
greater assistance to populations at risk. These efforts
are strengthened by the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) will undoubtedly help us to provide better
protection for women. Similarly, the fight against the
use of child soldiers must remain a priority of the
international community.
Refugees are the very first to suffer from the
eruption or continuation of conflicts. Host States have
the obligation to ensure that they fully enjoy their
rights, including the right of return. In protecting
refugees, it is vital that the humanitarian and civilian
nature of refugee camps not be compromised by the
presence of armed elements and that refugees be able
to exercise their right of voluntary return in security
and dignity. Finally, in meeting the needs of refugees
while protecting them, they must be counted and
registered without delay. This is a primary, essential
and inescapable obligation.

10-64740

My delegation strongly condemns all attacks on
humanitarian personnel and convoys and calls for their
protection. We equally condemn the diversion by a
number of armed groups of humanitarian assistance,
which, rather than reaching the populations in need,
serves to enrich the leaders of these groups, who must
be held accountable by the international community as
perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law.
As the Secretary-General underlines, the
proliferation of non-State armed groups has
exacerbated the difficulties involved in protecting
civilians. When these groups violate international law,
they must be brought to justice by the international
community. In addition, humanitarian agencies must
ensure that humanitarian work is not used by these
groups for political ends.
My country urges the international community to
confront the excessive accumulation of small arms and
light weapons, whose devastating effect on the civilian
population has been clearly demonstrated. These arms
often constitute a genuine threat to the peace and
security of entire regions when they are trafficked and
used by terrorist groups to attack innocent persons and
threaten States and groups of States.
In conclusion, I would like to state that, beyond
United Nations actions to restore and build peace,
preventive diplomacy and early warning systems remain
important tools available to the Security Council for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, the de-escalation of
emerging crises and the prevention of the return of
conflict. They should be used more often and
systematically so as to have a palpable impact on
hotbeds of tension throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia)(spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
November and for your initiative to convene this debate.
I would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the DirectorGeneral of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their briefings, which are of great importance
and help to shed light on our debate.

29

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

I would like to emphasize the resolve and
commitment of the Government of Colombia to protect
civilians in armed conflicts and to guarantee their
rights throughout the world. We are convinced that
respect for the life and integrity of all people is the
foundation of democracy. At his recent inauguration,
President Juan Manuel Santos underlined that respect
for these commitments reflects the most important
democratic, ethical and human convictions.
The Government and Congress of my country are
currently drafting three bills with a view to continue
strengthening the State’s institutional capacity and
promoting the social and economic prosperity of our
people. These bills address the issues of victims and
land restitution, royalties from natural resources, and
corruption.
The State has the primary responsibility to protect
civilians in armed conflict. Respecting this principle is
essential to strengthen the State’s capacities and to
identify long-term solutions, with the cooperation of
the international community, when required. Our own
experience has shown that strong democratic
institutions help to achieve the goals of progress and
overall well-being. This has been shown by the results
obtained in Colombia in recent years.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/579) is an
important contribution to the intergovernmental
consultations taking place in the General Assembly and
the Security Council on the protection of civilians. We
reiterate that the analyses conducted and actions adopted
should take place in observance of the United Nations
Charter, international and national law, and in the
framework of the principles of neutrality, impartiality,
humanity and independence. Special attention should be
paid to holding consultations with the Governments of
concerned countries and to recognizing the specificities
of each case under consideration.
Regarding observations concerning the possible
engagement of humanitarian actors with illegal armed
groups, my Government reaffirms that such
engagement must enjoy the explicit consent of the
concerned State and comply with national and
international humanitarian law. The lack of information
on and knowledge of specific realities on the part of
international actors could have a negative impact on
the actual protection of civilians.
My delegation wishes to emphasize the need to
establish effective controls over the illicit traffic in

30

small arms and light weapons as a key element for
better protection of the civilian population. Today in
Bogota, a parliamentary forum on small arms and light
weapons will be attended by parliamentary
representatives of 50 countries, who will discuss the
threat posed by the proliferation of such weapons to
development, democracy and security in many parts of
the world.
Colombia reaffirms its commitment to the
Cartagena Action Plan adopted at the Second Review
Conference of States Parties to the Mine Ban
Convention in December 2009. Colombia also supports
the initiative of the Secretary-General concerning the
establishment of indicators for assessing progress in
protecting civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. This initiative should be developed taking
into consideration each operation’s mandate and should
not be based on theoretical formulas looking for
universal solutions. My delegation will participate
actively in the discussions on this matter and will
contribute to its advancement in the various organs and
entities of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation
associates itself with the statement made to the
Security Council by the Permanent Representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Botswana attaches great importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and, in this
connection, welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to
hold this open debate. Let me also commend you for
inviting representatives of international humanitarian
organizations and other players who have assisted in
enriching today’s debate.
Botswana appreciates the thorough and
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, dated
11 November 2010 (S/2010/579). We note the chilling
message contained therein, to the effect that “Whether
as the intended targets of attack or the incidental
victims of the use of force, civilians continue to
account for the majority of casualties in conflict”
(ibid., para. 3).
Given this account, my delegation believes that
Member States of the United Nations, and particularly
members of the Security Council, should ensure that

10-64740

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

the issue of protection of civilians in armed conflict
remain high on the agenda of the United Nations,
because attacks on civilians in theatres of armed
conflict are in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
My delegation also agrees that while significant
advances have been made in the past decade to develop
a comprehensive policy and an institutional framework
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and
that while such discussions continue, urgent measures
should be taken to stem the tide of human rights
violations on the ground.
My delegation calls for an end to actions that
harm innocent civilians in conflict situations, including
the use of civilians as human shields, the obstruction of
humanitarian operations, the theft of humanitarian
supplies and plundering of other resources, the use of
murder and maiming as instruments to terrify civilian
populations, and the use of rape as a weapon of war.
Botswana
notes
with
appreciation
the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and finds them to be a useful
framework for guiding the actions of concerned parties
in addressing the core challenges, which are:
compliance with international law by parties to a
conflict, the protection role of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, humanitarian access, and
accountability for violations of international law.
Botswana believes that those recommendations should
be assessed with a view to arriving at improved
practical solutions for the work of the Council as well
as peacekeeping and humanitarian operations.
We are pleased, Mr. President, that you have
convened this open debate on a subject which, due to
the protracted nature of many conflicts, may very
easily receive reduced attention over time. It is very
important that the ideas generated during today’s
debate be allowed to feed into the reassessment of
practices in the areas stipulated, and I wish to assure
you of my delegation’s continued interest and full
support in that regard.
Finally, Botswana welcomes the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/25) adopted today.
The President: The representative of Lebanon
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
now give him the floor.

10-64740

Mr. Karanouh (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): One
of today’s speakers claimed to care for Lebanese
civilians. What is worse, that party continues not only
to occupy Arab land but also to exercise aggression
against its neighbours. It continues to challenge the
resolutions of this Council and the provisions of
international law and international humanitarian law
and to violate the Geneva Conventions, especially by
indiscriminately attacking, killing, besieging and
displacing innocent civilians, not sparing civilian
facilities from its bombings and destruction.
The President: Under-Secretary-General Amos
has asked for the floor to respond to comments and
questions raised. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Amos: In the interests of time, I will not
respond to all of the detailed points that have been
made, but I can reassure Council members that I have
taken note of them. I would, however, like to respond
to some of the recurring themes raised during the
debate.
First, I welcome the support expressed for the
informal Expert Group and the interesting proposals
from a number of States to expand its use and
increase its utility to the Council. I also welcome
today’s adoption of the updated aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex).
I am encouraged that the majority of speakers
have referred to the core challenges that we face in
enhancing the protection of civilians and the need to
redouble our efforts in that regard.
Many speakers have underlined the need for
compliance by parties to conflict with their obligations
to protect civilians and the significance, in that respect,
of ensuring the accountability of those who violate the
law. Attention has been drawn too to the importance of
safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access to
those in need.
I welcome the focus on compliance and access.
However, if we are to succeed in improving both,
humanitarian actors must be able to engage with
non-State armed groups. A small number of States have
expressed the concern that humanitarian engagement
may afford such groups legitimacy. That is not
supported by our experience. Only through engagement
can we promote and seek improved protection for
civilians and have consistent and safer access to those
in need.

31

S/PV.6427 (Resumption 1)

I also took note of the support for improving
monitoring against established benchmarks and
indicators. I consider that a key gap in more successful
implementation of protection measures on the ground
and in reporting progress made in protecting civilians.
I will report back to the Council on that in my next
report.
Some speakers have raised concerns over the
inclusion of certain situations in the report of the
Secretary-General and their characterization as
situations of armed conflict. Whether a situation
constitutes armed conflict is determined by the facts on
the ground. It is determined on the basis of criteria
developed in the jurisprudence of international
tribunals. Such a determination does not affect the
legal status of the parties involved; it does not equate
the parties in any way. And it should not be seen as
judging or condemning the conduct of the parties. It is
also completely separate from the determination of
whether the use of force is legal and whether the
actions of the parties comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
Finally, reference has been made to the nature of
contemporary conflict marked by the struggle against
non-State armed groups in so-called asymmetric
warfare. I acknowledge the complexity of those
challenges and would emphasize that international
humanitarian law is no less relevant in those contexts.

32

The law is very clear: all parties to conflict must
at all times take the necessary steps to spare the
civilian population and distinguish at all times between
civilians and combatants. Moreover, violations by one
party, including non-State parties, do not permit or
justify violations by any other party to that same
conflict. Indeed, the nature of contemporary conflicts
and the increasing prevalence of conflict in densely
populated settings require ever more vigilance from the
parties and determined efforts to respect and to ensure
respect for their obligations under the law.
I look forward to working with the Council in the
coming years in addressing protection-of-civilians
concerns and issues relating to humanitarian action
more broadly, as well as working with individual
Member States. I also look forward to continuing the
practice of bringing particular situation-specific
concerns to the attention of the Council following my
country missions.
The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Amos for her clarifications in response to the
comments by Member States and other participants.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

10-64740
