S/PRST/2001/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 March 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4298th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 March 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Security Council
resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1208 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999) —
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2001/218)”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on progress in the implementation of
its resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999.
“The Security Council commends the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the commander of the international security presence
(KFOR) for their ongoing efforts to implement fully resolution 1244 (1999),
undertaken under difficult circumstances, and welcomes the priority areas of
work identified by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council welcomes the establishment of a working group
under the authority of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
aimed at developing a legal framework for provisional institutions for
democratic and autonomous self-government in Kosovo and stresses the need
for all ethnic groups to be represented in the work of this group. It underlines
the need to keep the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
informed on the process. It calls on all parties to support the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to build a stable multi-ethnic
democratic society in Kosovo and to ensure suitable conditions for Kosovowide elections. It stresses the importance of a number of steps being taken for
the holding of these elections: the establishment of the legal framework, in
particular the definition of the functions and powers of the elected bodies; the
development of an integrated voter registry which should include the refugees
and internally displaced persons; full involvement of all the communities in
the ballot; and a high security environment for the voting.
“The Security Council welcomes close contact between the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK and KFOR, in particular
the steps taken towards the opening of an UNMIK office in Belgrade, which
will facilitate these consultations. It stresses the importance of substantial
dialogue between Kosovo political leaders and the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
01-29191 (E) 160301

*0129191*

S/PRST/2001/8

“The Security Council calls for an end to all acts of violence in Kosovo,
in particular those which are ethnically motivated and urges all political
leaders in Kosovo to condemn these acts and to increase their efforts to create
inter-ethnic tolerance. It reiterates the importance of resolving the problem of
the missing and detainees and notes that this would be a major confidencebuilding measure. It welcomes the initial steps taken by the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in this regard.
“The Security Council remains concerned about the security situation in
certain municipalities in Southern Serbia as a result of the violent actions of
ethnic Albanian armed groups. It welcomes the ceasefire agreements signed on
12 March 2001 and calls for strict compliance with their provisions. It stresses
that a peaceful settlement of this crisis can only be achieved through
substantial dialogue. It commends the continued restraint of the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbia. The Security Council
welcomes the plan of the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
for Southern Serbia and supports its initiative to find a peaceful and durable
solution through a process of dialogue and confidence-building measures. It
expresses the opinion that the swift implementation of confidence-building
measures would be an important element in a peaceful settlement, and
underlines the importance of continued political and financial support for this
process by the international community.
“The Security Council welcomes the decision taken by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) to authorize the commander of KFOR to allow
the controlled return of forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the
Ground Safety Zone as defined in the military-technical agreement signed in
Kumanovo on 9 June 1999 referred to in Annex II of resolution 1244 (1999) as
a first step in a phased and conditioned reduction of the Ground Safety Zone.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as set out in the statement of its President of
7 March 2001 (S/PRST/2001/7). It strongly condemns the continuing extremist
violence in parts of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, supported
from outside the country, which constitutes a threat to the stability and security
of the entire region, and underlines the importance of maintaining the
territorial integrity of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and all
other States in the region. It supports efforts by the Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to cooperate with NATO and other
international organizations to end this violence in a manner consistent with the
rule of law.
“The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter.”

2
