S/PRST/2005/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 February 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5122nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 February 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council received a briefing from the Secretariat on the
situation in Lebanon on February 15, 2005.
“The Security Council unequivocally condemns the 14 February 2005
terrorist bombing in Beirut, Lebanon that killed former Lebanese Prime
Minister Rafiq Hariri and others, and caused serious injury to dozens of
people, including former Minister Basil Fleihan.
“The Security Council expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the people and Government of Lebanon and to the victims and their
families.
“The Council calls on the Lebanese Government to bring to justice the
perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of this heinous terrorist act, and noting
the Lebanese Government’s commitments in this regard. The Council urges all
States, in accordance with its resolutions 1566 (2004) and 1373 (2001), to
cooperate fully in the fight against terrorism.
“The Security Council is gravely concerned by the murder of the former
Prime Minister of Lebanon and its possible impact on ongoing efforts by the
people of Lebanon to solidify Lebanon’s democracy, including during the
upcoming parliamentary elections. Such a terrorist act should not jeopardize
the holding of these elections in transparent, free and democratic conditions.
“The Security Council is concerned by the potential for further
destabilization of Lebanon, and expresses hope that the Lebanese people will
be able to emerge from this terrible event united, and to use peaceful means in
support of their longstanding national aspiration to full sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
“The Security Council reaffirms its previous calls upon all parties
concerned to cooperate fully and urgently with the Security Council for the
full implementation of all relevant resolutions concerning the restoration of the
territorial integrity, full sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the situation in Lebanon and to report urgently on the circumstances, causes
and consequences of this terrorist act.”

05-23846 (E) 150205

*0523846*
