A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/154
29 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 114

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/603)]
54/154. Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and the
convening of the World Conf erence against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its objectives, as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, of achieving international
cooperation in solving problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Reaffirming also its firm determination and its commitment to eradicate totally and unconditionally
racism in all its forms and racial discrimination and its conviction that racism and racial discrimination
constitute a total negation of the purposes and principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,1

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

00 29542

/...

A/RES/54/154
Page 2

Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination2 and the Convention against Discrimination in Education, adopted by
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on 14 December 1960,3
Noting the efforts of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination since its establishment
in 1970 to promote the implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination,
Recalling the outcome of the two World Conferences to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, held
at Geneva in 19784 and in 1983,5
Recalling also the outcome of the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to
25 June 1993, and, in particular, the attention given in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action6
to the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance,
Stressing the importance and sensitivity of the activities of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance,
Recalling with satisfaction its resolutions 48/91 of 20 December 1993 and 49/146 of 23 December 1994,
by which, respectively, it proclaimed the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, which
began in 1993, and adopted the revised Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination,
Noting with grave concern that, despite the efforts of the international community, the principal
objectives of the two previous Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination have not
been attained and that millions of human beings continue to the present day to be the victims of varied forms
of racism and racial discrimination,
Noting with great concern that, despite the efforts undertaken by the international community at various
levels, racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related forms of intolerance, ethnic antagonism and acts
of violence are showing signs of increase in many parts of the world and that the number of associations
established on the basis of racist and xenophobic platforms and charters is increasing, as reflected in the
report of the Special Rapporteur,7

2

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 429, No. 6193.
4
See Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, Geneva,
14–25 August 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2).
5
See Report of the second World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, Geneva,
1–12 August 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.83.XIV.4 and corrigendum).
3

6
7

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
See A/54/347.
/...

A/RES/54/154
Page 3

Alarmed that technological developments in the field of communications, including the Internet,
continue to be utilized by various groups engaged in violent activity to promote racist and xenophobic
propaganda aimed at inciting racial hatred and to collect funds to sustain violent campaigns against multiethnic societies throughout the world,
Noting that the use of such technologies can also contribute to combating racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance,
Having considered the report submitted by the Secretary-General8 within the framework of the
implementation of the Programme of Action,
Recalling its resolution 53/132 of 9 December 1998, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
ensure the financial and personnel resources necessary for the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Recognizing the importance of strengthening national legislation and institutions for the promotion of
racial harmony and for the effective enforcement of such legislation,
Remaining firmly convinced of the need to take more effective and sustained measures at the national
and international levels for the elimination of all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
Deeply concerned that the phenomenon of racism and racial discrimination against migrant workers
continues to increase, despite the efforts made by the international community to improve the protection of
the human rights of migrant workers and members of their families,
Recalling the adoption at its forty-fifth session of the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families,9
Acknowledging that indigenous people are at times victims of particular forms of racism and racial
discrimination,
I
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAMME OF ACTION FOR THE THIRD DECADE
TO COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
AND COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES
1.

Welcomes the report submitted by the Secretary-General;8

2. Reaffirms that racism and racial discrimination are among the most serious violations of human
rights in the contemporary world, and expresses its firm determination and its commitment to eradicate, by
all available means, racism in all its forms and racial discrimination;

8
9

A/54/299.
Resolution 45/158, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/154
Page 4

3. Urges all Governments to take all necessary measures to combat new forms of racism, in particular
by constantly adapting the means provided to combat them, especially in the legislative, administrative,
education and information fields;
4. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to assign a high priority to the
follow-up to programmes and activities for combating racism and racial discrimination, consistent with the
need to ensure the effective preparation of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance;
5. Requests the Secretary-General in his reports on racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance to accord special attention to and provide information on the situation of migrant workers
in this regard;
6. Calls upon all Member States to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families9 as a
matter of priority;
7. Commends all States that have ratified or acceded to the international instruments to combat racism
and racial discrimination, especially the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination2 and the Convention against Discrimination in Education;3
8. Urges all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination in order to achieve its universal ratification;
9. Urges States to limit the extent of any reservation they lodge to the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, to formulate any reservation as precisely and as
narrowly as possible, to ensure that no reservations are incompatible with the objective and purpose of the
Convention or otherwise incompatible with international treaty law, to review their reservations regularly
with a view to withdrawing them and to withdraw reservations that are contrary to the objective and purpose
of the Convention or that are otherwise incompatible with international treaty law;
10. Encourages the mass media to promote ideas of tolerance and understanding among peoples and
different cultures;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to draw attention to the effects of racial discrimination
on minorities and migrant workers and members of their families, especially women and children, in the
fields of education, training and employment and to submit in his report specific recommendations for the
implementation of measures to combat such discrimination;
12. Recognizes the need for adequate support and financial resources for the Third Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination and the Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, and requests the Secretary-General to include in his report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fifth session concrete proposals on how to ensure the financial and personnel resources
required for the implementation of the Programme of Action, including through the regular budget of the
United Nations and extrabudgetary sources;
13. Expresses its appreciation to those who have made contributions to the Trust Fund for the
Programme of Action for the Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, strongly appeals
/...

A/RES/54/154
Page 5

to all Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals in a position to
do so to contribute generously to the Fund, and to this end requests the Secretary-General to continue to
establish the appropriate contacts and undertake the appropriate initiatives;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-sixth
session on the outcome of expert seminars held in connection with the activities of the Third Decade;
15. Welcomes the establishment of the racism project team in the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights with a view to coordinating all activities of the Third Decade;
16. Urges all Governments, the Secretary-General, United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies,
intergovernmental organizations and relevant non-governmental organizations, in implementing the
Programme of Action, to pay particular attention to the situation of indigenous people;
17. Requests States to consider the relevant decisions of the Economic and Social Council on the
integrated follow-up to previous world conferences and the need to make optimum use of all available
mechanisms in the struggle against racism;
18. Strongly underlines the importance of education as a significant means of preventing and
eradicating racism and racial discrimination and of creating awareness of principles of human rights, in
particular among young people, and in this regard requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to continue its work on the preparation and dissemination of teaching materials and
teaching aids to promote teaching, training and educational activities on human rights and against racism and
racial discrimination, with particular emphasis on activities at the primary and secondary levels of education;
19. Considers that, in order to attain the objectives of the Third Decade, all parts of the Programme
of Action should be given equal attention;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to accord high priority to the activities of the Programme of Action,
and in this regard also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the necessary financial resources are
provided for the implementation of the activities of the Third Decade during the biennium 2000–2001;
21. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to submit each year to the Economic and Social
Council a detailed report on all activities of United Nations bodies and the specialized agencies containing
an analysis of information received on activities to combat racism and racial discrimination;
22. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly proposals which would assist in
the full implementation of the Programme of Action;
23. Reiterates its calls upon all Governments, United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and
intergovernmental and regional organizations and interested non-governmental organizations to contribute
fully to the effective implementation of the Programme of Action;

/...

A/RES/54/154
Page 6

II
WORLD CONFERENCE AGAINST RACISM, RACIAL DISCRIMINATION,
XENOPHOBIA AND RELATED INTOLERANCE
24. Recalls its resolutions 52/111 of 12 December 1997 and 53/132 of 9 December 1998, in which it
established that the Commission on Human Rights would act as the Preparatory Committee for the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, and takes note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1999/78 of 28 April 199910 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1999/12 of 27 July 1999;
25. Recommends that the Preparatory Committee give consideration to the recommendations of the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including the recommendation contained in
paragraph 41 (b) of his report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;11
26. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate financial resources are made
available for the preparatory process for the World Conference, including from the regular budget of the
United Nations;
27. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
make every effort to ensure the mobilization of resources for the voluntary fund for the World Conference
to cover the participation of the least developed countries in the preparatory process and in the Conference
itself, and requests all Governments, international and non-governmental organizations and private
individuals to contribute to the fund;
28. Calls upon the High Commissioner to help States and regional organizations, upon request, to
convene national and regional meetings or to undertake other initiatives, including activities at the expert
level, to prepare for the World Conference, and urges the specialized agencies and the regional commissions,
in coordination with the High Commissioner, to contribute to the convening of regional preparatory
meetings;
29. Requests the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and the regional commissions to provide
financial and technical assistance for the organization of the regional preparatory meetings planned in the
context of the World Conference, and stresses that such assistance should be supplemented by voluntary
contributions;
30. Decides that the World Conference and the sessions of the Preparatory Committee should be open
to the participation of:
(a) All States Members of the United Nations and States members of the specialized agencies;

10

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
11

See A/53/269.
/...

A/RES/54/154
Page 7

(b) Representatives of all regional organizations and regional commissions involved in the preparation
of regional meetings, as well as associate members of the regional commissions;
(c) Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General
Assembly to participate in the capacity of observers;
(d) Representatives of the specialized agencies, the secretariats of the regional commissions and all
United Nations bodies and programmes;
(e) Representatives of all United Nations mechanisms in the field of human rights;
(f)

Other interested governmental organizations, which shall be represented by observers;

(g) Interested non-governmental organizations, which shall be represented by observers in accordance
with Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996;
31. Welcomes the offer by the Government of South Africa to host the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001;
32. Requests the High Commissioner:
(a) To undertake a study, to be submitted to the Preparatory Committee at its first session, on ways of
improving coordination between her Office and all specialized agencies and international, regional and
subregional organizations with regard to action to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
(b) To continue to devise and implement, with the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat,
a world information campaign aimed at sensitizing public opinion to the importance and the objectives of
the World Conference, to publish in all the official languages of the United Nations an information pamphlet
that is to be made available to non-governmental organizations, the media and the general public and to
inform the Preparatory Committee of developments in this regard;
(c) To help States, upon request, and regional organizations to convene national and regional meetings
or to undertake other initiatives, including activities at the expert level, to prepare for the World Conference;
(d) To draw up a draft agenda for the first session of the Preparatory Committee, taking into
consideration, inter alia, the need to address in a comprehensive manner all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related contemporary forms of intolerance;
(e) To continue fund-raising activities in order to increase the resources for the voluntary fund
established specifically to cover all aspects of the preparatory process for the World Conference and the
participation of non-governmental organizations, in particular those from developing countries;
33. Welcomes the proposals on the themes for the World Conference made by the sessional open-ended
working group to review and formulate proposals for the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance of the Commission on Human Rights;

/...

A/RES/54/154
Page 8

34. Decides that the World Conference shall be action-oriented and shall focus on practical measures
to eradicate racism, including measures of prevention, education and protection and through the provision
of effective remedies, taking into full consideration the existing human rights instruments;
35. Requests the Preparatory Committee to begin drafting as soon as possible a final document on
specific goals as well as objectives and timetables for their achievement;
36. Appeals to Member States to contribute generously to the voluntary fund for the World Conference
to cover the preparatory process and the Conference and the participation of non-governmental organizations
from developing countries;
37. Requests Governments, the specialized agencies, other international organizations, concerned
United Nations bodies, regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of migrants and other human rights
mechanisms to assist the Preparatory Committee and to undertake reviews and submit recommendations
concerning the World Conference and the preparations therefor to the Preparatory Committee, through the
Secretary-General, and to participate actively in the Conference;
38. Calls upon States and regional organizations to convene national and regional meetings or to
undertake other initiatives, such as public information campaigns, to raise awareness of the World
Conference as part of the preparation for the Conference, and requests regional preparatory meetings to
submit reports to the Preparatory Committee, through the Secretary-General, on the outcome of their
deliberations, including practical and action-oriented recommendations to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
III
PROCLAMATION OF 2001 AS THE INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF MOBILIZATION AGAINST
RACISM, RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, XENOPHOBIA AND RELATED INTOLERANCE
39. Strongly reaffirms the proclamation of 2001 as the International Year of Mobilization against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, and in this context calls upon
Governments, the United Nations and non-governmental organizations to observe the International Year in
a suitable manner, including through programmes of action;
IV
GENERAL
40. Decides to keep the item entitled “Elimination of racism and racial discrimination” on its agenda
and to consider it as a matter of high priority at its fifty-fifth session.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
