VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

proaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/175.

Alternative approaches and ways and means in
the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34148 of 23 November 1979.
in which it decided to consider at its thirtv-fifth session
the question of the creation of a post of u"nited Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights under the itt:m
entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms",
Recalling also its resolution 33/105 of 16 December
I 978, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to consider the proposal for the establishment of
a post of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights as part of its work on the over-all
analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolution 28 (XXXVI) of 11 March 1980,'" in which the
Commission decided to continue at its thirty-seventh
session its work on the over-all analysis of the further
promotion and encouragement of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including alternative approaches
and ways and means within the United Nations system
for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Taking note of the proposal for the establishment of a
post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights,
Bearing in mind that the proposal for the establishment of a post of High Commissioner for Human
Rights requires more careful examination.
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider this proposal at its thirty-seventh session under
the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the question of the programme and methods of
work of the Commission: alternative approaches and
ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms";
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to submit, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth sessiou ct report on its work with regard to the item mentioned in paragraph I above. including the views expressed in the Commission with regard to the proposal
for the establishment of a post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights:
3. Decides to consider the question of the creation of
a post of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights at its thirty-sixth session under the item
"'See Official Record, of the l:'conomic and So"al Council. /1.)1/0,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/IJ and (orr I). chap. XXVI. sect. A

197

entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nat ions system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/176.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system to improve
the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly.
Recalling the responsibility entrusted by the Charter
to the United Nations for ensuring universal respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Noting the growing awareness of the international
CL)mmunity of the need to ensure effective promotion
and protection of human rights,
Also recalling the experience acquired by the United,
Nations in pursuing the goal of the promotion and protection of human rights. inter alia, through the use of
fact-finding missions. in cases in which mass and
llagrant violations llf human rights have been recogni,rcd,
I. Considers that the question of the establishment
of bodies entrusted with fact-finding missions and the
extent to which they may enhance the promotion and
protection of human rights requires serious consideratinn;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
discuss this question at its thirty-seventh session under
the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms. including the question of the programme and methods of
work of the Commission: alternative approaches and
ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms".

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/177.

Draft Body of Principles for the Protection of
All Persons under Any Form of Detention or
Imprisonment
·

The General Assemblv,
Recalling the adoption, in its resolution 3452 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975. of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Recalling also its resolution 34/ 169 of 17 December
1979, by which it adopted the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials and decided to transmit it to
Governments with the recommendation that favourable consideration should be given to its use within the
framework of national legislation or practice as a body
of principles for observance by law enforcement officials.
Recalling jimher that the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1979/34 of 10 May 1979, requested
the Secretarv-General to transmit to all Governments,
for their cornments. the draft Bodv of Principles for the
