S/PRST/2013/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 July 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6994th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 July 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has been briefed by the Special Coordinator for
Lebanon and the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
following the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
“The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions and the
statements of its president on the situation in Lebanon.
“The Security Council is encouraged by the calm that continues to
prevail across the Blue Line and in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon’s (UNIFIL) area of operations. It urges all parties to make every
effort to ensure that the cessation of hostilities is sustained, and emphasizes the
need for them to continue working with the Special Coordinator and UNIFIL,
including through the tripartite mechanism, to focus again on the goal of a
permanent ceasefire and to reflect positively on ways forward on all
outstanding issues in the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1701
(2006), 1680 (2006), and 1559 (2004) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Council also recalls the necessity for all parties to ensure the
security of the contributing troops and that the freedom of movement of
UNIFIL is fully respected and unimpeded.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern at all violations of
Lebanon’s sovereignty and calls on all parties to fully respect Lebanon’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence within its
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
“As the impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon’s stability and security
becomes more and more apparent, the Security Council underscores its
growing concern at the marked increase of cross-border fire from the Syrian
Arab Republic into Lebanon, which caused death and injury among the
Lebanese population, as well as incursions, abductions, and arms trafficking
across the Lebanese-Syrian border. The Security Council also expresses its
concern at all other border violations. The Security Council echoes President
Michel Sleiman’s protest, in his letter of June 18, 2013 at such repeated
13-38878 (E) 100713

*1338878*

S/PRST/2013/9

shelling from the conflicting parties, including by the Syrian Arab armed
Forces and Syrian armed opposition groups, that violate Lebanon’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
“The Security Council further notes with deep concern new
developments with regard to the involvement of Lebanese parties in the
fighting in Syria. The Security Council calls upon all Lebanese parties to
recommit to Lebanon’s policy of disassociation, to stand united behind
President Michel Sleiman in this regard and to step back from any involvement
in the Syrian crisis, consistent with their commitment in the Baabda
Declaration of 12th of June 2012. The Security Council further echoes
President Sleiman’s call on the parties in Syria to avoid military action near
the Lebanese border.
“In the face of attempts to undermine the country’s stability, the Security
Council encourages all parties in Lebanon to demonstrate renewed unity and
determination to resist a slide into conflict and commends in this regard the
continued efforts of President Michel Sleiman to preserve Lebanon’s unity and
stability and underlines that continued broad political support is needed for the
institutions of the State.
“The Council urges all parties in Lebanon to continue to engage with
Prime Minister designate Tammam Salam so as to allow the urgent formation
of a government. The Security Council further encourages all Lebanese leaders
to resume efforts to agree arrangements for parliamentary elections, consistent
with Lebanon’s long standing democratic tradition and in conformity with the
legal and constitutional framework.
“The Security Council also stresses the need to support the security and
judicial authorities so as to combat impunity in respects of acts of violence. It
also recalls the need to put an end to impunity in Lebanon and reiterates its full
support for the work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and urges the
Lebanese authorities to continue meeting their international obligations in this
regard, including on financial matters. The Council calls upon all parties to
fully cooperate with the Tribunal.
“The Security Council also condemns recent violence by armed groups
across Lebanon, including those in Tripoli and Sidon, the latter of which left at
least 16 soldiers dead and over 50 others wounded and expresses condolences
to the families of the victims. The Security Council also acknowledges the
crucial role played by the Lebanese security and armed forces in extending and
sustaining the authority of the State and responding to new security challenges.
The Council calls on Lebanon’s leaders across the whole spectrum and
Lebanese of all communities to offer every possible support to the Lebanese
Armed Forces as a national and neutral institution and central pillar of the
country’s stability.
“The Security Council is gravely concerned at the dramatic influx of
refugees fleeing violence in Syria, now totalling over 587,000 Syrian refugees
and an additional 65,500 Palestinian refugees in Lebanon. The Council
commends Lebanon’s generous efforts in hosting and assisting those refugees
and encourages the establishment of fully empowered institutional structures
to carry out planning, delivery and coordination responsibilities.

2

13-38878

S/PRST/2013/9

“The Security Council stresses the need for strong, coordinated
international support for Lebanon to help it continue to withstand the multiple
current challenges to its security and stability. It encourages increased
international support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, in response to their
recently launched capabilities development plan as well as in the context of the
Strategic Dialogue between the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL. It notes
the particular urgency of assistance which would strengthen the Lebanese
Armed Forces’ capabilities with respect to border control.
“As for the refugee crisis, the Security Council underlines the need for
assistance on an unprecedented scale, both to meet the needs of the refugees
and of host communities, and to assist the Lebanese authorities who face
extraordinary financial and structural challenges as a result of the refugee
influx. The Council calls in this regard upon the international community to
provide the required assistance as swiftly as possible to the latest joint appeal
of the United Nations and the Government of Lebanon and in this regard urges
those Member States which committed themselves to providing funds to live
up to their pledges.”

13-38878

3
