FORTIETH

YEAR

2621st

MEETING:

11 OCTOBER

1985, 1

, e~~e_e..__.-.
-------.J

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption
The Middle

agenda (S/Agenda/262
of the agenda
East problem

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

................................................
including

the Palestinian

question:

Letter dated 30 September
1985 from the Permanent
Representative
of
India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17507)
........................................................

I

S’i’V.2621

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2621st MEETING
Held

in New York on Friday,

11 October

(United States of America).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2621)

2.

1985, at 10.30 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Democratic Yemen, the German Democratic Republic and Indonesia in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council. to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS

1. Adoption

_

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. zarif(Afghanistan),
Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. AI-AI& (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic) .and Mr.
Sastradi&aya (Indonesia) took the pIaces reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17507)

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated IO October
1985 from the representative of Egypt [S/17560], which
reads as follows:

The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.

“I have the honour to request that during the
Council’s discussion of the item entitled ‘The Middle
East problem including the Palestinian question* the
Security Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, Secretary-General
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.”

Adoption of the agenda
i%e agenda was adopted.
The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17507)

If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council
agrees to accede to that request.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2618th to
2620th meetings], I invite the observer for the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the
Council table; I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Czechoslovakia, Israel; Kuwait, Morocco, Pakistan, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Morocco. I,
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
5. Mr. ALAOUI
(Morocco) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Council is again considering the Middle East problem
to which the various organs of the United Nations have
accorded special importance in view of the fact that for
more than a third of a century the Middle East has been
the arena of serious events that have led to a deteriorating
situation the daily exacerbation of which has turned it into
a chronic hotbed of tension that jeopardizes international
peace and security.

At the invitation of the President. Mr. Oaddoumi (Palestine Liberation Org&zation) took-a pIa;e at the council
table; Mr. Djoudi (Algeria), Mr. CeSar (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Netanyahu (Israel), Mr. Abuihassan (Kuwait), Mr.
Alaoui (Morocco), Mr. Yaqub-Khan (Pakistan), Mr. EIFattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia)
took the piaces reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. The statements on this question that we have heard so
far expressing the positions of various Governments provide irrefutable proof of the crucial importance the intema-

1

.

tional community. attaches to this question as one of the
most intractable problems on the international scene and a
direct threat. to, international peace and security..

x& Council which has declared in its resolutions that the
legal and administrative measures taken by Israel in this
respect are null and void.

7. As the Moroccan delegation has stated on several
occasions, the ,United Nations provides a sound international framework for the establishment of a just and balanced international prder and is of primary .importance in
the search for a solution to the tragic situation in the Middle East.

12. Israel’s policy in the region, its contempt for the relevant United Nations resolutions, its intransigence in denying the Palestinian people its rights, its attempt to gain
international acceptance for the transfer of its capital to
Jerusalem: all those facts are but a reflection of an overall,
well-orchestrated and unchanging policy whose ferocity
and aims exceed even the policies pursued in the dark days
of colonialism.

8. In our view, a genuine and realistic response by the
international community to the intransigence of Israel and
its attempts to frustrate international efforts to resolve this
question by peaceful means lies in taking the most effective
measures to halt the deterioration of the situation in the
area and bring about the implementation of the United
Nations resolutions concerning the imposition of sanctions
on Israel in accordance with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and the obligations arising from
international law and commitments.

13. The latest act of aggression, committed against the
sister country of Tunisia, headquarters of the PLO-and
the details of that act of aggression and the goals of those
who engineered it are well known to the Security
Council-gives
irrefutable proof of the purposes of the
Israeli policy. To add insult to injury, the leaders of Israel
do not even deny their terrorist practices, such as the bitter
deed committed against Tunisia. On the contrary, they
publicly declare and admit that they have committed these
acts, attempting to justify them by the pretext of the need
for carrying out collective punishment against the Arabs.
Such statements leave no doubt about the aim of this policy. The aim is to create an irreversible situation which will
make it doubtful that the Palestinian people will be able to
exercise its right to self-determination. Whatever pretext
Israel may use. to try to justify its acts of murder, aggression and invasion, the logic behind them is always the
same: an expansionist policy whose final goal is the subjugation of the Palestinian people and the creation of what
Ben-Gurion called the ‘Third Kingdom of David” or
“Greater Israel”, extending from the Nile to the
Euphrates.

9. It is clear that the most obvious result of the long
involvement of the United Nations in the problem of the
Middle East is the emergence of a common international
understanding and broad agreement concerning the nature
of the problem and the elements required to reach a lasting, comprehensive solution. At this time last year, when
the General Assembly was seized of the problem the Council is considering today, the world was traumatized by the
horrors of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the brutal
carnage in the Palestinian camps and among innocent civilians. At that time we thought that the conscience of the
international community had been so sensitized that it
would realize the pressing need to solve this problem and
to turn the conflict from military confrontation to peaceful
negotiation.

14. That bitter reality makes perfectly clear the root
cause of the malaise that has pervaded the Middle East for
40 years. It is also the basis for the pressing call directed to
all Member States to close ranks, mobilize their energy and
double their vigilance so that law, justice and freedom may
be restored to the region, as well as peaceful co-operation
among all its peoples.

10. Today we are wondering what has become of the
problems at the very core of this crisis, what has become of
Gaza, the Golan, Holy Jerusalem. We are aware that
expropriation of the property of Arab inhabitants under
occupation or expelled has never ceased. The number of
settlements ‘has doubled and the main strategic goal of
settling more than 100,000 Israelis seems to have virtually
been achieved. The imposition of Israeli laws and administration on the Golan Heights continues. The plundering of
cultural and archaeological properties, the demolition of
Arab houses, the burning of farms and the imposition of
collective punishments on the Arab inhabitants also continue, in violation of human values and international law,
especially the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949.’

15. It has become evident and is well recognized internationally today that there cannot be a lasting and just peace
in the region without the withdrawal of the Israelis from
all the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, including
the Holy City of Jerusalem; a just and lasting peace in the
region can be achieved only on- the basis of the genuine
exercise by the Palestinian Arab people, under the leadership of its legitimate representative, the PLO, of its inalienable right to selfdetermination,
its right to return to its
homeland and its right to establish its independent, sovereign State in Palestine, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions.

11. Holy Jerusalem, which is a living symbol and a meeting point of the tolerant, revealed religions, is still exposed
to the most repugnant violations. Its shrines, like all the
shrines under occupation, are in danger of destruction.by
adventurist archaeologists and by those who desecrate
such sanctuaries and set them ablaze, thus flouting the
feelings of Moslems and Christians and defying the Secu-

16. We all know that the question of Palestine is the core
of the conflict in the Middle East and the very essence of
the tragedy besetting that region. The international community has spared no effort in confirming its commitments
regarding this question. Ever since the General Assembly,
2

OR 22 November 1974, adopted resolution 3236 (XXIX); if
has at each session reaffirmed the validity and reality of&
inalienable rights of the Palestinians, including their i;glif
to return to their homeland, their right to selfdetermination and independence and sovereignty and their right to
be recognized as a principal and independent party in any
endeavour designed to establish a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. The Security Council, the highest intemationai organ, entrusted by the Charter of the United
Nations with the maintenance of international peace and
security, has taken every opportunity to condemn the
Israeli practices in the region as being null and void and to
call for the restoration of the rights of the Palestinian
people and for the return of the territory of Palestine to the
Arab people.

Chairman of the Arab Summit Conference. convened a
special session of the Summit to consider the grave developments in that part of the world. The Fez Summit.reaffirmed the continued commitment of the Arabs to the
spirit and principles of the Fez Declaration in regard to the
need for Israeli withdrawal from all the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy
City of Jerusalem, as a sine qua non for the establishment
of peace in the region. The Summit stated that the convening of an international conference under the aegis of the
United Nations would help to promote peace in the Arab
region. They stated that the Soviet Union and the United
States as well as the other permanent members of the Security Council should attend and participate in such a conference, as ‘should the PLO, ’ the -sole and legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people, as well as the
other parties concerned.

17. Despite the widespread and deep conviction held by
the international community in regard to those principles,
the doors to peace in the region are still closed because of
Israel’s intransigence and its flouting of international resolutions, as well as its persistence in pursuing a policy of fait
accompli based on power, displacement of populations
and military occupation.

22. In accordance with the principies held by the Arab
nations and guided by the centuries-old Arab civilization
and traditions, the Conference strongly deplored all forms
of terrorism from whatever source-the foremost among
them being Israeli terrorism-within
and outside the occupied territories. At the same time, it called for adherence to
the principles of law and justice in the achievement of the
national goals and in defence of the national rights, especially the rights of the heroic Palestinian people.

18. As was stated to the General Assembly at the current
session by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Morocco:
“The responsibility of the Organization in the matter
is primordial, since it was this Organization which
decided at the outset on the creation of two States in
Palestine. Nearly 40 years later, we note, however, that
the Palestinian people are still denied their right to selfdetermination and to existence as an independent State,
without the achievement of which it is not possible to
arrive at a peaceful and 1asting:soiution to the Middle
Fast question as a whole.“2

23. During the consideration of this matter in the Council today, Morocco reaflirms its conviction that the grave
situation that has persisted in this sensitive region for
many decades is a consequence of the Palestinian problem,
and the situation of the Palestinian people is its main element. Morocco repeats its condemnation of the Israeli
practices in the occupied Arab territories and its full support for and solidarity with the Arab people under occupation, especially the struggle of the Palestinian people,
under its sole and legitimate representative, the PLO, to
exercise its inalienable right to return to its homeland and
to establish an independent State on its territory, Palestine.

19. That has been reaffirmed during the proceedings of
many regional conferences, including those of nongovernmental organizations, and at international gatherings such as the International
Conference on the
Question of Palestine, held at Geneva from 29 August to
7 September 1983, which issued the constructive recommendations and decisions contained in the Geneva
Declaration on Palestine.3

24. My delegation cannot on this occasion fail to reaffirm the solidarity of the Moroccan people with the people
of Lebanon and to express its deep sadness at the plight
and the anxiety of that country with its rich historical past
steeped in human civilization, and its dismay at the bloody
events that have caused the ioss of so many innocent civilian lives. We affirm our full support for the unity and
stability of Lebanon, its territory and its people. We are
prepared to exert every effort within all international
forums to restore the security and stability of Lebanon and
to enable it once more to become a symbol of coexistence
among all the communities concerned.

20. In conformity with all these principles, in which the
Arab States believe, they lost no time in proposing at the
Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez in September 1982, a courageous plan of action that is characterized
by a spirit of reconciliation [see S/1.5510, annex]. The international Organization described that plan as a positive
step towards the establishment of a comprehensive and
lasting peace in the region. Rut, despite all those international or Arab initiatives, Israel persists in its expansionist policy in the region. It is even increasing its
oppression, suppression and expulsion of Arabs and is
establishing even more settlements in the occupied Arab
territories.

25. We call upon’the Council, all United Nations organs
and ail States that uphold peace and justice, to make a
concerted effort to achieve a just and equitable peace in the
Middle Fast and to lend sincere support to the Arab peoples in the area. In this connection we believe that now
more than ever before the members of the Council are
called upon to take the steps necessary to convene an inter--

21. Recently, in view of the escalation of violence in the
region, Ring Hassan II, in his capacity as the current
3

national peace conference on the Middle East as a realistic
path towards the desired peace and justice in that region.

territories are incessantly being altered and millions of
refugees are forced to wander homeless. However, the
Israeli authorities are not satisfied with that. They are bent
not only on destroying the PLO, the representative and
mainstay of the Palestinian people, but also on wiping out
the Palestinian people themselves and on eliminating their
national rights completely. The history of the past 40
.years, however, has proved that the will and determination
of the Palestinian people to restore their national rights are
unshakeable. Over the years the Palestinian people, under
the leadership of the PLO, uniting as one against the common enemy and persisting in their struggle, have written a
brilliant chapter in the history of national liberation movements. Notwithstanding the fact that their struggles will be
protracted and arduous and the road ahead tortuous, it
can be said with certainty that the national rights of the
Palestinian people cannot be wiped out by anyone. Pending a just settlement of the Palestinian issue, there can be
no comprehensive, just and durable solution to the Middle
East problem. Early recognitioo of this truth by the parties
concerned will facilitate an carry solution of the problem.

26. We wish to express our gratilication at the efforts
being made by the Secretary-General in regard to this
question. We also wish to convey our most sincere thanks
to all United Nations bodies, and especially the Division
for Palestinian Rights and the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and its
Chairman, Mr. Massamba Sam?, for their positive efforts
in this field.
27. Mr. LI Luye (China) (inrerpreration from Chinese):
On the occasion of commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations it is of special significance for
the Security Council once again to convene to review the
Middle East probiem, including the Palestinian question.
China’s stand on the question is clear and consistent. I
wish to take this opportunity to reiterate our views on
some of the main aspects of the Middle East problem.
28. First, ever since Israel declared itself as a State in
1948, it has persistently pursued an external policy of
aggression and expansion in its attempt to establish a
Greater Israel. This is the root cause of the prolonged
situation in which no solution has been found to the Middle East question. It is precisely Israel’s policy of aggression and expansion that has brought disasters to the
Palestinian nation, the prolonged occupation of vast
stretches of Arab land and the grave violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. It is again
Israel’s policy of aggression and expansion that has posed
a grave threat to and seriously disrupted peace and security in the Middle East, causing the prolongation of the
agony of war and turmoil in the region. Both the history
and the present reality of the Middle East question have
clearly shown that, so long as Israel refuses to give up its
policy of aggression and expansion and continues with its
aggression, expansion and occupation of Palestine and
other &ab territories by relying on the support and connivance of a certain big Power, there will be no chance for a
just settlement of the Middle East problem, and the Palestinian and other Arab countries and peoples will not cease
their just struggles to recover the lost territories and regain
their national rights. On this issue, all those who face up to
the reality will not fail to distinguish between right and
wrong, between the aggressor and the victims of aggression, or to determine tiho should be condemned and who
should receive sympathy and support. Regrettably, more
often than not we fail to reach consensus on this issue.
Time and again the logic of “might makes right” has time
and again prevented us from upholding justice and checking aggression.

30. Thirdly, the correct way to solve the Middle East
question is to find a comprehensive, just and durablesettlement, which would include the following basic elements:
Israel must unconditionally withdraw all its troops from
the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including
Arab Jerusalem; the national rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to return to their homeland
and their right to national selfdetermination and to establish their own State, must be restored; and all the countries
in the Middle East should enjoy the universal right to
independence and existence. The PLO has the right to
participate in the comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East problem on an equal footing. We believe that this is
the position shared by all countries and peopfe that uphold
justice.
3 1. In order to realize the foregoing propositions, a series
of proposals and formulas have been put forward by various parties concerned that have given expression to the
concern of the whole of the international community over
the Middle East problem. The position of the Chinese
delegation is that we favour and support all proposals and
efforts conducive to the comprehensive and just settlement
of the Middle East problem and to the realization of peace
in the region.
32. We highly value the unremitting efforts made by the
PLO and other Arab countries for the settlement of the
Middle East problem, including the Palestinian question.
We respect their decisions made through negotiations that
are in conformity with Arab national interests. We support
all their reasonable proposals for the achievement of their
national goals through political negotiations and other
means.

29. Secondly, the Middle East problem encompasses
many aspects, but its core is the Palestinian question. The
sufferings of the Palestinian people are among the most
tragic in the contemporary history of mankind. Israeli
aggression and expansion have ravaged the homeland
inhabited for generations by the Palestinian people and
have grossly trampled on their national rights. The geogi-aphic nature and demographic compositicjn of the occupied

33. Bearing & it does an unshirkable responsibility for
the settlement of the Middle East problem the United
Nations should play an important role in it. We are therefore in favour of convening an international peace confer-‘
ence on the Middle East under the auspices of the United
4

Nations, in compliance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevanf resolutions adopted
by the United Nations.

40. The violence and instability in the Middle East are a
direct consequence of the denial of the national rights of.
the Palestinian people, who are forced to live under Israeli
occupation in their homeland or in a state of exile in foreign lands. Until the injustice done to the Palestinian
people is redressed, the danger to peace in the Middle East
cannot subside. Indeed, in recent years we have witnessed
a spiral of violence, fueled by Israeli aggression and expansionism and Israel’s relentless policy of persecution of the
Palestinian people.

34. We wish to point out emphatically that the acts taken
by the Israeli authorities run completely counter to the
historical trend of international efforts-in search of a just
settlement of the Middle East problem. We shall cite just a
few recent cases in point. Since the beginning of this year,
the Israeli authorities have reinforced the law on administrative detention in the occupied territories and have continued to expel Palestinians and establish colonial
settlements there. Not long ago, they went so far as to
carry out air raids on the capital of Tunisia. People have
good reason to conclude from all this that the Israeli
authorities have not the slightest intention sincerely to seek
a just settlement of the Middle East problem and are,
moreover, deliberately obstructing and sabotaging such a
settlement. The Israeli authorities have taken a course
directly opposite to that which would lead to the realization of peace in the Middle East, which will only land them
in a more isolated position in regard to the international
community.

41. Demand for the recognition of the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people is seen by Israel as
a threat to its expansionist ambitions, which are evident in
its policy of annexation of the occupied territories, its invasion of Lebanon in 1982 and its unprovoked attacks
against the sovereignty and territoriat integrity bf Arab
States.
42 In utter disregard of the resolutions of the Council,
Israel is proceeding with the establishment of settlements
on lands sequestrated from their Arab and Palestinian
owners in the occupied territories. Israeli schemes to alter
the Arab and Palestinian character of the West Bank and
Gaze show scant regard for the sanctity of the Islamic
shrines in the Holy Land. Attempts are under way to transform the historical character of Al-Quds, which has been
preserved with care and devotion during centuries of Arab
sovereignty as the common heritage and a shining symbol
of the confluence of the three great monotheistic religions.

35. China has always been concerned about the Middle
East problem, particularly the Palestinian question, and
has made genuine efforts to promote the settlement of the
problem. I wish to reiterate here that China will, as always,
resolutely support the Arab countries and the Palestinian
people in their just struggle until the complete realization
of their lofty national goals of recovering the occupied
territories and regaining their national rights.

43. Respect for the relevant decisions of the Security
Council on the Middle East problem is a sine qua non for a
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. Those decisions, as well as other international peace initiatives,
including the Arab offer made at Fez in 1982 [see S/25.510,
annex], the subsequent proposals by President Reagan, the
United Nations proposal to convene an international
peace conference on the Middle East and the latest initiative by King Hussein, have been vigourously opposed by
Israel, which has responded to those initiatives with acts of
unprovoked aggression.

36. We hope that as a result of the current consideration
of the situation, the Council will be better informed as
regards the urgency of achieving a settlement of the Middle
East problem and will take effective measures to promote
a just settlement of the probIem, so as fully to perform its
duties of maintaining international peace and security.
37. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Mr. Yaqub-Khan. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

44. Israel’s conduct demonstrates its rejection of a just
and lasting peace based on the principles of nonacquisition of territory by force and the recognition of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. As a result, the
Middle East remains in turmoil, caught in a spiral of violence spurred on by Israel’s invasion of Lebanon and its
brutal acts of reprisal against people under its occupation
who have been forced to take up arms in defence of their
sacred right to freedom and liberty.

38. Mr. YAQUB-KHAN
(Pakistan): I have the privilege,
Sir, of speaking in the Council for the second time under
your presidency. I should like to express my appreciation
for the success and distinction with which you have been
guiding the work of the Council during this eventful
month. Your vast experience in international relations and
your skill and wisdom have all been invaluable assets in
the Council.

45. It was the resistance of the Lebanese people that
finally prevailed and repulsed the Israeli invasion of their
land, which was undertaken with the full weight of Israei’s
military might. The lesson of Lebanon appears to be lost
on Israel, however. Its latest strike against the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Tunisia, which has drawn universal condemnation as a wanton act of lawlessness, is yet
another example of the Israeli arrogance ) power, its disposition to resort to the arbitrary use of force and its

39. As we commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations, it is fit and proper that the Council, which
is vested by the Charter of the United Nations with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should address itself to the vital problem of the Middle East, which has preoccupied our Organization since its very inception.
5

continuing refusal to accept the imperatives of a just and
lasting peace in the area.

53. Mr. DJOUDI (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
If there is a problem which has been a source of constant
concern to the Council, in a part of the world on which its
attention has been consistently directed, it is the conflict
that has been played out in the Middle East for almost
four decades.

46. Responsibility for Israeli intransigence must be
shared by its powerful allies, whose excessive concern for
the security of Israel has emboldened the latter to defy the
decisions of the Security Council and to persist in its policy
of expansionism and aggression. Surely Israel’s actions
and its assertion to arrogate to itself the right to strike any
country at any time in defence of its arbitrarily conceived
interests do not arise from a sense of weakness or insecurity. In fact, these highlight the threat that Israel poses to
the security of all other nations in the region.

54. Overall consideration of the Middle East crisis is
therefore essential today because of the topicality and
urgency conferred on it by an international situation which
provides particularly clear proof of its dangers.
55. The circle of the crisis continues to widen because of
essentially centrifugal Israeli violence. Thus, through
planned horizontal escalation, the western Mediterranean
has become, since the aggression against Tunisia, the new
axis of a permanent threat. Hence, the entire Mediterranean, once the melting-pot of world trade and civilization
and even today the site for a proposed zone of peace, is in
danger of conflagration.

47. Instability, convulsions, turmoil and a cycle of terror
and counter-terror will benefit no one. Israel will surely
reap the bitter fruit of a bitter endeavour unless it desists
from the course of reckless aggression and responds constructively to the Arab initiatives for peace.
48. The essential issue in the Middle East problem is.the
vacation of the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, including Al-Quds, and restitution of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their right to a sovereign State of their own in Palestine.
Prospects for peace will depend on progress towards the
attainment of those objectives.

56. Now that the threat is at the very doors of Europe, it
is impossible to continue to ignore the weakness of a
notion of security basically centred on Europe which has
been unable either to contribute to the settlement of socalled peripheral crises or to save itself from the present,
-much less the future, unpredictable consequences of an
uncontrollable conflict.

49. The Council can make a beginning towards rectifying
the injustices perpetrated against the Palestinian people for
more than half a century by supporting the Arab initiatives
for peace and by promoting the United Nations proposal
for an international peace conference on the Middle East.
The Council must also reaffirm its past decisions and
demand Israeli compliance, in order to redress the intolerable situation created by Israel’s defiance of the decisions
and principles of the United Nations. Failure to restrain
Israel and to persuade it to accept the conditions for a just
and durable peace will only intensify the Middle East conflict and its attendant violence, which could explode into a
wider conflagration with incalculable consequences for
international peace.

57. We are dealing here with an active hotbed of tension
in a region where relative strength has always countedmore than law. This means that the absence of open war
cannot be construed as peace; nor can the peace of the
strongest be said to further the rights of the weakest.
58. At a time when the United Nations is called upon to
lay stress upon the existence of world peace universally
preserved, we must draw attention to a record which is
questionable in the light of the tenacious persistence of
regional conflicts. It would be a dangerous illusion to
believe that a conflict such as that in the Middle East could
be kept within limits acceptable within the concept of
world peace, when each new Israeli act of aggression is a
threatening step towards the globalization of that conflict.

50. The effectiveness and credibility of the United
Nations rest on the Security Council’s ability to maintain
international peace and security. That capacity is tested by
the Middle East conflict, which has been before the United
Nations since its very inception.

59.. Israeli faits accomplis cannot make us forget the
established rights of the Palestinian people. Neither the
trials of exile nor the trials of time can prevaii over a
national right; and the determination to uphold that right;
together with all that legitimately flows from it, has been
the strength of the Patestinian resistance. That resistance,
which Zionism has systematically endeavoured to destroy,
continues today and the heroic struggle in the occupied
territories is proof of the unswerving determination of the
Palestinian people to regain their national rights, the
denial of which constitutes the very crux of the Middle
East conflict. The General Assembly has always followed
that struggle.

51. Before concluding, I take this opportunity of renewing our pledge of complete solidarity-with the Arab States
in their endeavours to establish conditions of peace and
stability in their area and with the Palestinian people and
their representative, the PLO, in their struggle to regain
their legitimate national rights as a free and sovereign
people in their homeland.
52. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

60. Having undertaken to work towards the restoration
to the Palestinian people of all its rights, including its right
6

to establish its own State, the General Assembly decided
11 years ago to designate the PLO as the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people. It thus recognized
its status as a necessary partner in any effort to settle the
Middle East question. Consistent with that undertaking,
the General Assembly subsequently adopted a resolution
calling for the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East, in which all parties to the conflict
would be invited to participate on an equal footing, including the PLO.

66. Therefore, as well as bolstering its own authority, it
would be to the honour of the Council ifit proved equal to
the task of dealing with the tragedy of a people and
became aware of the seriousness of the threat, so that it
finally accepted the only possible course: promoting a just
and lasting solution to the Middle East conflict, in all its
dimensions, within the framework of an international conference that restored the rights of the Palestinian people
and reestablished peace and security, internationally guaranteed, for the peoples of the Middle East.

61. Moreover, it ruled out any attempt to arrive at a
settlement without the full participation of the Palestinian
people through its sole legitimate representative, the PLO.

67. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
68. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): The opening of the session commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the creation of the United Nations has been marked by strong
expectations that a renewed impetus will be given to dialogue and negotiations.

62 Thus, by defining a suitable framework and identifying the participants, the General Assembly hoped to
initiate the growth of a consensus in favour of the only
approach which could ensure a lasting peace in the Middle
East. And, indeed, all the Arab countries endorsed that
initiative, which was taken just before the adoption of the
Fez Plan [ibid.]. However, in the final analysis, it has not
been a naturally slow maturing process that has held up
the convening of such a conference but rather the intransigent determination of the Zionist leaders to compromise
irremediably any hopeful initiative and undermine for ever
all peace efforts. It should also be said that that intransigence was greatly encouraged by a concept of world security that too often overlooks the fact that the conflict is still
going on.

69. At the Conference of Foreign Ministers of NonAligned Countries, held at Luanda from 4 to 7 September
this year, it was observed that the global crisis, which has
affected all areas of international relations;san best be
solved through dialogue, and particularly through multilateral negotiations within the United Nations. That position applies fully to the solution of the crisis in the Middle
East as well.
70. The policy of aggression and expansion pursued by
Israel has turned the Middle East into a most dangerous
region of crisis. The Palestinian people has been suffering
for decades and it has been exposed to the most brutal acts
of colonization and even annihilation.

63. Hence, it becomes possible to admit the existence of
Palestinian resistance only-very conveniently-to see it as
being invariably responsible for isolated acts of desperation. In all logic, we cannot refuse to consider remedying
an injustice and at the same time be surpris&d at the alarming consequences of its continuation. Thus we have a paradoxical cycle of violence which constantly turns back on
the victim, while often the aggressor is rewarded for having
openly flown in the face of international legality.

71. Another salient feature of the situation in the Middle
East has been the constant increase of tension in the ge‘nera! area of the Mediterranean-all
this while the right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and to freedom, independence and the establishment of its own State
remains at the core of the Middle East crisis.

64. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the member
countries of the Council, meeting here on 26 September,
acknowledged that:

72. The Gaza Strip, the West Bank and the Syrian Golan
Heights continue to be occupied by Israel, which is continuing its intensive illegal measures of annexation, in
defiance of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

“the high hopes placed in the Organization by the international community had not been fully met and undertook to fulfil theii individual and collective responsibility for the prevention and removal of threats to the
peace with renewed dedication and determination.‘*

73. Oppression and violation of the fundamental human
rights of the population in the occupied Palestinian and
other Arab lands, the policy of resettlement of the Palestinians and other Arab populations and the constant expansion of illegal Israeli settlements have become the common
practice of the occupying Power.

[2608th meeting, para. 337.1

65. However, for the first time in many years, the Council is today again taking an overall look at the Middle East
conflict and the prospects for its settlement. Its work thus
coincides with an event, the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations; with a witI, that of the Council renewing
its pledge to work for international peace and security; and
with a .threat-that
posed by the Middle East crisis to
world peace.

74. Those developments led the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the non-aligned countries to decide at their
recent conference held at Luanda to request the convening
of the current series of meetings of the Council. The non7

.

aligned countries have always held that peace in any part
of the world cannot be built on occupation, annexation or
domination.

81. We in non-aligned Yugoslavia have always considered that the solution of the Middle East crisis must be
comprehensive and must be based on the withdrawal of
Israel from all Arab and Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, including Jerusalem. It must be based on the
exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, to national identity, to sovereignty,
and to the establishment of their own State. It must be
-based on the participation, on an equal footing, of the
PLO as the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, under the chairmanship of Yasser Arafat, in
all endeavours towards and negotiations on the peaceful
settlement of the issues within the framework of the United
Nations. It must be based on ensuring, for all countries
and peoples in the Middle East, ‘life in peace and security
and their independent social development within recogniied borders.

75. The exercise of the sovereign will of the Palestinian
people cannot be thwarted. Neither should the demands of
the United Nations for Israel’s urgent and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied territories be ignored. Dialogue on an equal footing between all the parties directly
involved, including the PLO, aimed at finding a just, comprehensive and lasting solution, is indispensable. A political solution is the only viable one.
76. Since the first Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade
24 years ago, those countries have been consistent in pointing out the urgency and importance of the settlement of
the Middle East crisis through negotiations, on the basis of
the relevant United Nations resolutions and decisions. The
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the non-aligned countries
once again emphasized, at their meeting at Luanda, that
the convening of an international peace conference on the
Middle East, under the auspices of the United Nations,
constituted the best framework for a just and lasting solution. It may be recalled that the framework for such a
political solution was established at the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, in 1983, and was
strongly supported in resolutions adopted at two consecutive sessions of the General Assembly.

82. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Mr. Nana S.
Sutresna Sastradidjaya, whom I welcome. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
83. Mr. SASTRADIDJAYA
(Indonesia): My delegation
has already had the opportunity to. extend its felicitations
to you, when the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia
participated in the Council’s debate last week, on the complaint by Tunisia. Our confidence in your wise guidance
was fully vindicated by the successful outcome of the
Council’s deliberations.

77. The Committee of Eight non-aligned Countries on
Palestine, of which Yugoslavia is a member, has been
working towards the same goal. It has given support for
the convening of the international conference, under the
auspices of the United Nations and with the participation
of all parties directly concerned in the Arab-Israeli conflict,
including the PLO and the members of the Security
Council.

84. The Middle East problem, with at its core the question of Palestine, has become the symbol of both perseverance and powerlessness. The former reflects that what is
involved is a struggle for justice, and hence the need for its
peaceful and comprehensive solution. The latter epitomizes the apparent helplessness of the international community, due to the intransigence of a few countries whos-e
continued pursuit of their strategic interests has made a
mockery of all existing problem-solving mechanisms of the
United Nations.

78. We believe the situation in the Middle East calls for
immediate action by the United Nations, particularly by
the Security Council, and for the convening of such a
conference. Every encouragement and support should be
extended to the Secretary-General to pursue his consultations and endeavours for the convening of the conference.

85. The non-aligned countries, while maintaining their
support and solidarity with the Arab countries victims of
Israeli aggression and the just struggle of the Palestinian
people, under the leadership-of the PLO, its sole and legitimate representative, have time and again taken the initiative in the search for a peaceful solution to the problem.
Consequently, pursuant to a decision taken at the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Luanda last month, the Counci1.ha.s again been called
upon to consider the problem of the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. That decision was prompted
by the seemingly insurmountable obstacles that continue
to stand in the way of the early convening of the Intemational Peace Conference on the Middle East, as called for
by the International Conference on the Question of Palestine, held at Geneva in September 1983 and endorsed at
the thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth sessions of the General
Assembly. In this regard the non-aligned countries reiterated that it is the responsibility of the Council to facilitate

79. We of Yugoslavia are convinced that selfdetermination, sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, equality, non-interference, withdrawal of foreign troops from
occupied territories and full respect for the right of peoples
to choose their own way of development are the only basis
on which to build peace and peaceful solutions. Those
same principles are atthe root of our foreign policy regarding the situation in the Middle East as well as in respect to
other issues of international relations.
80. It may be appropriate here to recall that the right to
one’s own existence cannot be secured by force when one
denies by force that same right to others. The policy of
force and imposition of alien will is not and cannot be
accepted, either in the Middle East or in other regions in
the world.
8

is so because some of its members appear unable or unwilling to confront the heart of the matter.

the convening of the Conference and to provide the appropriate institutional arrangements in order to ensure the
implementation of the agreements to be concluded at the
peace conference.

91. If the major Powers on the Council wish to address.
themselves effectively to the basic %sue, then there is no
avoiding facing squarely the esse& requisite for solution
of the problem, which is one of j&e:
justice in ensuring
the inalienable rights of the Pal&n
people, justice in
effecting Israel’s total withdrawal fm all Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including J&em,
justice in safe-guarding the basic need of the Stae in the region to live in
peace within secure boundaries, ix from dggressiqn and
foreign occupation, and justice in savring the right of the
PLO, the sole and legitimate rep=tative
of the Palestinian people, to participate on s equal footing in all
efforts and negotiations directed t-ds
finding a peaceful settlement in the Middle Ea.% These, indeed, are the
essential elements on which a du*
and comprehensive
peace should be based.

86. A year ago the situation that existed in the Middle
East prompted the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly that “the conditions required for the convening of the proposed conference with any chance of
success are not met at the present time” [S/16792. para.
do]. Regrettably, that situation has not changed and has
even worsened.
87. Indeed, the events of the last year continue to underscore this tragic reality. The undeniable fact is that responsibility for the deadlock falls squarely on Israel, as its policies
and actions have always been at the root of aggravated
tension and conflict in the region. It is hardly necessary for
my delegation to dwell on the endless list of Israeli transgressions against the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of civilized behaviour, for they have been fully documented by scores of relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as well as by reports of
the various committees of the United Nations.

92. Despite insufficient action by the Council in the past,
the international community continues to place its fervent
hope and expectation on the Council, which has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

88. Indeed, the United Nations has’ been continuously
seized of this question virtually from its inception. Hence,
it is sufficient for my delegation to underscore that it is
Israel’s incessant a&ression
against its neighbours, its
stepped-up repression of the Palestinian Arabs in the occupied territories, as well as its systematic attempts to destroy
the PLO both politically and physically, in the vain hope
of extinguishing Palestinian nationalism and obliterating
Palestinian national identity, that has kept the cauldron of
enmity stirring for so long in that strife-torn region. It is
beyond doubt that Israeli policies and practices continue
to be directed towards the goal of ultimately annexing the
occupied territories, as it has already done with the Golan
Heights and Jerusalem, and thereby to deny permanently
to the Palestinian people their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independent statehood. There should
also be no illusions among us that it is with this sinister
scheme in mind that Israel is bent upon doing everything
that it can to sabotage any prospect for the convening of
the peace conference.

93. Our hope is that the major Powers will eschew their
strategic designs on the region and co-operate with the
Secretary-General
in his continuing efforts to achieve
agreement on the modalities for the conference. For it has
been clear all along that the active participation and support of both super-Powers is essential if this process is to
have any chance of success. And our expectation is that,
given the urgent need to break the present deadlock, they
will work together through the Council to devise, within
the overall framework of the international peace conference, a negotiating process or structure acceptable to all
parties concerned. While no one can be under any illusion
that the objective of a peace conference could be easily
realized, the events of recent weeks and days dramatically
illustrate that the alternative can only be a further inexorable slide towards yet another, even more destructive, cycle
of violence and war, with disastrous consequences not only
for the region but for the world as a whole.
94. There is therefore only one way, the way of dipiomacy and serious negotiations, the way of the peace conference, which at the present stage offers the only
promising avenue to a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace.

89. By the same token, Indonesia has always condemned
terrorist acts directed against innocent civilians, which
have grown into a menace of such alarming proportions as
to threaten the lives and property of citizens of all nations
and which also serve only to impede the search for a just
and comprehensive solution to the Middle East problem,
including the core issue of ensuring for the Palestinians the
attainment of their inalienable rights.

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

90. Given the continuing deterioration of the situation in
the Middle East, my Government fully supported the
recommendation to resort to the Council, even though we
are aware that the Council has so far shown itself to be less
than effective in dealing with the Middle East conflict. This

NOTES

’ United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
2 Of/icial Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Plenary
Meetings,
21st meeting, para. 74.
f United Nations publication,
Sales No. E. 83. I. 21, chap. I, sect. A.

9

HOW TO OSTlhlpJ UNITED NATIONS PUBLICAilONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: U&cd Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Lcs publications dcs Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ies librairics et les agences dCpositaires
du monde entier. Inform&~~~s auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAIC l-IOJIYWfl’b
M&IHWf
OPrAHki3Aum
OlZ’bEAMHEHHbIX
HAlJldi
kI3&1~sin O~~~HH~~IWW06aemehrx
Ha& MOXCROXyneTb B mixuibIX kIara3HHax
II BTCHTCTBaX DO BCCX paffOHIiX bUtpa. HaBOiVme
CUP~KH 06 X3,llaWHlvrB BaItI& IttiUXHOM
Mara3HHe ~nw nmmtTe no anpecy: Oprami3auua OB%emmertnblx Hazxstt. CCXIW no
nponae a3J.tamrit. Hb!o-fiopKUJIH
TeHeea.
COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas istin en venta en librerfas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte li su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

’ Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

90-61439-November

1994-1,925
