A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/199B
7 August 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 40
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.76 and Add.1)]
51/199.

United Nations Office of Verification in El
Salvador
B1

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the situation in Central America and, in
particular resolution 51/199 of 17 December 1996, by which it, inter alia,
decided that the responsibilities of verification and good offices entrusted
to the United Nations should be executed through periodic visits to El
Salvador by a high-level envoy from Headquarters, who would keep the
Secretary-General informed on a regular basis, and that the envoy would be
assisted for a period of six months in the discharge of those responsibilities
by a small support unit in El Salvador, working with the administrative
support of the United Nations Development Programme,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General containing an
assessment of the peace process in El Salvador,2
Paying tribute to the efforts that have been made by the people of
El Salvador to achieve the general objectives of the peace process established
by the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la
Liberación Nacional as contained in the Geneva Agreement of 4 April 1990,3

1

Consequently, resolution 51/199, in section I of the Official Records of the
General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/51/49), vol. I,
becomes resolution 51/199 A.
2

A/51/917.

3

A/45/706-S/21931, annex I; see Official Records of the Security Council,
Forty-fifth Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1990, document
S/21931.
97-77461

/...

A/RES/51/199 B
Page 2

Paying tribute also to the contribution made by the various United
Nations missions in El Salvador, namely the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador, the Mission of the United Nations in El Salvador and the United
Nations Office of Verification in El Salvador, as well as the support unit and
the envoy of the Secretary-General to the implementation of the peace accords
in El Salvador,
Welcoming the progress made in the past five years towards a society
characterized by democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights,
Acknowledging with gratitude the contributions of Member States that
have made available personnel and voluntary funding to the support unit for
the envoy of the Secretary-General in El Salvador and to technical assistance
projects in support of the peace process,
1.
Welcomes the continuing commitment of the Government and people of
El Salvador to the consolidation of the peace process;
2.
Urges all concerned to continue working together to complete the
implementation of the peace process in El Salvador without delay;
3.
Decides that, taking into account the recommendation contained in
the report of the Secretary-General,2 the support unit for his envoy in El
Salvador should be closed down as a separate entity, as it has concluded its
mandate;
4.
Welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-General to assign two
international Professionals and two local consultants as a unit under the
administrative structure of the United Nations Development Programme, for a
period of six months, funded by the available balance under the Trust Fund for
the Mission of the United Nations in El Salvador, to follow up on the
outstanding elements of the peace accords, while the verification and good
offices responsibilities of the Organization would continue to be carried out
from Headquarters;
5.
Emphasizes the importance of the continued cooperation of the
various agencies, offices and programmes of the United Nations system active
in El Salvador in the consolidation of the peace process;
6.
Calls upon Member States and international institutions to
maintain their political, technical and financial support to the efforts of
the Government and people of El Salvador to promote peace, freedom, democracy
and development in that country;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of further
developments in the implementation of the peace process in El Salvador, as he
deems appropriate.
105th plenary meeting
31 July 1997
