S/2021/1008

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 December 2021
Original: English

Situation in the Sudan and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2579
(2021), by which the Council decided to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) until 3 June 2022
and requested the Secretary-General to report to it every 90 days on the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate and on the progress made against the
benchmarks and indicators outlined in the report of the Secretary-General dated
17 May 2021 (S/2021/470). The present report also covers political, security,
socioeconomic, human rights, rule of law and humanitarian developments in the
Sudan from 21 August to 21 November 2021 and provides an update on the scale -up
of the Mission.

II. Significant developments
A.

Political situation
2.
On 25 October, the armed forces detained the Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok,
and a number of civilian ministers, officials and political leaders and took control of
the State media. In a televised address, the Chairperson of the Sovereign Council and
Commander of the Sudanese Armed Forces, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah
Al-Burhan, announced a state of emergency and suspended articles 12, 15, 16, 24 (3),
71 and 72 of the Constitutional Document, in effect dissolving the Sovereign Council,
the Council of Ministers and the yet to be formed Transitional Legislative Council
and restoring a Transitional Military Council. He also dismissed state governors
(walis), froze the work of the Committee to Dismantle the 30 June 1989 Regime and
Retrieve Public Funds, also known as the Dismantling Committee, and ordered that
Internet services be suspended. He pledged to hold elections by July 2023.
3.
In a press conference held on 26 October, Lieutenant General Al-Burhan said
that the military’s actions were intended to pre-empt civil strife and put the paralysed
transition process on the right track by overseeing the establishment of the necessary
institutions and the appointment of a representative Government. He asserted that the

21-17516 (E)

071221

*2117516*

S/2021/1008

military stood with the Sudanese people in their calls for a civilian Government and
would adhere to the Constitutional Document and the Juba Agreement for Peace in
the Sudan.
4.
The Prime Minister was released from detention on 26 October but remained
under house arrest with severely restricted visitation privileges until 21 November.
Other detained civilian leaders remained in custody, except for four ministers who
were released on 4 November. None of the four female ministers, including the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who maintained her high media profile, were detained.
Meanwhile, between late October and mid-November, more than 150 activists,
journalists and civilian officials were arrested throughout the country. Several
hundred civilian officials were dismissed from positions in government at the national
and state levels, as well as from State-owned economic enterprises and banks.
Hundreds of activists, including women’s rights activists, reportedly went into hiding.
5.
In response to the military’s actions, large crowds gathered across the Sudan to
protest against the military coup, and a campaign of civil disobedien ce was launched.
During a large-scale demonstration on 30 October, three people were reported to have
been killed and scores injured, following reports of the use of live ammunition by
security forces. Large demonstrations were also held on 13 and 17 Novem ber. There
were 7 people reportedly killed on 13 November and 16 on 17 November and several
hundred were injured as the army and security forces again used live ammunition and
tear gas to contain and disperse the protests. Many protesters were arrested acr oss the
country.
6.
Sudanese women were seen at the forefront of the protests, and the Women of
Sudanese Civic and Political Groups, also known as MANSAM, issued a statement
condemning the coup. The increased militarization in the country in the weeks
following the coup, shrinking civil society space, threats to women’s rights defenders
and the virtual absence of women in national mediation efforts suggest formidable
challenges ahead to overcome the severe underrepresentation of women in formal
positions of power and meet the minimum representation level of 40 per cent called
for in the Constitutional Document and the Juba Peace Agreement.
7.
Two of the non-signatory armed groups to the Juba Peace Agreement, the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North
(SPLM-N) Abdelaziz al-Hilu faction, also denounced the coup.
8.
The coup was widely condemned by international actors. On 26 October, during
a session of the African Union Peace and Security Council, and acting under a rticle 7
(g) of the Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, the Council decided to suspend, with immediate effect, the
participation of the Sudan in all the activities of the African Union until the ef fective
restoration of the civilian-led transition. On 28 October, the United Nations Security
Council issued a statement calling on the Sudanese military authorities to restore the
civilian-led transitional Government and urging all stakeholders to engage in dialogue
without preconditions.
9.
Over the weeks following the military coup, significant efforts, including by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan, were undertaken to
facilitate dialogue and identify a peaceful and negotiated solution to the crisis,
allowing for a return to the constitutional order. On 11 November, Lieutenant General
Al-Burhan announced the formation of a reconstituted Sovereign Council, placing
himself as Chair and Lieutenant General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, also known as
Hemedti, Commander of the Rapid Support Forces, as Vice-Chair. While the
representatives of the military and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front remained the
same as in the dissolved Council, the civilian members were replaced.

2/16

21-17516

S/2021/1008

10. On 21 November, an agreement was signed between Lieutenant General
Al-Burhan and the Prime Minister stipulating, inter alia, that the 2019 Constitutional
Document would continue to form the basis for the transitional period but would be
amended by mutual agreement to ensure the inclusion of all parties, except the
National Congress Party. The military-civilian power-sharing arrangement would
remain as the “guarantor of stability in the Sudan”, and the interim Sovereign Council
would oversee the transition, as envisaged in article 8 of the Constitutional Document.
The release of political detainees, an investigation into recent incidents of death and
injury during protests and the formation of a technocratic Government were also
stipulated in the agreement. It was stated that an inclusive dialogue would be initiated,
encompassing all political and social forces. The agreement covered the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement and the joining of non -signatory armed
groups to the peace process, in addition to expediting the formation of transitional
institutions and appointments. A unified national army would be formed, and the
Dismantling Committee would be restructured. The announcement sparked fresh
protests in Khartoum and elsewhere denouncing the agreement and criticizing the
Prime Minster for signing it and the partnership with the military.
11. The coup followed months of rising tension between the civilian and military
components of the Sudanese transitional authorities. Some 40 members of the security
forces were jailed following a failed coup attempt on 21 September, allegedly
perpetrated by supporters of the former President, Omar Al -Bashir. The Prime
Minister described the event as an attempt to undermine the civilian democratic
transition, while Lieutenant General Al-Burhan and his Deputy, Lieutenant General
Dagalo, criticized civilian politicians for unfairly excluding the military from some
key civilian-led initiatives and for failures of governance due to political infighting.
12. On 26 September, pro-revolutionary protestors gathered in Khartoum at the
headquarters of the Dismantling Committee, following rumours that the military had
withdrawn security forces from the location. The Prime Minister and Lieutenant
General Al-Burhan reportedly held an emergency meeting to defuse tensions. In a
televised speech shortly thereafter, the Prime Minister stated that the crisis was not
between the military and civilians but “between those civilians and military who
believe in the democratic civil transformation, and those who seek to block the road
ahead of it from both sides”. On 15 October, the Prime Minister subsequently
proposed a road map for dialogue and the de-escalation of tension, including in
Eastern Sudan, the resumption of transitional institutions, addressing national
security issues, the depoliticization of State institutions and respecting power-sharing
arrangements in accordance with the Constitutional Document. The road map also
contained calls for a continuation and review of the Dismantling Committee’s
operations, ending discord within the Forces for Freedom and Change (FFC) and
progress on transitional justice. However, these proposals did not gain traction.
13. Tensions during the reporting period were further compounded by the continued
fragmentation of the civilian component of the transition. On 8 Septem ber, the FFC
coalition signed a new political declaration of unity, in which it was rejoined by the
National Ummah Party and some members of the Sudan Revolutionary Front, namely
the Sudan Liberation Army/Transitional Council, the Sudan Liberation Force Al liance
and the SPLM-N Malik Agar faction. The declaration was premised on expanding the
FFC base, reforming its governing structures and recommitting it to key transitional
priorities. On 26 September, a parallel, additional “faction of the FFC” emerged,
comprising eight signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement, including the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation Movement Minni Minnawi faction. The
new grouping continued to challenge the original FFC and the transitional
Government, even though it included the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning,
Gibril Ibrahim. It reportedly supported a group of anti-government protestors that
21-17516

3/16

S/2021/1008

established a sit-in camp in the vicinity of the Republican Palace on 17 October. In
turn, a significant number of supporters of the civilian-led democratic transition
demonstrated across the country on 21 October.
14. Meanwhile, the situation in Eastern Sudan also escalated, with the closure of
Red Sea ports and key roads by members of the Beja High Council, whi ch disrupted
the supply of medicine, fuel and wheat to the rest of the country. Beja protestors
demanded the dissolution of the civilian Government in Khartoum and called for a
military takeover, as well as the abrogation of the eastern track of the Juba P eace
Agreement. Following the coup of 25 October, negotiations led to the temporary
opening of the port and the main roads on 1 November for a month, pending further
consultations.
15. At the regional level, disagreements between Egypt, Ethiopia and the Su dan
over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam continued, and a date for the resumption
of talks had yet to be set. Meanwhile, the situation along the Al -Fashaga border
between Ethiopia and the Sudan remained volatile, compounded by the escalating
conflict in the Tigray Region of Ethiopia and the risk of its further spillover into the
Sudan. On 21 September, in the wake of the attempted coup in Khartoum, the
Sudanese authorities announced that they had thwarted an attempt by the Ethiopian
army to invade Al-Fashaga. The Ethiopian authorities denied this claim.

B.

Security situation
16. There was a worrying deterioration in the security environment in the country
during the reporting period. In addition to the impact of the attempted coup on
21 September and the coup on 25 October, intercommunal conflict and clashes
between armed groups continued in several locations, along with prolonged protests
in the east and counter-terrorism operations by security forces in Khartoum. There
was a rise in the number of security incidents across the Sudan, from 152 in the
previous period to 157. Underreporting cannot be ruled out owing to the continued
disruption of communication services in the aftermath of the coup.
17. In the lead-up to and following the coup of 25 October, there was growing civil
unrest characterized by significant demonstrations by pro - and anti-transition
protestors and a volatile security situation, with significant deployments of military
and paramilitary forces in the capital. The military coup triggered a series of
demonstrations across the country, organized by resistance committees, professional
associations and civil society and spontaneously by local communities. Numerous
reports were received of military and security forces disper sing protestors, including
by using tear gas and live ammunition.
18. Intercommunal clashes took place between various Arab (Beni Halba,
Misseriya) and African (Erenga, Tunjur, Zaghawa) communities in different parts of
the country, mostly due to disputes over land ownership, access to resources and
criminality, leading to hostilities. Darfur remained the main focus of tension, in
particular in the localities of Tawilah and Dar al-Salam, North Darfur, where the wali
declared a state of emergency on 19 October.
19. Clashes also occurred among armed groups and with the security forces. On
1 September, government security forces clashed with one of the signatory armed
groups to the Juba Peace Agreement, the Tamazuj, in Soba, in the southern part of the
city of Khartoum. On 15 September, Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid elements
clashed with the Sudanese Armed Forces near the Tawilah area of Darfur. On
12 October, suspected SPLM-N Abdelaziz al-Hilu faction armed elements reportedly
attacked a camp belonging to the SPLM-N Malik Agar faction, a signatory armed
movement, in the village of Kajor in Southern Kordofan, allegedly over military

4/16

21-17516

S/2021/1008

training conducted in the area by the signatory armed movement. The attack
reportedly resulted in three deaths and 21 injuries. On 9 November, the Rapid Support
Forces clashed with Justice and Equality Movement forces in the Jabal Eissa area,
North Darfur.
20. Government security forces conducted what they characterized as counterterrorism operations in Khartoum on 28 September and 4 October. The operations
featured the exchange of fire between the security forces and alleged terrorist cell
members reportedly affiliated with Da’esh, in two separate incidents. Six security
personnel and 3 suspects were reported to have been killed, while four security
personnel were injured and 25 suspects were arrested. Various weapons, including
firearms and explosives, were reportedly seized as a result of the operations. On 9
and 12 October, security forces also reportedly made arrests and confiscated
explosives in response to activities related to terrorism in Kusti, White Nile State.

C.

Socioeconomic situation
21. While there had been initial signs of economic recovery in the Sudan in recent
months, the military coup d’état put such progress in jeopardy. Persistent political
instability, in both the east and Khartoum, alongside the lingering effects of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and high inflation, also continued to
hamper investment, economic activity and private consumption amid high
unemployment and low productivity.
22. Prior to the coup, the Sudan was expected to experience modest positive
economic growth of 0.6 per cent in 2021 as the quick pace of economic reforms began
to produce tangible results. The recent clearance of debt arrears with international
financial institutions and the decision of the executive boards of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund to authorize debt relief under the enhanced Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative (estimated at close to $50 billion) had begun to
bear fruit, with the World Bank set to commit approximately $2 billion in grants to
help to tackle poverty and inequality and boost growth. The Sudan was also due to
receive $500 million in budget support, $300 million for electricity improvements
and $300 million for irrigation projects before the end of 2021.
23. However, in the immediate aftermath of the coup on 25 October, the World Bank
announced that it had paused disbursement for all its operations in the Sudan as well
as the processing of any new projects. The United States of America also announced
the suspension of $700 million in emergency assistance to the country and Germany
suspended aid until further notice. France, a leading creditor, also announc ed that it
would reconsider the cancellation of debt owed to it by the Sudan. The suspension of
Internet services from 25 October until partial restoration on 18 November also had
a negative impact on the economy.
24. Following the devaluation of the official exchange rate and the removal of fuel
subsidies earlier in the year, price growth reached a record high of 428 per cent (year on-year) in July 2021 and subsequently fell to 388 per cent in August and 366 per
cent in September. The deceleration at elevated levels came as costs of both local and
imported goods declined, influenced by lower prices and stability in the exchange
rate. Nevertheless, household purchasing power remained low as goods shortages and
high transport and fuel prices continued to affect business activity. The economy was
also negatively affected by the closure of Red Sea ports and roads and the resulting
need to divert imported goods.
25. The roll-out of the family support programme, a cash-transfer scheme launched
in February 2021, continued to expand, including in the states of Western, Northern
and Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile, Eastern Darfur and Central Darfur. More than

21-17516

5/16

S/2021/1008

8 million people have registered but not all have received support. Challenges with
registration and payment systems have delayed the roll-out. The programme was
expected to launch its third phase by mid-November to reach all states. However, after
the World Bank paused its activities in the Sudan, the programme suspended
registration and direct cash payments to citizens until further notice.

D.

Protection of civilians, human rights and the rule of law
26. The human rights situation in the Sudan remained fragile, with continued reports
of incidents of intercommunal violence, especially in Darfur, attacks agains t civilians
and conflict-related sexual violence. The declaration of a state of emergency on
25 October was followed by the arbitrary arrest and detention of numerous persons,
including ministers and other officials, leaders of the FFC, members of the
Dismantling Committee and regional subcommittees, opposition leaders, civil society
activists, human rights defenders, lawyers and journalists. At the time of writing, at
least 18 of those arrested, including senior officials, were being held incommunicado
and their whereabouts were unknown. There was no official record of their arrest and
their families and lawyers had been denied access to them.
27. According to medical sources, at least 43 protesters were reportedly killed as a
result of the excessive and disproportionate use of force by security forces in response
to protests against the coup, and more than 600 persons, including women, were
reportedly injured, suffering bullet wounds and injuries caused by tear gas inhalation
and beatings. Cases of violence against women and children were recorded, including
during a raid on a female student dormitory located near the military headquarters in
Khartoum on 25 October. Many female students were reportedly beaten, resulting in
injuries. Many civilians were also arrested in relation to their participation in the
protests. Most have since been released but many still face charges. While police and
other security forces continued to deny using live ammunition to disperse
demonstrators, the acting Governor of Khartoum announced on 20 November that he
had formed a fact-finding committee led by a prosecutor to investigate incidents of
death and injury during the protests on 13 and 17 November, and stated that the
perpetrators would be brought to justice. The political agreement of 21 November
also referred to an investigation into all events that occurred during protests, including
deaths and injuries, and contained a commitment to “bringing perpetrators to justice” .
28. On 25 October, Lieutenant General Al-Burhan invoked state of emergency
legislation to suspend mobile-based Internet services, and telecommunications were
disrupted across the country. The interruption of Internet services prevented the
population from accessing information and significantly impeded the capacity to
verify allegations of human rights violations. Owing to the shutdown, all radio
stations and television channels reportedly stopped broadcasting, except for Sudan
National Television and Omdurman Radio, which were controlled by the security
forces. A court ruled on 9 and 11 November to reinstate Internet services under
customer protection legislation, the ruling was not immediately implemented. Internet
services were partially restored on 18 November, with limited access to social media
applications. Some journalists were also arbitrarily arrested and assaulted while
reporting on protests, and their homes and offices were raided by security forces.
There were concerns that journalists would be charged with crimes under the vague
provision of committing crimes “against the unity of nation” or other provisions in
the Criminal Act of 1991.
29. Protection challenges coupled with the weaknesses and capacity constraints of
State institutions and law enforcement entities continued to expose civilians to
vulnerabilities. The resurgence of intercommunal conflicts resulted in the killing of
civilians, the destruction of property and displacements, especially in West Darfur

6/16

21-17516

S/2021/1008

and North Darfur, while clashes between herders and farmers continued with
impunity. Some of the violence against civilians was accompanied by the forceful
eviction of farmers from their land by Arab nomads. In the Tawilah locality of North
Darfur, despite mediation efforts initiated by state authorities, the wali of North
Darfur and the Sovereign Council, civilians continued to face harassment and attacks
from armed militia groups. This fragile situation was exacerbated by the gradual
return of Libya-based Darfuri fighters, who were involved in several armed clashes
in North Darfur.
30. From August to November 2021, UNITAMS documented 185 alleged incidents
of human rights violations and abuses, involving 607 victims, including 14 children.
Violations of the right to life accounted for 107 victims (81 men, 22 women and four
children), violations of physical integrity accounted for 326 victims (290 men and 36
women), abductions accounted for 8 victims (including 5 women and one minor),
while sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence,
accounted for 6 victims, including four children. Confirmed arbitrary arrests and
detentions accounted for 160 victims (148 men and 12 women), all of which occurred
in the aftermath of the military coup. As at 21 November, 120 detainees had been
released while 40 continued to be detained. Of the 185 incidents, 102 were attributed
to government security forces and 55 to non-State actors, including armed movements
and militia groups, while unknown or unidentified individuals accounted for 28
incidents.
31. The United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting grave
violations against children, co-chaired by UNITAMS and the United Nations
Children’s Fund, verified 42 grave violations against 41 children (30 boys and 11
girls) and one incident of military use of a school during the reporting period. The
violations were attributed to the Sudanese Armed Forces (28) and unidentified
perpetrators (14). Violations were verified in North Darfur (29), West Darfur (8),
Central Darfur (2), Southern Kordofan (1), East Darfur (1) and Kassala (1). The
incident of military use of a school was attributed to the Sudanese Armed Forces and
took place in South Darfur. This represents a 90 per cent increase in the number of
verified violations during the reporting period, compared wit h the previous period.
Darfur remained the most affected region, with 94 per cent of verified violations
taking place there. The task force continued to engage with the transitional
Government and armed groups on ending and preventing grave violations agai nst
children.
32. The recurrence of significant violence exposed protection gaps and delays in the
implementation of the transitional Government’s reform agenda, including the
deployment of the joint security-keeping force as provided for in the Juba Peace
Agreement and the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians.
33. Prior to the coup, the transitional Government had made some effort to address
protection and security concerns as part of its primary responsibility to protect
civilians. The rate of response to violence against civilians improved, with
investigations and the arrest of alleged perpetrators in 19 incidents. On 5 September,
the transitional Government convened the first high-level meeting of the country’s
international partners with the National Mechanism for the Protection of Civilians.
While acknowledging protection concerns in Darfur, the transitional Government
highlighted several challenges that had affected the implementation of the National
Plan for the Protection of Civilians, including funding gaps, delayed deployment of
the joint security-keeping forces, as well as political and practical difficulties in
implementing the Juba Peace Agreement.
34. The transitional Government also proposed the establishment of a coordination
task force composed of representatives of United Nations protection entities and the
21-17516

7/16

S/2021/1008

National Mechanism for the Protection of Civilians, which is responsible for the
implementation of the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians. With the support
of UNITAMS, the transitional Government finalized arrangements to organize a
national workshop on 1 and 2 November on the National Plan, bringing together the
interministerial body responsible for the implementation of the Plan, UNITAMS and
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to develop a comprehensive action
plan and implementation road map. These plans were put on hold following the arrest
of key government officials on 25 October, including the Minister of Cabinet Affairs,
who were lead focal points for the workshop.
35. In the months preceding the coup, the scope for strategic justice and
accountability reforms diminished, while polarization in the justice sector intensified
following disagreements between the Dismantling Committee and the Supreme
Court. The permanent appointment of a Chief Justice and an Attorney General has
remained pending since May 2021, when the Sovereign Council dismissed the Chief
Justice and accepted the Attorney General’s resignation. The transitional Government
had not established any of the independent commissions envisaged in the
Constitutional Document, including the Transitional Justice Commission, which
many civil society groups viewed as lacking sufficient tools to be effective.
36. On 25 September, the Dismantling Committee announced the dismissal of 399
public employees, including 17 judges (7 from the Supreme Court) and prosecutors.
The judiciary reacted promptly, noting that the Committee did not have the authority
to vet judges and prosecutors. A total of 10 additional decisions by the same chamber
of the Supreme Court followed in which it annulled decisions by the Committee in
relation to employees of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Energy,
arguing that the Committee lacked the competence to make such decisions and
pointing to procedural violations in how its decisions were reached.

E.

Humanitarian situation
37. The challenging economic environment, high inflation, heavy rains and floods
and the subsequent increase in disease outbreaks continued to drive humanitarian
needs across the Sudan during the reporting period. Following a brief pause in
activities after the coup on 25 October, humanitarian operations resumed with some
impact on sectors working closely with the civil service, such as the health and
education sectors. Field operations continued despite limited fuel availability.
38. Following the announcement by the Beja High Council to end the one-month
closure of Red Sea ports and roads, 950 containers that had remained stuck sin ce
mid-September were moved out of the port. Humanitarian organizations have not
subsequently reported any issues with the movement of commodities from the port.
39. The number of acutely food-insecure people decreased from 9.8 million in the
period from June to September to about 6 million in October with the start of the
harvest season. However, food insecurity may continue after the harvest season
between November 2021 and February 2022 as production costs had increased three
to four times compared with the previous season, according to the World Food
Programme.
40. More than 59,000 people were displaced owing to conflict between August and
October, mainly in parts of Darfur and in Southern Kordofan. As at 11 November,
over 365,000 people had been displaced in the Sudan in 2021, according to the
International Organization for Migration, of whom around 349,000 were displaced
owing to conflict. In Sortony, North Darfur, where up to 30,000 people were
reportedly displaced during the previous reporting period , humanitarian organizations
started to provide food, water, sanitation and hygiene and education-related assistance

8/16

21-17516

S/2021/1008

following an inter-agency mission to Sortony on 22 September. Humanitarian
organizations were working to cover the remaining response gaps in terms of access
to health, nutrition and safe water services. Prior to the inter-agency mission, access
to Sortony had not been possible for nine weeks as local authorities did not approve
the movement of humanitarian personnel, citing security concerns.
41. As of end of October, about 58,000 refugees from Ethiopia sought shelter,
protection and assistance in Gedaref and Kassala States. The majority arrived
following the outbreak of fighting in Tigray. Since July, nearly 2,000 Quemant have
crossed into the Basunda locality in Gedaref from the Amhara Region of Ethiopia. In
addition, approximately 10,200 refugees from South Sudan sought shelter, protection
and assistance in the Sudan during August and September, mostly in White Nile and
East Darfur States. Between January and September 2021, about 67,800 refugees
from South Sudan arrived in the Sudan, bringing the total number of South Sudanese
refugees in the country to 786,500.
42. Malaria was one of the main diseases affecting patients seeking consultatio n and
treatment. As at 15 October, the Federal Ministry of Health reported 1,822,868 cases
of malaria compared with 1,456,413 during the same period in 2020. The number of
cases exceeded threshold levels in many states. Over 1,860 cases of hepatitis E had
also been registered in the Sudan since June, with most cases reported in Gedaref and
South Darfur. Humanitarian partners scaled up their water, sanitation and hygiene
response, rehabilitating and building over 5,000 new latrines in Gedaref, including in
areas hosting refugees. They also supported the state Ministry of Health with hepatitis
E tests and trained epidemiologists in affected states on the detection and reporting
of suspected cases. A total of 189 cases of dengue fever were reported, the majorit y
in Northern Kordofan and Kassala.
43. The number of confirmed COVID-19 cases continued to increase sharply. As at
20 November, 41,766 positive cases had been registered since the beginning of the
pandemic, with over 3,300 associated deaths. COVID-19 cases were highly
underreported owing to the lack of access to testing and a fragile surveillance system.
The roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines in the Sudan was slow, according to the Ministry
of Health. Since mid-March, only 3 per cent of the country’s 47 million people have
been fully vaccinated against COVID-19.
44. During the reporting period, the World Health Organization Surveillance System
for Attacks on Health Care recorded one incident affecting patients, personnel and
facilities.
45. Heavy rains and floods that started in parts of the Sudan in June continued to
affect people in 14 of the 18 states, overwhelming the local response capacity. A total
of 314,500 people were affected, with 15,000 houses destroyed by torrential rain and
flooding, a further 46,000 damaged and an unconfirmed number of public
infrastructure facilities and farmlands affected. The transitional Government, through
the Humanitarian Aid Commission, along with humanitarian partners reached close
to 183,000 flood-affected people with various types of humanitarian assistance,
including food, shelter, water, sanitation and hygiene and nutrition aid. Flood
preparedness activities carried out earlier in 2021 helped to reduce the impact of the
floods on people.

21-17516

9/16

S/2021/1008

III. Role of the United Nations in the Sudan and implementation
of resolution 2579 (2021)
A.

Scale-up of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan
46. The scale-up of UNITAMS continued to accelerate. By the end of November,
the total number of staff deployed stood at 157 (110 international and 47 national staff
members). There was progress in the establishment of the Mission’s field network,
with the regional hub in El Fasher fully staffed and operational, and with the initial
deployment of personnel in Kadugli. Preparations were ongoing for the opening of
field presences in the east and other parts of Darfur. Planning was also completed for
the establishment of the Office of the Chairperson of the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire
Committee in El Fasher, and UNITAMS put in place temporary capacity for the Office
pending approval from the United Nations legislative bodies. The Office of the
Chairperson will lead the Mission’s efforts in providing support for implementing the
ceasefire arrangements of the Juba Peace Agreement.

B.

Integrated approach
47. UNITAMS and the United Nations country team continued to deepen their
collaboration. The United Nations common country assessment for the Sudan was
finalized. It comprises detailed analysis of the country’s development context and
national vision for sustainable development, cross-boundary, regional and
subregional perspectives, and analysis of progress towards the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development in the priority areas of peace, people, prosperity, planet and
partnerships. The assessment process included a national stakeholder mapping
exercise and consultations with key partners at the national and state levels, including
members of the transitional Government, civil society organizations, women’s
organizations and groups, youth groups and groups of marginalized and vulnerable
persons.
48. The United Nations in the Sudan began consultations on the development of the
United Nations-Sudan transition plan (integrated strategic framework), which will
articulate the common vision, priorities and responsibilities of the United Nations in
support of the country’s transition. The transition plan was being developed in
partnership with the transitional Government and was expected to be finalized before
the end of the year. However, progress slowed after the coup of 25 October, especially
with respect to planned consultations with the transitional Government.
Objective 1: assist the political transition, democratic governance, protection and
promotion of human rights and sustainable peace
49. UNITAMS continued to engage with all relevant actors to support the transition.
Following the coup on 25 October, the Special Representative actively supported the
promotion of dialogue and the coordination of mediation efforts aimed at reaching a
negotiated political settlement and restoring the constitutional order. UNITAMS also
used its good offices to facilitate dialogue between tribal leaders in the east of the
country and the transitional authorities with a view to building confidence and easing
the closure of the eastern ports and roads, which was eventually ended following the
coup.
50. Ahead of the publication of the draft constitution-making law on 9 September,
UNITAMS, together with international partners, provided technical advice to the
Minister of Justice. The draft law provides for the establishment of the Constitutional

10/16

21-17516

S/2021/1008

Commission, detailed steps for the constitution-making process and the formation of
a general secretariat and trust fund to administer and support the process. The
Ministry of Justice commenced a series of consultative meetings with stakeholders
across the Sudan on 18 October. UNITAMS began consultations with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and constitutional experts to identify
areas for technical support for the constitution-making process.
51. On 19 and 20 September, UNITAMS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights provided support to the Office of the Prime Minister
in holding a workshop for secretariat and subcommittee members of the Dismantling
Committee on international best practices, standards and norms in vetting. The
workshop highlighted challenges associated with implementing the broad scope of
attempts to dismantle remnants of the former regime in the Sudan and managing
public support. Recommendations underscored the urgent need to define and publish
the Committee’s procedural rules and criteria and increase training. However, these
recommendations could not be implemented before 25 October, nor after the coup as
the Committee’s leaders were among those detained.
52. Advisory work on a number of rule of law, human rights and governance
matters, in particular ongoing consultations on draft laws and various commissions
due to be established pursuant to the Constitutional Document and the Juba Peace
Agreement, was interrupted by the coup of 25 October, largely owing to the removal
of government counterparts, including the Attorney General.
Objective 2: support peace processes and implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement and future peace agreements
53. Implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, in particular its security
arrangements, continued to make modest progress. In consultation with the Joint High
Military Committee for Security Arrangements, the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire
Committee held its inaugural meeting on 3 and 4 October in El Fasher, North Darfur,
with representatives of the transitional Government and signatory armed movements.
Discussions were focused on the operationalization of the Permanent Ceasefire
Committee through, inter alia, an effective joint mechanism to monitor, verify and
resolve ceasefire violations. The Chairperson of the Permanent Ceasefire Committee
also held consultations with representatives of Chad and South Sudan as constituent
members.
54. In preparation for the inaugural meeting, UNITAMS facilitated a technical
consultative meeting with representatives of the signatories to the Juba Peace
Agreement, regional leaders, representatives of regional administrations and civil
society organizations, including women’s groups, in Khartoum on 5 and 6 September.
The meeting helped to establish a common understanding of the mandate, ta sks and
institutional structure of the Permanent Ceasefire Committee, as well as the
requirements for its operationalization. Following the inaugural meeting, the
Chairperson of the Committee and his team conducted familiarization visits to Nyala
and Zalingei to raise awareness among representatives of the regional administration
and members of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes on the
composition and work of the new ceasefire monitoring mechanism in order to further
explore potential areas of cooperation and coordination. The second meeting of the
Committee was held on 24 and 25 October and was adjourned at the midpoint by
consensus among all participants to allow for consultations on the next steps
following the coup. As part of its tasks, the Committee also mobilized efforts to
deescalate tensions in response to the outbreak of clashes on 9 November between
signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement.

21-17516

11/16

S/2021/1008

55. UNITAMS and the United Nations Secretariat developed a concept of
operations and assessment of required resources to ensure the sustainability of the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee. The initial concept is focused on capacities in
Darfur, while noting the potential for the extension of ceasefire functions to other
parts of the country subject to ongoing peace talks. The Mission also began a series
of consultations with signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement to map broader support
needs and enhance its capacity for supporting the implementation of the human rights,
protection and justice elements of the agreement.
56. The Mission continued to engage both the transitional Government and the
SPLM-N Abdelaziz al-Hilu faction, as well as the South Sudanese mediation team,
on options to resume the peace process and bridge differences between the parties
following the adjournment of talks on 15 June. UNITAMS conducted a scoping
mission to Kauda on 31 August in addition to a series of meetings held in Khartoum
with representatives of both parties. Meanwhile, engagement with women from
SPLM-N continued, specifically to hear their views on the political process and on
capacity-building needs. These consultations led to the planning by UNITAMS, the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and UNDP of a joint workshop on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and women’s leadership in Juba on 30 and 31 October, which was postponed
owing to the coup.
Objective 3: assist Sudanese-led peacebuilding, civilian protection and rule of law, in
particular in Darfur and the Two Areas
57. UNITAMS and the United Nations country team continued to support the
transitional Government’s preparations to establish key independent commissions,
including the Anti-Corruption Commission, the Peace Commission and the
Transitional Justice Commission. While laws for the establishment of these
commissions were formally published on 17 July, the selection of commissioners and
the operationalization of the commissions remained pending. Consultations on the
draft laws on the Legal Reform Commission, the Human Rights Commission and the
Gender Commission were under way until the coup of 25 October. Legislative
drafting had not yet begun on other key bodies, such as the Civil Service Commission
and the Land Commission.
58. In September, UNDP and UNITAMS started a series of discussions on
strengthening the Office of the Attorney General to prosecute serious crimes and
boosting judicial independence. However, delays in appointing the Chief Justice and
the Attorney General (both posts vacant since May 2021) limited progress on justice
reform. Also in September, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime conducted
a prison reform scoping mission to the Sudan in close coordination with the General
Directorate of Prisons and Reform, which included prison visits and an initial training
course for the senior management of the Directorate. On 21 September, UNDP
supported the Judicial Training Institute in hosting a co nference with chief judges
from all states to identify reform priorities. The recommendations were meant to lead
to a judicial reform strategy.
59. UNITAMS continued to support the operationalization of the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians. On 3 and 4 October, in collaboration with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations country
team, the Mission launched the first of a series of round tables between the state -level
protection of civilians committees and community representatives, including civil
society and women protection networks. The round tables sought to foster community
engagement at an early stage of the operationalization of the committees. The second
round table began on 24 October in Ed Daein, East Darfur, but was suspended midway

12/16

21-17516

S/2021/1008

owing to the coup. Further round tables had been planned for all five states in Darfur
before the end of the year.
60. UNITAMS worked with the United Nations country team to finalize a joint
strategy to support the transitional Government in the implementation of the National
Plan for the Protection of Civilians. A detailed programme document and a list of
activities were developed, with particular focus on prevention, physical protection
and the creation of an enabling and protective environment. The programme, slated
to include training on international human rights and humanitarian law, as well as the
operationalization of the National Mechanism for the Protection of Civilians and
state-level protection committees, remained in question at the time of reporting.
61. Earlier in the reporting period, UNITAMS supported the Sudanese Police Force
in the assessment of needs to support the implementation of the police’s mandate in
the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians. The assessment was jointly
presented by the Mission and UNDP to members of the international community on
7 September. UNITAMS continued to support the Sudanese Police Force in capacity building and training, including on the protection of civilians, human rights and
gender awareness, in addition to confidence-building measures with communities and
internally displaced persons. The Mission assisted a recruitment process conducted
by the Sudanese Police Force that resulted in the selection of 687 candidates,
including 249 women, exceeding the previous threshold of 20 per cent.
62. UNITAMS initiated a series of peacebuilding assessments for North Darfur,
South Darfur, Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan, Red Sea and Kassala States to inform
the Mission’s good offices role at the subnational level, as well as peacebuilding
planning and programme design. These in-depth, subnational conflict analyses,
scheduled to be undertaken in collaboration with the transitional Government and
partners, were put on hold following the coup.
63. On 14 October, the Special Representative joined the Minister of Defence , the
Minister of Labour, a member of the Sovereign Council, Ibrahim Jaber, donors and
implementing partners for the opening of the Sudan Regional Training Ce ntre for
Humanitarian Mine Action in Omdurman. UNITAMS provided technical support and
capacity-building for project design and implementation, as well as for administering
donor funding. The Centre stands as the newest mine action landmark for improving
both capacity-building and technical assistance in response to the threat of landmines
and explosive remnants of war in the country.
64. UNITAMS and the National Mine Action Centre provided explosive ordinance
disposal training to 21 participants from local mine action non-governmental
organizations. It also provided training to 21 individuals from the SPLM -N Malik
Agar faction who were subsequently integrated into the national non -governmental
organization for demining activities in Ulu, Blue Nile, which co nsisted of four
demining teams undertaking operations to pave the road for required humanitarian
support in areas controlled by that faction. Furthermore, UNITAMS, in partnership
with the National Mine Action Centre, finalized a comprehensive assessment re port
on victim assistance and the disability sector in the Sudan. In the report, it assessed
and identified the needs of the most at-risk populations and of victims of explosive
hazards across the country, while providing a road map to strengthen victim as sistance
interventions.
65. The Office of Counter-Terrorism intensified advice to Sudanese stakeholders on
a counter-terrorism framework, including through the organization of workshops to
strengthen the country’s capacity to prevent and counter terrorism in compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law. In the framework of the United
Nations-European Union Counter-Terrorism Partnership for the Sudan, the Office

21-17516

13/16

S/2021/1008

held a workshop in Khartoum on 13 and 14 September on the protection of vulne rable
targets and critical infrastructure.
Objective 4: support the mobilization of economic and development assistance and
the coordination of humanitarian and peacebuilding assistance
66. Prior to the coup, UNITAMS had continued its efforts to impro ve the
coordination of economic and development assistance in the Sudan. On 9 September,
the Mission supported the launch of the Sudan Partnership Forum by the Prime
Minster and the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning. Chaired by the Prime
Minister, with the United Nations, the World Bank and a donor representative as
Vice-Chairs, the Forum was designed to foster coordination on the planning and
delivery of development assistance in line with national priorities and established
global principles of effective development cooperation.
67. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2579 (2021), the Sudan
peacemaking, peacebuilding and stabilization programme – the programmatic
framework supporting mandate implementation – was finalized and shared with
Member States. Terms of reference for the multi-partner trust fund, also known as the
Sudan financing platform, were finalized and two projects were approved for funding:
one supporting the good offices function of the Special Representative and the other
increasing capacity within the Ministry of Cabinet Affairs to implement the National
Plan for the Protection of Civilians.

C.

Review of benchmarks
68. The Mission continued to develop proposed benchmarks and indicators to track
progress against strategic objectives, in line with the request outlined by the Security
Council in its resolution 2579 (2021) to work with the United Nations country team
and the Government to identify qualitative indicators to complement existing
indicators that are quantitative in nature. To this end, revision of the benchmarks
continued in conjunction with finalization of the Sudan peacemaking, peacebuilding
and stabilization programme and commencement of the Sudan transition plan to
ensure the alignment of planning and reporting frameworks. Planned consultations
with the transitional Government were, however, delayed follow ing the coup.

IV. Observations
69. With the third anniversary of the Sudanese revolution approaching, the future
of the Sudanese transition remains uncertain. The military coup of 25 October and the
dissolution of the civilian component of the transitional Government shattered the
hopes of many Sudanese for a civilian-led democratic future. It risks derailing the
significant achievements made on the international and economic fronts and
depriving the Sudan of much needed aid and debt relief. The continued arbitrary arrest
and detention of civilian officials, journalists and activists have further alienated
those seeking the restoration of constitutional order.
70. The agreement reached on 21 November between Lieutenant General Al-Burhan
and the Prime Minister is a step towards resolving the political crisis gripping the
country and returning to the constitutional order. All sides need to make concerted
and timely efforts to negotiate, with a view to effectively addressing unresolved issues
in an inclusive manner, and in such a way that is considered legitimate by the
Sudanese people and the country’s partners. The United Nations continues to extend
its good offices to facilitate a dialogue that can support the transition to a democratic
Government in the Sudan in line with the demands and aspirations of the Sudanese
14/16

21-17516

S/2021/1008

people, in close coordination with the African Union and regional partners, including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the League of Arab States.
71. I reiterate my call for the immediate and unconditional release of all those
arrested and detained arbitrarily, and to cease arrests of political opposition leaders
and activists. Those who have been charged should be afforded a fair trial. Amid an
increasingly hostile environment for journalists, I also urge the authorities to respect
freedom of speech and freedom of the press. There are consistent reports of the use
of live ammunition by security and military forces against peaceful protestors,
resulting in deaths and injuries. This is unacceptable. I urge the Sudanese authorities
to abide by their obligations under international human rights law and to respect the
rights to life, freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. I welcome the
commitment set out in the political agreement to investigate all deaths and injuries of
protestors and call for such investigations to be thorough, independent and transparent
and for those responsible to be held accountable. I also express my condolences to
the families and friends of those who died and wish a speedy recovery to those
injured.
72. The slow implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement remains of concern. The
military coup of 25 October has jeopardized the Agreement and the important
progress made in ending conflicts throughout the Sudanese territory. The actions of
the military have eroded trust and confidence among the non -signatory armed groups
to the Agreement and risk setting the country back on a path of violence and conflict.
The absence of progress in the talks between the transitional Government and the
SPLM-N Abdelaziz al-Hilu faction is disheartening. Meanwhile, the eastern track has
remained a driver of conflict and efforts to facilitate an inclusive dialogue to reach
consensus on outstanding political issues have not progressed, in the light of the
political crisis in Khartoum. I urge all parties to make good faith efforts towards
peacemaking and addressing the underlying causes of conflict for the benefit of the
Sudanese people.
73. The establishment of the Joint High Military Committee for Security
Arrangements and the Permanent Ceasefire Committee constitutes a significant step
towards the implementation of security arrangements stipulated in the Juba Peace
Agreement. It is critical that the Committee is provided with adequate, timely and
sustainable logistical and financial support. I encourage the authorities and the
partners of the Sudan to ensure that the country receives the resources necessary to
fulfil its critical task and establish its various structures, inclu ding at the state level,
so that it reaches all Darfur states. Sustained efforts will be required to ensure the
inclusion of gender-responsive programming and the meaningful participation of
women at all levels, including field teams, while engagements wit h women’s groups
continue. At the same time, I encourage the timely formation of the Juba Peace
Agreement Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanism at the national level, which
remains essential to provide the overall strategic direction and support to peace
implementation.
74. Rising intercommunal tensions in Darfur and other areas of the country remain
a source of concern. While the transitional Government had made some progress in
addressing intercommunal violence through mediation efforts before the coup,
civilians continue to be at risk. I urge the authorities to fulfil their responsibilities to
protect civilians, including by making progress in the implementation of the National
Plan for the Protection of Civilians, notably through the deployment of the joi nt
security-keeping force and related provisions in the Juba Peace Agreement. Special
attention is also required on the prevention of and response to conflict -related sexual
violence.

21-17516

15/16

S/2021/1008

75. The coup highlighted the importance of accountability, while also
demonstrating the challenges of civilian justice institutions in the Sudan to address
and prevent serious human rights violations. The absence of a permanently appointed
Chief Justice and Attorney General since May and a Constitutional Court throughout
the transitional period has meant that there is no functioning independent mechanism
by which human rights violations, including illegal detentions, can be reviewed. All
judicial appointments must be made as soon as possible as part of ongoing
deliberations to restore the constitutional order and a demonstrated commitment to
deliver on calls for accountability for serious crimes, including those committed
during the recent political crisis. At the same time, the commitment in the political
agreement to reforming the dismantling process is an opportunity to positively revise
it. The United Nations stands ready to support reforms and better align Sudanese
vetting efforts with international standards and norms.
76. Sudanese women played a central and historic role in the revolution that led to
the civilian-led transition, which makes their absence from high-level political
decision-making even more pronounced and troubling. Security concerns and
communication difficulties due to the disruption of telecommunications a nd the
Internet blackout have impeded collective organizing, and yet women continue to
come out in high numbers to peacefully demonstrate in support of the civilian -led
transition. I am concerned by reports of harassment, intimidation and incidents of
targeted violence against women protestors. I urge all parties to cease all forms of
violence against women. I encourage the rightful participation of women in mediation
efforts to resolve the current political crisis.
77. The number of COVID-19 cases has been on the rise in the Sudan. Interruptions
to testing and to the vaccination campaign following the coup have compounded
matters. Despite the challenges, testing and vaccination efforts must be restarted as
soon as feasible, under the auspices of the COVID -19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) Facility, to avoid a further deterioration of the situation and the emergence
of a health crisis in the context of a political one.
78. I thank my Special Representative, Volker Perthes, and all United Nations
personnel in the Sudan for their dedication and tireless efforts in support of the
country and its people, in particular at this time of political uncertainty in the Sudan.

16/16

21-17516
