United Nations

A/RES/61/65

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 January 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 90 (g)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2006
[on the report of the First Committee (A/61/394)]

61/65. Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/56 of 8 December 2005,
Expressing its grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by the
possibility that nuclear weapons could be used,
Reaffirming that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes requiring urgent irreversible progress on both fronts,
Mindful of the contribution of the final report of the Weapons of Mass
Destruction Commission, 1
Recalling the decisions and the resolution on the Middle East of the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons 2 and the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, 3
Recalling also the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to nuclear
disarmament, in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 4
Urging States parties to exert all possible efforts to ensure a successful and
productive preparatory process for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,

_______________
1

Weapons of Terror: Freeing the World of Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Arms (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.06.I.17).
2
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
3
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vols. I–III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.

06-49833

A/RES/61/65

1.
Continues to emphasize the central role of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons4 and its universality in achieving nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and calls upon all States parties to
respect their obligations;
Reaffirms that the outcome of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties
2.
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons sets out the agreed
process for systematic and progressive efforts towards nuclear disarmament;3
3.
Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate the
implementation of the practical steps towards nuclear disarmament that were agreed
upon at the 2000 Review Conference, thereby contributing to a safer world for all;
Calls upon all States to comply fully with all commitments made
4.
regarding nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and not to act in any
way that may compromise either cause or that may lead to a new nuclear arms race;
Again calls upon all States parties to spare no effort to achieve the
5.
universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and urges
India, Israel and Pakistan, which are not yet parties to the Treaty, to accede to it as
non-nuclear-weapon States promptly and without conditions;
Condemns the announced nuclear-weapon test by the Democratic
6.
People’s Republic of Korea on 9 October 2006, all nuclear-weapon tests by States
that are not yet parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and any further nuclear-weapon test by any State whatsoever, and urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to rescind its announced withdrawal from
the Treaty;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session
7.
the item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the
implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments” and to review the
implementation of the present resolution at that session.
67th plenary meeting
6 December 2006

2
