150

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Welcoming the Ministers' expressed readiness to
work towards the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 32/130 through the United Nations system,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the progress
report on the over-all analysis 59 which was submitted
to the General Assembly by the Commission on
Human Rights, through the Economic and Social
Council, in accordance with Assembly resolution
32/130;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue with high priority this over-all analysis, which
will contribute to the implementation of resolution
32/130;
3. Expresses the hope that all Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned and United Nations
organs in the field of human rights will continue to
support the ongoing process of over-all analysis being
carried out by the Commission on Human Rights;
4. Looks forward to discussing at its thirty-fourth
session the conclusions and recommendations of the
Commission on Human Rights which will result from
its over-all analysis;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the specialized agencies concerned
and all United Nations organs in the field of human
rights;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/105.

Alternative approaches and ways and
means within the United Nations system
for promoting the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the creation of a post
of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 32/130 of 16 December 1977, in which it requested an over-all analysis
of the United Nations approach to human rights in
the light of the concepts enumerated in that resolution,
Recalling the decision of the Third Committee at
the thirty-second session of the General Assembly to
refer the proposal for the establishment of a post of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for consideration by the Commission on Human Rights
at its thirty-fourth session in the context of the over-all
analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and
means for improving the effective enjoyment of human
Iights and fundamental freedoms, 60
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 26 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978,61 in which
59 Official

Records of the Economic and Social Coun-

cil, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. IX.
60 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 76, document A/32/423,
para. 23.
6 1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.

the Commission considered advisable the establishment, which the Economic and Social Council authorized on 5 May 1978 in its decision 1978/20, of an
open-ended working group of the Commission that
would meet for one week before its thirty-fifth session
to undertake the necessary work relating to the over-all
analysis,
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
take into account, in continuing its work on the overall analysis mentioned above, the views expressed on
the various proposals during the general debate on the
present item at the current session, as well as during
the thirty-second session of the General Assembly,
including a post of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights;
2. Decides to consider these questions again after
the Commission on Human Rights has completed
and/or reported on the over-all analysis.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/106.

Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 62 proclaiming that everyone has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Noting that during the thirty years of its existence
many portions of the Declaration have been expanded
into various international instruments, while article 18
has thus far not been so elaborated,
Still desirous to see article 18 followed by a declaration on the elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance,
Recalling its resolution 3027 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, in which it decided to accord priority
to the completion of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance before
resuming consideration of the draft international convention on this subject,
Recalling also its resolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10
December 1974, in which it requested the Commission
on Human Rights to submit to the General Assembly,
through the Economic and Social Council, a single
draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion
or Belief, and its resolutions 31/138 of 16 December
1976 and 32/143 of 16 December 1977, in which it
urged the Commission to speed up its work so that
the draft Declaration might be finalized,
Noting with regret that the Commission on Human
Rights has reported, through the Economic and Social
Council, that it has as yet not completed the draft
Declaration,
Noting further the efforts undertaken by the informal
working group set up by the Commission on Human
Rights in elaborating a generally acceptable text of
the Declaration, taking into account the relevant
United Nations documents,
Taking account of the fact that, since the Commission on Human Rights has undertaken to draft the
62 Resolution

217 A (III).

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Declaration in response to the request made to it in
General Assembly resolution 3267 (XXIX), the informal working group set up by the Commission at
each of its sessions since 1974 has so far adopted
the title and preamble of a draft Declaration, 63
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-fifth session to give high priority to the
drafting of the Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief and to strive towards completion of
the draft Declaration at that session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the Commission on Human Rights the provisions of existing international instruments which
relate to the problem of religious intolerance;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
instruct its working group which has been established
to carry out this task to set a time-table for a full
consideration of the remaining articles of the draft
Declaration during the thirty-fifth session of the
Commission;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session, through the Economic and Social Council, a
single draft Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Elimination
of all forms of religious intolerance" and to give it
high priority.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/162.

Migratory labour in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/105 A to N of 14 December 1977 and 32/105 0 of 16 December 1977
relating to the policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 2082 B (LXII) of 13 May 1977, in which the
Council recommended that the General Assembly
should declare 1978 the International Anti-Apartheid
Year,
Noting with satisfaction the proclamation of the year
beginning on 21 March 1978 and ending on 20 March
1979 as International Anti-Apartheid Year,
Bearing in mind the Programme for the International Anti-Apartheid Year, 64
Recalling also the resolutions on accelerated economic development and international action and on the
promotion of development strategies with a view to
reducing economic dependence on South Africa and
the Charter of Rights for Migrant Workers in Southern
Africa which were adopted by the Conference on
Migratory Labour in Southern Africa, 65 held at Lusaka
from 4 to 8 April 1978, and organized by the Economic Commission for Africa and the International
63 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), para. 198.
64 Resolution 32/105 B, annex.
65 E/CN.14/ECO/142, part two.

151

Labour Organisation, in co-operation with the Government of Zambia and the liberation movements of
southern Africa that are recognized by the Organization of African Unity,
Aware of the heavy dependence of Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia and Swaziland
on their supply of migrant labour to South Africa and
of the need to eliminate such undesirable dependence,
Convinced that the continuance of the system of
migrant labour to South Africa both perpetuates the
evils of apartheid and retards the social and economic
advancement of the States supplying migrant labour,
Convinced also that the removal of this evil system
of migrant labour would facilitate the elimination of
apartheid and accelerate the socio-economic development and transformation of the supplier States,
Realizing that the weak position of the supplier
States to take action individually with a view to extricating their dependent economies and their migrant
nationals from the stranglehold of apartheid and the
economy of South Africa calls for urgent concerted
action and co-operation among the affected Member
States as well as assistance from other African States,
international organizations, non-African Governments
and other organizations,
I. Endorses the Charter of Rights for Migrant
Workers in Southern Africa as adopted by the Lusaka
Conference on Migratory Labour in Southern Africa
on 7 April 1978 and annexed to the present resolution;
2. Urges all Member States and all organizations
of the United Nations system and other international
organizations, pursuant to the Lagos Declaration for
Action against Apartheid66 adopted by the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, to extend to the
African States affected by the migration of labour to
South Africa all material, financial, technical and
political support for the initiation and implementation
of specific development programmes and projects aimed
at enabling those States to utilize fully their available labour force for the development of their own
economies and thereby eliminate the necessity to export
such labour to the apartheid economy of South Africa.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
ANNEX
Charter of Rights for Migrant Workers in Southern Africa
adopted on 7 April 1978 by the Conference on Migratory
Labour in Southern Africa

We, tlze representatives of tlze States and peoples of soutlzern
Africa,
Noting that apartheid has been declared a crime against
humanity by the General Assembly of the United Nations,
Noting the work done by the International Labour Organisation on the problems of migratory labour in southern Africa
and recalling International Labour Organisation Conventions
No. 87 of 9 July 1948 and Nos. 97 and 98 of 1 July 194967
concerning, respectively, the freedom of association and protection of the right to organize, migration for employment and
the application of the principles of the right to organize and to
bargain collectively,
66 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
'
67 See International Labour Organisation, Conventions and
Recommendations adopted by the Intcrnatio11al Labour Conference, 1919-1966 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 1966).
