A /76/PV.102

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

102nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 8 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Expression of sympathy on the passing of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II
The President: Before we proceed to other items,
it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the memory of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, who passed away today.
The passing of Her Majesty the Queen is a moment of
great sadness for the royal family, the people of the
United Kingdom and the international community.
Her loss will be deeply felt throughout the world. She
will always be remembered for her dedicated service at
home, across the Commonwealth and around the globe.
She fostered peace and friendship worldwide.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request
the representative of the United Kingdom to convey
our condolences to the royal family, the Government
and the people of the United Kingdom and the wider
Commonwealth of Nations.
I would now like to invite representatives to stand
and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory
of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: A formal tribute in the General
Assembly will be convened at a later date to
be announced.

Agenda item 66 (continued)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution (A/76/L.86)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.86, entitled
“Financing for peacebuilding”.
May I take it that is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.86?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/305).

A/76/L.86

*2258466*

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): It was not long ago that the
General Assembly convened here for the high-level
meeting on financing for peacebuilding. Our meeting
and the consensus adoption of landmark resolution
76/305 this afternoon are a demonstration of the
ownership and urgency that the entire membership has
accorded to advancing tangible solutions addressing the
existing peacebuilding financial gap in the context of
the increasing global demand for peacebuilding.
I thank Ambassador Anna Karin Eneström for
her dedication and leadership and the efforts of her
team during the core facilitation process. I also thank
the members of my own delegation, who worked hard
to reach this goal. And I am grateful to the Office

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-58466 (E)

was

A/76/PV.102

of the President of the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Support Office for their assistance in the
exercise. It was a great honour for Kenya to undertake
this responsibility. On behalf of my Government, I would
like to convey my deep gratitude to you, Ambassador
Shahid, for entrusting Kenya with co-facilitating the
critical intergovernmental negotiations that led to
today’s outcome during your term as President of the
General Assembly.
The initial listening exercises we conducted
proved informative. The negotiations were complex
but constructive, and we see the consensus conclusion
before us today as truly groundbreaking. It would not
have happened without the availability, flexibility and
constructive spirit demonstrated by all delegations
during the negotiations. I also want to especially
recognize and commend the various regional groupings,
including the Group of African States, the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, the Canada, Australia and
New Zealand group and the European Union. Their
leadership and united efforts greatly contributed to
reaching our goal of a timely, action-oriented and
substantive outcome that is focused on financing for
peacebuilding. We were working on a tight timeline,
but we have delivered on our designated mandate before
the end of the seventy-sixth session. Together we have
truly sent a clear political message and affirmed our
commitment to considering all options for adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding,
including through voluntary, innovative and assessed
funding. Resolution 76/305 rightly notes that the
provision of assessed contributions to financing for
peacebuilding would represent the shared commitment
of Member States to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. What that means is that for the first time, we,
as the United Nations, recognize and are in agreement
that the important work of peacebuilding cannot be left
to voluntary contributions and cannot be in the hands
of just a few countries, in the financial sense. What
the provision of assessed funding also means is that
beneficiary countries and regions, including my own
continent, Africa, not only have a stake in peacebuilding
and its dividends, but they also have ownership of it.
From the vantage point of Kenya’s continued
commitment to peacebuilding and as an informal
coordinator between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, it is therefore our hope
that the Secretary-General and the Fifth Committee
will take up the clear guidance and recommendations
2/31

08/09/2022

that the resolution presents and urgently operationalize
and translate those political commitments into tangible
actions that respond to our changing peace and
security landscape.
I would like to conclude by noting that time and
again, the General Assembly stands up and delivers
hope at a time when the whole world looks to us when
it comes to the critical matter of peace and security. Let
us not lose the ambition that the General Assembly has
laid out today in resolution 76/305.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): Let me first express my
deepest condolences to the delegation of the United
Kingdom on the passing of Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II.
For a long time now we have recognized the existing
gap in peacebuilding financing and the need to scale
up our investment in peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. Peace, the prevention of violent conflict,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace are central to the
work of the United Nations. Their financing is one of
its most critical enablers. I am proud to have facilitated
the intergovernmental negotiated outcome on finance
for peacebuilding, together with my good friend
Ambassador Martin Kimani of Kenya. His leadership
skills and commitment were key to the successful
conclusion of our work. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for bestowing on us the honour to
represent you in that process.
Peacebuilding remains a strong priority for Swedish
foreign policy because we believe in it. Peacebuilding
works. It saves lives and is cost-effective. It is an
inherently political process, aimed at preventing the
outbreak, escalation, recurrence and continuation
of conflict. It is a collective endeavour, involving a
great number and variety of stakeholders and bringing
together elements of security and political, economic,
social and human rights in a coherent and integrated way.
The Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund has
established itself as a beacon of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. Its achievements through its
catalytic rapid response and flexible approach are wellknown. The consensus-based adoption of resolution
76/305 confirms the international community’s
recognition of the need for peacebuilding efforts to have
adequate predictable and sustained financing in order
to effectively assist countries in building and sustaining
peace, and affirms our commitment to considering all
options for ensuring such financing, including through
22-58466

08/09/2022

voluntary, innovative and assessed funding and other
means of resource mobilization.
Among other things, the resolution sends a
political signal to the Fifth Committee to determine
the modalities under which assessed contributions
could be used to finance the Peacebuilding Fund. It
notes that the provision of assessed contributions to
peacebuilding financing would represent a shared
commitment by Member States to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The resolution further stresses the
importance of multi-year, flexible and risk-tolerant
voluntary funding commitments for peacebuilding. It
encourages enhanced efforts to explore and pilot an
innovative financing mechanism. It encourages Member
States and the private sector to take practical steps to
strengthen partnerships in support of peacebuilding. It
further recognizes the important role of international
financial institutions in peacebuilding and sustaining
peace and encourages strengthened partnerships and
strategic cooperation between the United Nations and
international financial institutions at all levels.
I would like to thank all Member States for their
active support and constructive engagement throughout
the process, in keeping with our intention to have a
concise and action-oriented resolution for focusing
on financing and peacebuilding. Let me also express
my deep appreciation to the entire Kenyan team, my
own colleagues and the staff of the Peacebuilding
Support Office and of your Office, Mr. President.
We now look forward to building on that outcome,
implementing its provisions and continuing our efforts
to ensure adequate, predictable and sustained financing
for peacebuilding.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): In my national
capacity, before I speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM), I would like to express
our deepest condolences on the passing of Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth II.
I now have the honour to deliver a statement on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. NAM would like
to express its sincere appreciation and congratulations
to the facilitators, Ambassadors Martin Kimani and
Anna Karin Eneström, for their successful steering of
the intergovernmental consultations on financing for
peacebuilding, and for presenting resolution 76/305
for adoption today. We would also like to thank all
delegations for their constructive engagement, flexibility
and accommodation, which resulted in a consensus

A/76/PV.102

outcome for this important intergovernmental process.
My special thanks go to all our experts for their sincere
and tireless efforts in the whole process.
The resolution adopted today is one of major
significance. It further advances the ongoing efforts to
address existing gaps in peacebuilding financing and
ensure adequate, predictable and sustained financing
for peacebuilding. We are pleased to see a balanced
text in the resolution, which will strengthen the
peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations as
transformed through the successive twin resolutions
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (resolutions
70/262, 72/276 and 75/201 and Security Council
resolutions 2282 (2016), 2413 (2018) and 2558 (2020))
and emphasize accountability and the oversight of
funds. We are encouraged to see that the resolution
recognizes the need to consider all options for
financing for peacebuilding, while ensuring synergies
among all stakeholders, widening the donor base
for peacebuilding financing and taking into account
national peacebuilding priorities. We also appreciate
the recognition of non-monetary contributions and
innovative funding in peacebuilding, the role of
South-South and triangular cooperation, public and
private financing for peacebuilding, cooperation
between United Nations and the international financial
institutions and the role of other United Nations funds,
in addition to the Peacebuilding Fund.
NAM appreciates the emphasis on the role of
women and young people in peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. We also welcome the fact that the
resolution underlines the critical contribution of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in this endeavour, through peacebuilding activities in
their respective areas of operations. NAM believes
that resolution 76/305 can be a good basis for the Fifth
Committee to continue its discussions on peacebuilding
financing. NAM countries will engage constructively
in those negotiations to realize the objectives set forth
by the resolution.
Finally, I reiterate NAM’s full commitment to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, including through
a stronger focus on national ownership, and express our
pledge to continue advocating for adequate, predictable
and sustained financing for peacebuilding.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I add my voice to yours,
Mr. President, and those of my colleagues in extending
my deepest condolences to Ambassador Barbara

22-584663/31

A/76/PV.102

Woodward and the members of the United Kingdom’s
Permanent Mission on the passing of Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth II. May her soul rest in peace.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Group of African States in my capacity as Chair
of the African Peacebuilding Caucus. The African
Group aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the representative of Bangladesh on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, the African Group would like to
express its gratitude and deep appreciation to our
two excellent co-facilitators, Ambassadors Anna
Karin Eneström and Martin Kimani, the Permanent
Representatives of Sweden and Kenya, for a job
very well done. Today’s consensus adoption of the
landmark resolution 76/305 is a testimony to the
shared commitment of Member States to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. It attests to the importance
and urgency of addressing the critical challenge of
peacebuilding financing with a view to strengthening
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and
making it more impactful and effective.
Africa has been a strong advocate of prioritizing
investment in nationally owned and driven
peacebuilding as a proven, cost-effective and smart
investment — an objective that is still out of reach
as long as peacebuilding remains largely dependent
on voluntary contributions, which are inadequate,
unpredictable and unsustainable. This historic
resolution is therefore timely and important, as it is
clearly futile to continue funding a core function of
the United Nations through voluntary contributions
while expecting a different result. In that connection,
the African Group welcomes the comprehensive and
action-oriented nature of today’s resolution in tackling
all the funding streams — voluntary, innovative and
assessed. We also welcome the emphasis it places on
assessed contributions as a means to ensure adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding.
For Africa, this resolution is important, as many
of its provisions are in line with the African Common
Position on the 2020 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. It is also commendable
that the resolution gives clear guidance to the Fifth
Committee for continuing and concluding during the
seventy-seventh session its consideration of the report
of the Secretary-General on allocating $100 million
to the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) through assessed
4/31

08/09/2022

contributions, including considerations related to
increased transparency, accountability and oversight
at the PBF. The African Group looks forward to the
operationalization of the provisions of this important
resolution, particularly the upcoming consideration
of the Secretary-General’s proposal on assessed
contributions next month at the main session of the Fifth
Committee. The Fifth Committee process provides a
unique opportunity for Member States to translate their
political commitments in this resolution into action, as
their consensus today has indicated. Africa, as a main
stakeholder in peacebuilding, remains fully committed
to engaging constructively in the Fifth Committee
discussions, in concert with the active and constructive
engagement of the African Group in the plenary to
achieve the wonderful and successful conclusion that
we have had today.
In conclusion, the African Group congratulates you
personally, Mr. President, as well as the co-facilitators
and indeed all Member States, on the successful
conclusion of this groundbreaking process.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I also join others in
expressing our deepest condolences to the delegation
of the United Kingdom on the passing of Queen
Elizabeth II.
India welcomes our adoption of resolution 76/305,
and we would like to acknowledge the contribution of
the co-facilitators, Kenya and Sweden. In my national
capacity, I would like to make the following points.
As Member States move forward with discussions
related to assessed contributions towards peacebuilding,
issues related to accountability and the oversight of
funds to be allocated for the purpose, as well as our
assessed contributions, should continue to receive the
full attention of the General Assembly, as well as the
Fifth Committee. We hope that issues related to the
examination of financial rules and regulations governing
the use of assessed contributions for peacebuilding
purposes will be exhaustively discussed in the Fifth
Committee in due course. The constructive suggestions
raised by delegations during the negotiations, for
instance with regard to designating separate windows
for voluntary and assessed contributions in order to
ensure full transparency, should be explored fully in
the Fifth Committee discussions. The Fifth Committee
must remain the final arbiter of decisions related to
funding and financing for peacebuilding. Furthermore,
all such decisions must be taken by consensus, just as
22-58466

08/09/2022

today’s resolution was adopted by consensus. India
welcomes that constructive approach to discussions on
peacebuilding. In conclusion, I would like to make the
following three suggestions to the Assembly.
We continue to underscore the importance of the
cardinal principle of inclusivity in advancing national
peacebuilding objectives. An exclusively donor-driven
approach to peacebuilding is therefore not the most
prudent path to follow.
The discourse on enhanced financial support for
peacebuilding activities through sources other than
voluntary contributions merits in-depth and careful
study of its ramifications for the United Nations
ecosystem. Any decision to that effect must be based
on consensus.
Lastly, as one of the largest troop- and
police-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, India believes that it is
important to set clear benchmarks and criteria for
an exit strategy in countries under consideration.
The Peacebuilding Committee in advocating for
peacebuilding needs to ensure drawdowns when those
criteria are met.

A/76/PV.102

stagnation, exacerbation, recurrence or continuation
of conflicts, such as the creation and implementation
of sustainable development and human rights
programmes. El Salvador hopes that the discussions
and commitments in this resolution will be enhanced
and strengthened in the discussions and decisions of the
General Assembly during its next session, and we will
continue to participate constructively in them.
My country welcomes the recognition in the
resolution of the fundamental role that women and
young people play in peacebuilding, as well as the
urgent need to finance initiatives that integrate them on
an equal footing and enable their full and meaningful
participation. Peace and prosperity can be ensured only
if they are included at all levels. In future, we hope
that our deliberations will be supported by the broad
and timely availability of information on financial
instruments and changes in the flow of financing
for peacebuilding. We must continue to prioritize
greater transparency and enhanced accountability
regarding resources for the financing for peacebuilding,
with a view to bolstering the impact of our initiatives
on the ground.

Mr. Segura Aragón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): We add our voice to others in expressing our
sincere and deep condolences to the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom on the passing of Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth II.

Finally, allow me to express our belief that the
current circumstances require that the international
community act proactively and decisively to prevent
conflicts and respond to them. In that regard, El
Salvador’s firm commitment to peacebuilding and
sustainable peace remains unchanged.

El Salvador is grateful for the convening of this
plenary meeting and aligns itself with the statement
made by the delegation of Bangladesh on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Ms. Carlson (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we would like to express our
deepest condolences to the United Kingdom on the
passing of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.

We welcome the adoption by consensus of resolution
76/305, the General Assembly’s first resolution devoted
to financing for peacebuilding. We would like to express
our sincere thanks to the co-facilitators, Ambassadors
Martin Kimani and Anna Karin Eneström, and their
teams, for their leadership and efforts in steering the
negotiations on this resolution.

We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Bangladesh on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We see the resolution as a reflection of the
commitment of Member States to putting prevention
and peacebuilding at the heart of their efforts
and establishing the partnerships needed to make
sustainable peace into reality. We therefore hope that its
full implementation will translate into tangible actions
aimed at closing the financing gap in peacebuilding and
thereby facilitating political processes that prevent the

We would first of all like to thank Kenya and Sweden
for their efficient facilitation of the consultations in
this process and all delegations for their constructive
engagement. We believe the adoption of resolution
76/305 is an essential step in ensuring that we have
predictable, flexible and timely resources to better
support peacebuilding.
The Dominican Republic is honoured to serve as
Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for the
Latin American and Caribbean region. Throughout
this period, we have seen the positive impact of the

22-584665/31

A/76/PV.102

Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund on the
achievement of the aspirations of countries that have
found in the Commission an inclusive, impartial
and open platform for sharing their challenges and
experiences. And we have seen that by including
the voices of women and young people, the potential
of the tools that we have to achieve our goals as an
Organization is even greater. The financial support for
women’s peacebuilding initiatives and their integration
in the planning, implementation and monitoring of such
initiatives is therefore crucial.
Closing the clear financial gap we face in order to
continue to have the desired impact on peacebuilding is
a priority for the Dominican Republic. We believe it is
especially urgent to unite our efforts to address the fact
that the financial gap affects initiatives led by youth
organizations in particular.
In view of the situation whereby the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal did not reach the necessary
consensus in the Fifth Committee and its discussion
was postponed to the next main session, we believe
that this is an essential step that we encourage Member
States to consider for future negotiations on this topic
in the Fifth Committee.
In conclusion, we believe that the final outcome
of this resolution is aligned with the creation of a
clear mechanism to establish predictable, pro-rated
resources and innovative financing that will enable the
Peacebuilding Fund to meet our growing needs.
Mr. Mizuta (Japan): Before I deliver our statement,
I would like to express our deepest condolences for the
loss of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
Japan welcomes the adoption of resolution 76/305
by consensus. I thank the Permanent Representatives
of Kenya and Sweden for tirelessly co-facilitating the
informal consultations. Japan engaged in the process
constructively and gladly joined the consensus with
a view to further advancing the United Nations
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda. In hopes
of facilitating our future discussions on this important
theme, I would like to clarify Japan’s position on a few
points that remained contentious during the negotiation
process, particularly in relation to paragraphs 16 and 18
of the resolution.
First, the continued flexibility and agility of the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) must be ensured at all costs
in order to respond to the needs on the ground. For that
6/31

08/09/2022

reason, the United Nation’s programmatic activities
typically conducted by the funds and programmes for
development and humanitarian activities have been
financed in principle by voluntary contributions. The
level of transparency, accountability and oversight
required for assessed contributions is not compatible
with the flexibility and agility needed for those field
operations. This means that if we are to consider
using assessed contributions for the PBF to finance
operations on the ground, their use should be strictly
limited to exceptional cases and in a way that does
not jeopardize the flexibility and agility of the PBF.
Recurring administrative costs, such as staffing, could
be considered an exception. Time-bound programmatic
activities to support smooth transitions after United
Nations missions’ withdrawal could be another. In any
case, the use of assessed versus voluntary contributions
must be clearly demarcated. That is Japan’s
understanding of the phrase “assessed funding is not
meant to be a substitute for voluntary contributions” in
paragraph 16.
Secondly, Japan would like to re-emphasize the
need to revisit the question of the most desirable funding
target for the PBF. The Fund’s current resources may
not be sufficient to finance all the increasing project
proposals by the relevant United Nations entities.
However, that alone cannot support the argument that
the PBF is underfunded. We expect the Peacebuilding
Support Office to conduct strict scrutiny and approve
only quality and qualified projects to meet its core
funding purpose, which is to provide seed funding.
If we do acknowledge funding shortages vis-à-vis
qualified applications, the voluntary contributions
mechanism per se is not the cause of the shortage and
does not justify resorting to assessed contributions,
which are not meant to replace voluntary contributions.
Last but not least, I would like to posit the key
elements for securing adequate, predictable and
sustained financing for the PBF or for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace more broadly.
First, with regard to the monitoring and evaluation
of PBF-funded projects and the sharing of their results,
we welcome the launch of the Secretary-General’s
peacebuilding dashboards, as noted in paragraph 9.
Secondly, with regard to creating synergy between
the PBF and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as
mentioned in paragraph 2, the PBC should become an
22-58466

08/09/2022

A/76/PV.102

instrument to enhance the transparency and visibility
of the PBF.

follow-up discussions with all parties to consider a fair,
reasonable, practical and feasible approach to that end.

Thirdly, with regard to strengthening the United
Nations system-wide coherence of all the relevant
activities conducted by different entities, including
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
agencies, funds and programmes, the triple nexus should
be strengthened on the ground and at Headquarters
level as well.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset and on
behalf of Brazil, I would like to express our deep
condolences to all our colleagues at the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom on the passing of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. As the world mourns
her departure, we remember with fondness her trip to
Brazil, where she was received with great warmth. Her
decades-long sense of duty and devotion to her people
will not be forgotten.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Japan’s
full commitment to advancing the peacebuilding and
sustaining peace agenda.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Peacebuilding contributes to eliminating the root
causes of conflicts and achieving lasting peace. It
responds to the needs of conflict-affected and postconflict countries and is an integral part of the United
Nations work. China attaches great importance to
peacebuilding, and has always actively advocated for
and participated in peacebuilding, with peacebuilding
support and assistance within its capacity provided
through multiple channels to conflict-affected and postconflict countries. Currently, with the significantly
greater uncertainty and instability manifest in the
international security landscape, there is an evergrowing need for peacebuilding in conflict and postconflict countries, especially in Africa.
Resolution 76/305, which we have just adopted, is
a major step forward in exploring options for adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding.
It provides an opportunity for strengthening and
improving the peacebuilding architecture, which
China welcomes. We would also like to commend
the efforts of the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Sweden and Kenya.
Financing through assessed contributions subjects
the Organization to the management and supervision
of its Member States. As a basic principle governing
United Nations financing, we expect Member States
to consider ways to increase the transparency,
accountability and oversight of the Peacebuilding
Fund, in accordance with the resolution. We expect the
Secretariat to review the terms of reference of the Fund
in close consultation with Member States, give donors
and the recipient developing countries a greater say in
the Fund and ensure that financing for peacebuilding
complies with the current United Nations budgetary
and financial regulations. China will actively join

I would like to thank my colleagues Ambassadors
Anna Karin Eneström and Martin Kimani for their
outstanding work as co-facilitators in the drafting of
resolution 76/305. Their insight and leadership were
key to addressing all the parties’ concerns and showing
the way forward when compromise was needed to find
common ground. Their commitment and energy are
now rewarded as the Assembly is providing guidance
to the Fifth Committee to work on the critical issue
of peacebuilding financing. That guidance is an
important step forward, as it leaves in the hands of
the Fifth Committee the task of further exploring
different types of funding. In the particular case of
assessed contributions, the Committee’s work is key to
addressing issues of accountability and transparency in
the activities of the Peacebuilding Fund. And there are
questions in that regard. Let me name just a few.
Unlike the traditional United Nations practice
regarding assessed contributions, Member States would
be financing activities that were not previously planned
and budgeted accordingly before being submitted to the
scrutiny of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and the approval of the
General Assembly. Neither would the use of those
resources be regulated by the Financial Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations. Not to mention that
contrary to the usual practice, Member States would
have financial obligations related to non-mandated
activities, something that does not align with United
Nations standards. The Fifth Committee must complete
its work to properly assess the effects of such a proposal
on Member States and the Organization as a whole.
Given its potential financial and procedural impact, I
want to reiterate that no decision should be taken on
the issue until that process is completed successfully.
Brazil is ready to continue to engage constructively in
that exercise.

22-584667/31

A/76/PV.102

08/09/2022

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to Ambassadors Anna Karin Eneström and Martin
Kimani, the Permanent Representatives of Sweden and
Kenya to the United Nations, who very ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations in
the informal consultations to produce a draft text of
resolution 76/305 by the end of this session. I would
also like to recognize the work of their experts, Ms. Eva
Nthoki of Kenya and Ms. Kadi Doumbia of Sweden,
and their teams. I am sure the members of the Assembly
join me in expressing our sincere appreciation to them.

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of myself and my dear
friend Ambassador Carolyn Rodrigues-Birkett, the
Permanent Representative of Guyana, in our capacity
as co-facilitators of the intergovernmental process on
establishing the United Nations Youth Office.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 66?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 100 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Draft decision A/76/L.79
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/76/L.79, entitled “Fourth Conference
of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/76/L.79 was adopted (decision
76/575).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 100?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolutions (A/76/L.85 and A/76/L.87)
The President: Before we proceed to take a
decision on the draft resolutions, delegations wishing
to make a statement in explanation of vote or position
on either or both of the draft resolutions are invited to
do so now, in one intervention.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
or position before the voting, I would like to remind
8/31

At the outset, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to you personally, Mr. President, for
entrusting us with this important responsibility. We
are also deeply grateful to all delegations for their
constructive engagement and strong support. For more
than two months delegations worked diligently to reach
the best text formulation that would give the Youth
Office a robust mandate in a manner that reflects our
shared and growing commitment to advancing the
work of the United Nations on youth. Despite different
views, one commonality prevailed — recognizing
the importance of engaging with young people and
listening to them.
Given the large global youth population, which
numbers approximately 1.2 billion, the largest
generation of young people in history, it is extremely
important to ensure that youth issues are prominent
on the United Nations agenda and that their voices are
heard and their views considered, especially as the
world is grappling with increasing challenges such as
the setbacks in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and the additional burdens of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We therefore thank the Secretary-General for
proposing the establishment of the Youth Office in his
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). Draft resolution
A/76/L.85, which is before the General Assembly today,
reflects our collective efforts and hard work towards
advancing that proposal. We should be proud of what
we have achieved together. Throughout the negotiation
process, Ms. Rodrigues-Birkett and I have prioritized
listening to all views to ensure that we could put forth
a strong text. We held a series of open and transparent
consultations with all delegations. We also engaged
with youth organizations and representatives to hear
their suggestions and proposals for the new Office,
many of which are reflected in the draft resolution.
The best legacy we can leave young people is letting
them know that we are confident in their ability to play
an integral part in shaping their future. A sustainably
22-58466

08/09/2022

funded and effectively structured United Nations
Youth Office will create the space for them to do so and
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations system to
support and engage with young people across the world
more effectively.
We remain grateful to all who contributed to this
process, and we appreciate the support extended to
us by the Executive Office of the Secretary-General,
the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management and, of course, the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth and her able team, whose insights were
extremely valuable. The establishment of this Office is
timely and an indication of our common understanding
of the potential role of youth and the contributions
they can make to the work of the United Nations and
its three pillars of peace and security, development
and human rights. We hope that all delegations will
join the consensus in adopting this important draft
resolution as a demonstration of our multilateral efforts
in that regard.
I would like to say one last word of appreciation to
our junior colleagues, Mr. Mohamed Hassan Mohamed
from the Egyptian Mission and Ms. Trishala Persaud
from the Mission of Guyana, for doing their utmost to
make this draft resolution a reality. They spent hours
and hours working hard to make it a success and
build consensus.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): Today is a day of
deep sadness for New Zealanders, with the passing of
Queen Elizabeth II. Her Majesty was a monarch with an
unwavering sense of duty and deep love of family. We
mourn her loss.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
entrusting Ambassador Al Hassan and me with the
responsibility of serving as co-facilitators for the
conduct of intergovernmental consultations related
to the modalities for the summit of the future. It has
been a privilege to be a co-facilitator of draft resolution
A/76/L.87 with Ambassador Al Hassan. He worked
tirelessly and thoughtfully to ensure that we were able
to deliver on the mandate that you entrusted to us. To the
delegations involved, we also acknowledged that this
process was not easy at times, especially working over
the summer. We very much appreciated their ongoing
support and constructive engagement throughout the

A/76/PV.102

process. From the outset, New Zealand and Oman were
guided by a couple of key principles.
First, we knew that as co-facilitators, we were
responsible for leading an inclusive and effective
process, but that ultimately the substance of what we
produced sat with the Member States. Secondly, we had
an overarching goal of ensuring that the modalities draft
resolution provided a strong platform for a substantive
and meaningful summit of the future. Looking to the
future, we do hope that the summit will provide an
opportunity for Member States to come together to show
a renewed commitment to the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of effective multilateralism.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you once
again, Mr. President, for the opportunity to serve; the
Secretariat for all of its support; Mr. Al Hassan for
his partnership; my own team, of course, who worked
tirelessly and went above and beyond; and ultimately the
Member States, for their active engagement throughout
the process.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Before I
deliver my statement, I would like to echo my previous
colleagues and express my sincere condolences to the
delegation of the United Kingdom on the passing of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
At the outset, I want to sincerely thank you,
Mr. President, and all the Member States of the United
Nations, for the kind words addressed to me and for
the trust you have placed in me by appointing me as a
facilitator, alongside my colleague Ambassador Carolyn
Schwalger of New Zealand, to work on the modalities
for the summit of the future. It was an honour to work
with her and the New Zealand team.
I also want to take this opportunity to thank
all Member States for their cooperation and their
statements, which enriched our consultations and
negotiations. That has also allowed us to achieve a text
today that while it may have overlooked some aspects, we
believe it reflects a balance among the various positions
of Member States, as Ambassador Schwalger said. We
hope we have accomplished the mission entrusted to
us. I would like also to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General, the Secretariat and the staff of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly for
their cooperation, which was concrete and important.
Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
express Malaysia’s profound sadness and heartfelt

22-584669/31

A/76/PV.102

08/09/2022

condolences to the delegation and people of the
United Kingdom on the passing of Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II earlier today.

agenda. Accordingly, please be assured of Malaysia’s
utmost support for the Youth Office and other youthempowerment initiatives within the United Nations.

There is a proverb in the Malay language, loosely
translated, that says that youth are the hope of the
people and the pillar of the nation. With that in mind, it
is imperative that we undertake efforts to empower our
young people at the national, regional and international
levels, because they are the leaders of tomorrow. We
should also undertake those efforts within the auspices
of our Organization.

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of vote before action on the draft
resolution. The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/76/L.85, entitled “Establishment of
the United Nations Youth Office”.

Malaysia welcomes the submission of draft
resolution A/76/L.85, which is before us today. We
believe it is timely and apt. The youth agenda should
be mainstreamed within the United Nations and the
avenues in which young people’s voices can be heard
should be expanded. The establishment of a Youth
Office within the Secretariat is therefore a step in
the right direction. We commend the efforts of the
Permanent Representatives of Egypt and Guyana
for their excellent stewardship of the negotiations on
the draft resolution. Their inclusive, mindful and
professional approach has led to a balanced text free of
contentious terminology. We hope that approach will
be emulated in other negotiations.

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present oral
statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. It has also been
distributed to Member States.

Malaysia fully supports the establishment of the
Youth Office as outlined in the draft resolution, as it
will dedicate necessary resources to the youth agenda.
We commend the Secretary-General’s Envoy for Youth
for her excellent work in empowering youth within the
United Nations system, despite significant challenges,
including a lack of predictable funding. We believe her
experiences and insights will be helpful in producing a
detailed proposal on the modalities of the Youth Office.
Malaysia is of the view that the Youth Office
should streamline efforts vis-à-vis youth within
the United Nation system to optimize resources
and avoid duplication. The Office must be able to
utilize frameworks and resources under the relevant
United Nations entities, inter alia, the United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, UNICEF
and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women. We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s detailed proposal on the modalities
of the Youth Office and hope that his proposal will be
taken into consideration.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s
full commitment towards the youth-empowerment
10/31

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

The activities referred to in operative paragraphs
1 through 6 of the draft resolution would entail new
activities in 2023 related to the establishment of the
United Nations Youth Office as well as additional
documentation workload for the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Adoption of the draft resolution would give rise to
budgetary implications in the range of $3.5 million
to $3.9 million per year, including post resources on
a continuing basis to cover the activities of the newly
established United Nations Youth Office as well as
for the translation of documentation in all official
languages by the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management.
However, as further internal consultations and
analysis on the operational functions, structure,
resources and staffing of the Office are necessary
within the Secretariat, the Secretariat is not currently
in a position to provide detailed cost estimates. Should
the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution on
the establishment of the United Nations Youth Office,
a revised estimates report would be submitted to the
General Assembly during the main part of its seventyseventh session detailing the requirements for which
an additional appropriation would be requested for
2023, in line with the request contained in operative
paragraph 1.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.85?
Draft resolution A/76/L.85
(resolution 76/306).

was

adopted

22-58466

08/09/2022

A/76/PV.102

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.87, entitled
“Modalities for the Summit of the Future”.

passing of Queen Elizabeth II. She personified an era
and embodied hope and compassion.

of

I have the honour to deliver this explanation of
position on draft resolution A/76/L.87 on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement,
pertaining to operative paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 21 of the
current draft resolution, is made in the context of rule
153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
The present statement has also been distributed to
Member States.

Allow me, first of all, to express our Group’s
appreciation to the co-facilitators, Ambassadors
Carolyn Schwalger and Mohamed Al Hassan, for their
tireless efforts in achieving a balanced outcome. The
Group also congratulates you, Mr. President, and
through you, the co-facilitators, for the successful
outcome of a complex process.

The request contained in operative paragraphs 3,
4, 5 and 21 of the draft resolution would constitute
an addition to the workload of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management, the
Department of Global Communications, the Office of
Information and Communications Technology and the
Department of Safety and Security in 2024 and entail
additional resource requirements in the amount of
$183,000 in that year.

The Group decided not to break silence and join
consensus as a show of its commitment to multilateralism
and global solidarity, which is most needed at this time,
when the world is facing multiple and cascading crises.
Nevertheless, the Group wishes to express its concerns
regarding the process.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

Detailed cost estimates and their underlying
assumptions for the requirements are provided in
the annex to this statement, which, again, has been
distributed to Member States. Accordingly, should the
General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/76/L.87,
additional resource requirements estimated in the
amount of $112,100 under section 2, Economic and
Social Council Affairs and General Assembly and
Conference Management, $5,800 under section 28,
Department of Global Communications, $27,800 under
section 29C, Office of Information and Communications
Technology, and $37,300 under section 34, Department
of Safety and Security, would be included in the proposed
programme budget for 2024 for the consideration of the
General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.87?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 76/307).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Rashid (Pakistan): At the outset, allow me
to convey my delegation’s deepest condolences on the

First, it is not clear why the consultations on the
draft resolution were conducted with such obvious
haste. Throughout the process, the Group was not
afforded sufficient time to consult internally and
respond to the tight deadlines, which were imposed for
no apparent reason. Even the silence procedure on the
final text was concluded in less than 24 hours, which
is unprecedented.
Secondly, it would have been important to have
clarity on the process, with a calendar containing
details for the circulation of drafts and for the holding
of meetings, as that is standard practice. This would
have allowed consultations to develop and conclude in
a better fashion.
Thirdly, it should be understood that, in any
negotiation, sufficient time must be provided for
Member States to reflect on a text, engage in dialogue,
exchange proposals and find compromises with the
assistance of the co-facilitators. The Group is therefore
also surprised by the new method of negotiations by
which the co-facilitators consulted the Member States
and not even a single session was arranged by the
co-facilitators to allow for negotiations among the
delegations concerned.
With regard to the text of the draft resolution, the
Group reaffirms that its reading of operative paragraph
17 is fully consistent with the content of the tenth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs 4
and 16, which highlight that the preparations for the

22-5846611/31

A/76/PV.102

Summit and the negotiations over its outcome will be
through an intergovernmental process in line with the
United Nations Charter and the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly. The Group would also express its
reservations about referring to the outcome document
as “A Pact for the Future”, as that prejudges a process
that has yet to start.
Finally, the Group would like to put on record that
this form of consultation should not set a precedent for
any future negotiations. We hope that there will be a
clear way forward with regard to the Summit in order
to allow for more constructive engagement in future.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
next speaker, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to His Excellency Osama Mahmoud
Abdelkhalek Mahmoud, Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations; Her Excellency Carolyn
Rodrigues-Birkett, Permanent Representative of
Guyana to the United Nations; Her Excellency Carolyn
Schwalger, Permanent Representative of New Zealand
to the United Nations; and His Excellency Mohamed
Al Hassan, Permanent Representative of Oman to the
United Nations, who ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations on draft resolutions A/76/L.85 and
A/76/L.87. In the spirit of the consultations on “Our
Common Agenda” (A/75/982), they spared no efforts
to ensure that the views of all stakeholders were heard.
I would also like to recognize the work of the
experts: Mr. Mohamed Omar Elfarouk Hassan
Mohamed of the Permanent Mission of Egypt,
Ms. Trishala Simantini Persaud of the Permanent
Mission of Guyana, Ms. Christine Nam of the Permanent
Mission of New Zealand and Ms. Aura Velasquez of the
Permanent Mission of Oman. I am sure that members
of the Assembly join me in extending to them our
sincere appreciation.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates the General Assembly on the adoption by
consensus of the resolution on the establishment of the
United Nations Youth Office (resolution 76/306). We
thank Egypt and Guyana and appreciate the excellent
hard work they have done as co-facilitators.
The adoption of resolution 76/306 is an important
step as the United Nations works to better coordinate
and strengthen youth affairs and encourage global
youth to get more involved in the United Nations.
12/31

08/09/2022

China has given much attention and support to active
participation of young people in United Nations affairs.
We appreciate and welcome the initiative put
forward by the Secretary-General in his report,
“Our Common Agenda” (A/75/982), and we have
constructively participated in the negotiation of the
resolution. The newly established United Nations
Youth Office focuses on the three pillar areas of peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights, with a clearly defined and balanced mandate.
China hopes the Youth Office will function with wellintegrated resources and bring innovative working
methods. China also hopes that it will become a body
with proper geographic and gender balance so that it can
play a unique role in helping young people, especially
those from developing nations, to achieve sustainable
development and participate in United Nations affairs
in a broader manner.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
China thanks the Secretariat for its explanation of
the budget implications of resolution 76/306. According
to the resolution, the existing Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Youth will be merged
into the newly established Youth Office, which will
become an office dedicated to youth affairs within
the Secretariat. As a result, it is eligible for funding
through the regular budget.
As the second largest contributor to the United
Nations, China has always believed that the United
Nations budget should give priority to ensuring
resources in the field of development. We therefore
support the use of the regular budget for the purpose
of this Office to ensure its full operation. China looks
forward to a report from the Secretary-General on
feasible resource allocations by the Office and hopes
that the United Nations can take this opportunity
to further increase the representation of developing
countries in the Secretariat staff.
As the United Nations Youth Office is being set up,
China wishes to take this opportunity to work with all
parties to promote the development of young people.
We also wish to make our contribution to building a
community of a shared future for humankind.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing our sincere condolences
to the delegation and the Permanent Mission of the
22-58466

08/09/2022

A/76/PV.102

United Kingdom on the sudden passing of Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth II.

the fact that it included elements that had not been
considered in an inclusive manner.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. In
addition, let me make the following comments in my
national capacity.

Furthermore, the Group of 77 and China, whose
membership represents numbers equivalent to two
thirds of the Organization, requested an extension of the
deadline for the silence procedure to which Rev.3 was
subjected in order to be able to carry out the necessary
consultations among delegations and with its members’
respective capitals. We all know what the answer was:
bring the text before the Assembly for its consideration.
This is simply unacceptable and cannot be considered a
precedent for the future.

Despite our concerns with respect to document
A/76/L.87, we have decided to join the consensus on
resolution 76/307, given our historic commitment to
multilateralism and the irreplaceable role of the United
Nations in addressing the complex challenges facing
the international community as a whole. However,
my delegation’s support for the adopted text should
not be interpreted as an endorsement of the unsettling
way in which this process was conducted, resulting in
modalities with more than a few ambiguities.
As a part of the Group of 77 and China and in
its national capacity, on repeated occasions and in a
transparent and timely manner, the Cuban delegation
expressed its concern from the beginning of the
process about the timing of the launch of this process
and the hasty manner in which it was conducted,
which directly affected the ability of smaller missions,
particularly those from the South, to participate on an
equal footing. It is a contradiction that the objective
underpinning the Summit of the Future, as we have
heard from the Secretary-General himself, is to
promote the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, whose fundamental axiom is
to leave no one behind, and that the negotiation process
for the modalities of this summit was conducted in a
manner that did not uphold this principle. Delegations
were not given adequate time to evaluate the evolving
versions of the text, consult their capitals and receive
instructions to find the necessary compromises, steps
that are indispensable in a rigorous negotiation. The
Group of 77 and China, the largest negotiating group of
this Organization, and several of its members speaking
in their national capacity, reiterated on more than one
occasion the need to give delegations adequate time.
However, the opposite was the case.
Between the zero draft and A/76/L.87/Rev.1,
delegations were given less than 48 hours. Between
Rev.1. and Rev.2, they were given less than 24 hours.
Between Rev.2 and Rev.3, they were given about
20 hours. Rev.3 was put under the silence procedure
without even discussing it with all delegations, despite

We understand the pressure to which the facilitators
of the negotiation process were subjected, given the
mandate given to conclude this process within the
framework of the seventy-sixth session. However, it is
up to the Member States and to them alone to decide
on the feasibility of holding such an important process
in less than a month or to give themselves the time
necessary to carry out a truly inclusive and rigorous
process, the outcome of which generates a solid
consensus among all delegations.
The rushed manner in which this process was
moved forward has undermined the quality of the text
adopted and the general consensus on its content. It is
regrettable that we preferred to start off on the wrong
foot in order to finish more quickly than to move
forward slowly but go further. In our view, this is not
the way to a better and more inclusive future.
With regard to the content of the resolution, I would
also like to point out a few aspects. First, with regard
to the eighth preambular paragraph, our understanding
is that it is up to the Member States to decide which
inputs to take into account — and which not to take
into account — in the intergovernmental negotiation
process on the scope of the Summit of the Future, its
areas of focus and its outcome document.
Secondly, with regard to the holding of a
preparatory ministerial meeting in 2023, an idea that
was inserted in the text late and not discussed with all
delegations, our understanding is that its purpose is to
give political impetus to the preparations for the 2024
summit and that as a preparatory meeting it should be
guided by the terms of this modalities resolution. We
would be doing a disservice to the Summit of the Future
and its outcome document if an attempt is made to
take advantage of this ministerial meeting to prejudge
or force agreements on what we have mandated to be

22-5846613/31

A/76/PV.102

adopted in 2024. On the other hand, we understand that
the preparatory ministerial meeting should contribute
to and not overshadow or replace the work of the
Sustainable Development Goals summit mandated
by this Assembly for 2023 several years ago. The
comprehensive and timely implementation of the 2030
Agenda must continue to be our top priority.
Thirdly, with regard to operative paragraph 17,
while we agree on the need for the preparations for the
Summit to be transparent and inclusive, we understand
that the negotiations mandated by resolution 76/307,
including the negotiation of the outcome document,
will be conducted in an intergovernmental format in
accordance with the rules of procedure and practices of
the General Assembly.
In conclusion, allow me to express my delegation’s
readiness to participate in a constructive spirit in the
next phase of preparations for the Summit of the Future.
In that next phase, we look forward to a truly rigorous,
transparent and inclusive process of intergovernmental
negotiations for all delegations. Only in this way will
we ensure that the outcome document will have the
necessary consensus without which this modalities
resolution could not have been adopted.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico expresses its most sincere
condolences to the people and the Government of the
United Kingdom — and to the royal family — on the sad
passing of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, undoubtedly
an example of service to her people and country.
Mexico joins the consensus today on resolution
76/307 and appreciates the efforts of the Permanent
Representatives of Oman and New Zealand as
co-facilitators of this process. We note that the
text adopted today leaves open many windows of
opportunity. But allow me to highlight in particular the
most important limitation that my country identifies in
the text, namely, the mention that the outcome document
must be adopted by consensus. Historically, my
country, Mexico, has maintained a consistent position
on consensus. For Mexico, consensus is a desirable
aspiration and not an end in itself or an ultimate goal.
As established by the rules of procedure and the
Charter of the United Nations, decisions of the Assembly
must be taken by a majority of the members present and
voting. Consensus does not mean unanimity. It means
the will expressed by a large majority of the members
present. And unanimity can mean, in practice, granting
14/31

08/09/2022

vetoes, affecting progress on issues as important as our
future as humankind on this planet.
In addition, this limitation is detrimental to the
image of our Organization. It is also inconsistent with
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. As it
will be a high-level meeting of the General Assembly,
any Member State has the right to introduce initiatives
for consideration by the summit, which can be adopted
by a majority vote of the Member States present. In this
regard, Mexico regrets this unnecessary limitation in
the text we have just adopted.
Nevertheless, my country will work proactively
to reach an agreement that is ambitious, with a view
to achieving a positive impact for the benefit of future
generations. For Mexico, the inclusion of the notion
of consensus in this modalities document should not
limit or reduce the threshold of the objectives or the
ambition of the commitments contemplated in this
important initiative.
Furthermore, I would like to raise the following
point: the precedent set by the very hurried process
in which the Member States negotiated and were
constrained to reach an agreement on this modalities
resolution is worrisome. While we commend the efforts
of the co-facilitators throughout the process, we regret
that the time to develop the resolution’s mandate given
to the Member States was insufficient for them to
adequately consult with their capitals.
Mexico therefore hopes that the negotiation process
for the outcome document of the Summit of the Future
will provide Member States with sufficient time to
adopt an ambitious and action-oriented text. Otherwise,
it would be very unfortunate if similar circumstances
were to lead not only to a Pact for the Future without
real commitments and substance, but also to the failure
to reach a final outcome at all. Mexico reaffirms its
commitment to the process of holding the Summit of
the Future, to youth and to future generations. It is our
obligation today to embrace the future.
Mr. Dundon (Australia): Before I begin, let
me express the deep and sincere condolences of the
Government and the people of Australia on the passing
of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Our thoughts are
with our colleagues at the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom, the royal family and all the people of
the United Kingdom.
22-58466

08/09/2022

I take the floor on behalf of Australia and Canada
with regard to resolution 76/306 on the establishment
of a United Nations Youth Office. Let me join
others in thanking the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and Guyana, for their efforts
aimed at steering this important resolution. We are
particularly grateful for the thorough consultation
process that preceded the zero draft, including
engagement with the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Youth and a range of youth organizations.
We are pleased to see that many of the views of these
important stakeholders are reflected in the resolution
adopted this afternoon.
As the Secretary-General’s report “Our Common
Agenda” (A/75/982) rightly identifies, a rich diversity
of people, including by age, gender, disability and
race, must be meaningfully involved in multilateral
decision-making if we are to deliver a relevant, inclusive
and effective United Nations system. This includes
bolstering youth representation and participation
in deliberative and decision-making forums of the
United Nations. It is for these reasons that Australia
and Canada welcome today’s consensus adoption of
resolution 76/306.
However, we would like to take this opportunity
to register our views on the process with regard to
the consideration of the budgetary implications of
the resolution. Given the resource constraints facing
Member States and the multiple pressures on the
United Nations regular budget, we are disappointed
that delegations were not provided with cost estimates
prepared by the Secretariat at an early stage in the
consultation process. In our view, providing early
indications of the budgetary implications would
have enabled a better informed and more transparent
discussion of the recurring financial implications of
this decision.
Once again, we reiterate our strong support for
increased youth engagement across the United Nations
system and look forward to engaging with the United
Nations Youth Office once it is established.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): First
of all, let me express our deepest condolences to all
the representatives of the United Kingdom and the
Commonwealth on the death of Queen Elizabeth II, a
remarkable Head of State.
Switzerland welcomes the adoption by consensus
of the resolution on the modalities of the Summit of

A/76/PV.102

the Future (resolution 76/307). We especially thank the
co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of New
Zealand and Oman, for guiding these negotiations so
skilfully with commitment and great patience. The
adoption of the resolution, as well as the establishment
of a United Nations Youth Office, as decided by the
General Assembly today (resolution76/306), are
important first steps.
Switzerland attaches great importance to the
preparatory process for the Summit of the Future
and looks forward to participating actively and
constructively in the various aspects of the negotiations
leading up to the Summit. These tracks, such as the
preparation of a new peace agenda, a global digital pact,
a declaration on future generations and the elaboration
of new proposals to improve the governance of global
common goods, present an opportunity to advance the
debates and strengthen the multilateral system, so that
it can deliver on the promises of peace, development
and human rights.
Switzerland is particularly pleased that resolution
76/307 encourages the active participation of all
relevant actors — not only in the Summit itself, but also
in the preparatory phase. As the world is facing major
challenges, it is essential that we take into consideration
all relevant approaches and ideas in order to arrive at a
summit that generates real answers for the future.
We have set ourselves the ambitious goal of
achieving a consensual outcome in the negotiations.
This is a challenge but also an opportunity. We call on
all parties to engage constructively and with maximum
flexibility in the next steps. Let us be ambitious. We
look forward to engaging in these important discussions
without delay, and will be attentive to contributing
to and, above all, maintaining positive momentum
until 2024.
Ms. Andújar (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank the co-facilitators
from Guyana and Egypt for their leadership in
this process. They have undertaken a very arduous
valuable and undoubtedly rewarding task, and we
congratulate them for the excellent work done during
the negotiation process.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the adoption
of resolution 76/306 on the establishment of the United
Nations Youth Office. Our country proposed the
creation of United Nations Youth in 2011, and we are
very pleased to see this aspiration become a reality.

22-5846615/31

A/76/PV.102

We commend the youth consultation conducted
by the co-facilitators, allowing us to hear from a wide
range of young people and youth organizations and
to strengthen our commitment to moving forward
on key aspects for the establishment of this Office.
Increasingly, we are witnessing how young people are
positive agents of change and are allies and partners in
multilateralism efforts.
This landmark historic resolution represents a
major step forward in strengthening the United Nations
in the area of youth, in particular for the full and
equal and meaningful participation of young people
in decision-making to address the specific needs and
aspirations of young people and to work together with
them in transforming societies that are more just. The
Dominican Republic has been a strong supporter of
these principles and therefore of any reform that would
result in a United Nations that is more effective for all
young people. In this spirit, as soon as the deliberations
in this regard began, our country became involved in
the negotiations working hand in hand with some 64
countries that expressed their support and concerns,
including through joint speeches on the establishment
of this Office. Member States and young people will
now be able to count on a United Nations Youth Office,
which, we are convinced, will be adequately staffed
and have sufficient resources allocated from the regular
budget to ensure its sustainability and, therefore, its
operational functioning, as well as for programmes and
initiatives to be conducted.
We are also pleased that the resolution takes into
account several other priorities of the Dominican
Republic, including how the Office will serve as an
anchor for the coordination and accountability through
an honour system in matters related to youth in relation
to peace, sustainable development and human rights,
as well as for facilitating intergenerational solidarity,
ensuring that the United Nations remains accessible to
youth and youth-focused and youth-led organizations,
that its staff has an equitable geographical representation,
and that youth focal points are appointed across the
United Nations system and country teams. We would
also emphasize that the Office must be led by a young
person in a high-level position.
We also hope that the annual report that the
Secretary-General will submit to the General Assembly
will include not only an update on the activities of the
Youth Office, but also those of the entire United Nations
16/31

08/09/2022

system in the area of youth, as it is a matter of coherence
of the coordination and of the approach itself.
Let us always remember that this Office is owned
not only by the Member States, but by all young people,
with and for young people. We reiterate the thanks
of the Dominican Republic to the co-facilitators.
Our delegation will continue to contribute to the
strengthening of the United Nations and the multilateral
system in favour of all youth.
Mr. Momeni (Islamic Republic of Iran): I take
the floor to deliver the explanation of position of my
delegation on resolution 76/307, entitled “Modalities of
the Summit of the Future “.
At the outset, I would like to express my gratitude
to the Permanent Representatives of Oman and New
Zealand and their respective teams for their efforts
in facilitating the consultative process. My delegation
associates itself with the explanation of position
delivered by Pakistan on behalf of the Group of 77
and China on this resolution. We would like to add the
following points in our national capacity.
With regard to the process, there was a significant
lack of clarity throughout it and on the way forward.
It is not clear why the consultations on the draft
resolution were conducted with such obvious haste.
It is unfortunate that the proposal of the Group of 77
and China to extend the silence procedure for further
consultations was not accepted. Furthermore, there was
no real or in-depth negotiation in the process, which is
normally expected. This form of consultation should not
and must not set a precedent for any future negotiation.
With regard to the substantive issues, I would like to
put on record that, during the consultations, the Group
of 77 and China requested the deletion of the reference
to “A Pact for the Future” in operative paragraph 4, as it
prejudges a process that has yet to be started. However,
this proposal was ignored.
In relation to the way forward, as this is an
intergovernmental process, all decisions must be
taken by Member States, and all countries, especially
developing countries, must be able to participate in all
preparatory processes for the Summit. With regard to
operative paragraph 17, we value the participation of
relevant stakeholders based on internationally agreed
criteria and the principle of equal participation,
especially by representatives of developing countries.
We also value their participation, upon invitation by
22-58466

08/09/2022

A/76/PV.102

co-facilitators, in the process, so that their valuable
inputs can be presented and heard. This operative
paragraph is not agreed language, nor does this language
appear in any compilation text. Rather, it originates from
small-group consultations. We therefore disassociate
ourselves from this operative paragraph. We do not
agree with or consider this language a basis for future
negotiations. Notwithstanding this clarification, we
joined consensus in adopting the resolution.

Secondly, my delegation understands the
importance of hearing from stakeholders and giving
them an opportunity to participate at the Summit.
However, that cannot happen at the expense of our
intergovernmental process or of the time and space
needed for Member States to express their positions.
We hope that the balance that the resolution strives
for can be observed throughout the organization of
the Summit.

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil aligns itself with
the statement delivered by Pakistan on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.

Thirdly, the text before us today is clearer than its
first draft with respect to the ownership of the preparatory
process by Member States through intergovernmental
negotiations. A summit can represent a shared vision
for our future only if its scope, tracks and outcomes are
defined and controlled by Member States.

At the outset, allow me to express our appreciation
and support for the work done by the Permanent
Representatives of Oman and New Zealand, along
with their teams, in facilitating the process related to
the Summit of the Future. It was a bumpy road to get
us here. Notwithstanding this successful outcome, the
tight schedule imposed upon all Member States, but
especially developing countries, made consultations
among ourselves hasty and imperfect and generated
unnecessary risks to our negotiations. We do not believe
it should serve as a model for any other process in the
United Nations.
Nevertheless, we are glad to be in a position
to adopt resolution 76/307 today due to the good
progress achieved in central points of the text, in
line with the interests of the overwhelming majority
of the countries of the Group of 77 and China. I will
emphasize three of them: the date of the Summit, the
engagement of Member States and stakeholders and the
decision-making process for the way forward.
First, I will start with the date of the Summit. As
consistently underscored by my delegation, we already
have a multilaterally agreed framework to tackle
our development challenges — the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which has not yet reached its
midpoint. Our current crises, such as the rise in food
insecurity and the deterioration of living conditions,
among others, illustrate that this is a time to highlight
the centrality of the Agenda and to accelerate its
implementation, not to overshadow it by creating new
agendas. We therefore consider the option of convening
of the Summit of the Future in 2024, after we have had
the opportunity to take stock of our progress in the
2023 Sustainable Development Goals Summit, as the
most appropriate choice.

On that note, we understand that the SecretaryGeneral would not want to interject in such a strictly
intergovernmental process and that his inputs would be
most useful if presented after the membership has had
the opportunity to shape the scope and tracks of the
Summit of the Future.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
United Kingdom, let me first thank the President of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General and many
of our colleagues here for the tributes they have paid
to Her Majesty the Queen. As my Foreign Secretary
said today, she will be remembered for her dedicated
service at home, across the Commonwealth and around
the world. Her extraordinary service fostered peace and
friendship worldwide.
I would now like to turn to item 124 on today’s
agenda. Let me start by thanking the co-facilitators,
Egypt and Guyana, for the work on the resolution to
establish the Youth Office (resolution 76/306).
As the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) makes clear, with 1.8 billion young people
in the world, it is essential that we support their
contribution to decision-making at the highest levels.
That is why the United Kingdom welcomed the President
of the General Assembly’s youth engagement dialogue
on 30 August, and that is why we are committed to
supporting young people having a voice on all issues.
We must champion a diverse range of voices within
the United Nations system, in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s vision for inclusive multilateralism.
Although we support the intent of the Youth Office,
particularly with regard to improving the ways that

22-5846617/31

A/76/PV.102

young people can engage with the work of the United
Nations, including by coordinating work across existing
United Nations mechanisms, we are disappointed with
the process adopted to establish it.
The United Kingdom regrets that we were
obliged to break silence on this text due to a lack of
transparency over the potential financial implications
of this decision. While discussion on exact budget and
staffing levels rests solely with the Fifth Committee, it is
important that the General Assembly have a full picture
when taking decisions. That includes ensuring that it
has an indication of potential financial implications
before action is taken. And that means doing so before
a silence deadline, where they are used.
We thank the Secretariat for providing those
figures so quickly, and we look forward to considering
the Secretary-General’s detailed proposal on the
operational functions, structure, resources and
staffing at the Youth Office. We trust that it will set
out clearly how the new Youth Office will work with
the United Nations system entities in order to ensure
a more effective, integrated and joined-up approach to
incorporating a youth perspective in the work of the
United Nations, including through tackling duplication
and ensuring better mainstreaming.
If we are to deliver Our Common Agenda’s vision for
United Nations 2.0 — a United Nations that is focused
on results, impact and effectiveness — then Member
States must have the evidence and analysis they need
to inform such important decisions. As we continue to
deliver on the vision of Our Common Agenda, we would
ask that all Member States ensure that any new activity
supports a more effective United Nations, allowing for
agility, integration and cohesion across the system.
That must be our guiding light as we move forward and
deliver on our common agenda and make preparations
for the Summit of the Future.
Now let me address the resolution on the modalities
for the Summit of the Future (resolution 76/307). I pay
tribute to co-facilitators New Zealand and Oman for
their work to deliver this resolution. It was no easy task,
especially on such a tight timeline.
Despite that challenge, we agreed today on a
consensus resolution for the holding of the Summit
of the Future. The General Assembly’s unity, in
requesting this meeting, is an important signal of our
common support for the Summit. While we regret that
the Summit will not take place until 2024, we welcome
18/31

08/09/2022

the pre-Summit in 2023, an important opportunity to
take stock of progress and maintain momentum.
We welcome the inclusion of strong language on
civil society participation, both in the Summit itself and
in its preparatory process. Civil society actors are vital
for the work of the United Nations. They will provide
invaluable inputs.
As we look forward to the Secretary-General
providing further information to prepare the Summit,
as we have requested, allow me to end by saying
a word on the Summit itself. The world is facing an
unprecedented set of challenges, from natural disasters
caused by climate change to growing conflict. If we
do not prepare for the future, we can only expect more
of those challenges to come. That is why the United
Kingdom fully supports the Summit of the Future, and
we look forward to working with all our colleagues on
delivering it.
Mr. Komatsu (Japan): We would like to thank the
co-facilitators and all delegations for their engagement
on this very important resolution regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Youth Office
(resolution 76/306). We commend the facilitators for
holding a consultation with youth representatives and
relevant stakeholders on 14 July in order to hear their
visions and views.
My delegation appreciates the outstanding work of
the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and her Office
and hopes to continue expanding our collaboration.
Japan joins the consensus on this resolution and
supports the establishment of this new Office.
Japan encourages the meaningful participation of
youth in promoting the agenda for peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights. We are
happy to see those elements included in this resolution..
As explained in the co-facilitators’ letter dated
31 August, we understand that an oral statement shared
before the adoption of this resolution gives only a broad
indication or a range of budgetary implications. We
expect that the detailed cost estimates will be submitted
later for further consideration by Member States in
order to ensure transparency and accountability.
As
emphasized
during
negotiations
and
accommodated in this resolution, a detailed proposal
by the Secretariat on the operational functions,
structure, resources and staffing of the Office, based
on the further analysis of the resource needs of the new
22-58466

08/09/2022

Youth Office, is critically important for the Member
States to further analyse and discuss the details of
the Office, including financial aspects. By ensuring
the process for Member States to analyse and discuss
this proposal at a later stage, we believe that we can
enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the Office
and avoid further duplication and fragmentation of the
Organization’s work.
Finally, the voices of youth should be heard in a more
institutionalized way, including within this new Office.
We believe that we can institutionalize the participation
and engagement of youth in intergovernmental spaces
if we can take stock of more good practices. We are
ready to listen to and work with youth.
Mr. Siringoringo (Indonesia): Allow me to begin
by expressing Indonesia’s deepest sympathy and
condolences to the Government and the people of the
United Kingdom on the passing of Queen Elizabeth II.
Her leadership has showcased timeless prudence and
serves as a good example to the world.
Indonesia applauds the leadership of the President
in strengthening the United Nations by mainstreaming
and advancing the role of youth in the system. We also
appreciate the work of the Permanent Representatives
of Egypt and Guyana for their wisdom in guiding the
deliberation process on the Youth Office modalities.
Indonesia
recognizes
the
importance
of
establishing the future Youth Office within the United
Nations. More than just a priority to us, it is also proof
of our commitment to empowering and advancing the
leadership of young people in the world.
As a country with a large young population,
Indonesia understands fully the power that young
people hold. In 2022, the number of people between 15
to 34 years of age grew to more than 87 million. That
represents at least 31 per cent of our total population,
and it brings a demographic bonus to our country
economically, socially and politically. We can see
how young people start to live in the financial sector.
Eighty percent of 8.3 million investors in Indonesia’s
capital markets are young people. In political sectors,
we continue to see an increase from time to time in
the participation of youth in the Parliament and within
the Government. That is why we understand the
importance of engaging and involving youth within the
United Nations. We therefore support the establishment
of a Youth Office in the United Nations.

A/76/PV.102

In that regard, Indonesia has been consistent in
advancing two points.
First, we must start by enhancing a youthful and
young-spirited United Nations. The Organization is
now facing many new and more complex challenges.
In order to face those new challenges, new, fresh and
energized perspectives are needed. We therefore need
a youthful United Nations, and changes need to start
from within.
It is critical to enhance the role and participation
of youth in developing ideas within the United Nations
system. That is why we have to pursue young and
age-balanced United Nations workforces in order to
lower the average working age in meaningful positions
within the United Nations. As a point of reflection,
we observed that the average age for P4-level officers
is around 47 years old, and the average age for P5level officers is around 50 years old. By comparison,
in many rising companies and institutions outside the
United Nations, the average age of people in strategic
positions ranges from 30 to 35 years old. In that regard,
we support the decision of the General Assembly to
include this element of an age-balanced workforce
in this consensus resolution and to highlight the
importance of geographical representation in pursuing
that balance.
Secondly, youth empowerment within the United
Nations system should never be a stand-alone and
exclusive agenda. Instead, it should be pursued with a
broader intergenerational perspective while ensuring
youth participation. The meaningful legacy from
generations past must not be ignored. At the same time,
inspiration coming from the younger generation must
never be neglected.
An
intergenerational
approach
to
youth
participation is therefore essential. That approach
can be built only through dialogue and deliberations
that involve multiple generations. With a view to
establishing the Youth Office, Indonesia emphasizes
the need to include efforts to enhance intergenerational
dialogue in its mandate.
Indonesia supports the development of modalities
on the establishment of the United Nations Youth
Office. We see that as one of the issues that unites us
rather than divides us. We hope that can be maintained
in the same spirit of multilateralism, constructive
engagement and collaboration. Let us collaborate in

22-5846619/31

A/76/PV.102

harmony in order to bring in the power of youth to the
United Nations.
As President Sukarno, Indonesia’s founding father
and the first President of the Republic of Indonesia,
stated:
“Bring me 1,000 men and I will move the mountain.
Bring me 10 young men and I will shake the world.”
Ms. Pichardo Urbina (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We echo the sincere condolences expressed
to the people of the United Kingdom upon the passing
of Queen Elizabeth II.
Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
With regard to the resolution adopted just now
by consensus on the Summit of the Future (resolution
76/307), Nicaragua wishes to state its position on the
negotiating process for this resolution on modalities.
We regret that non-inclusive working methods were
imposed and that there was a very short amount of
time to negotiate this important resolution, which
obviously requires many more consultations and
greater consensus.
We also regret that the considerations and positions
of all Member States were not taken into account. That
is particularly true of the recommendations made by
the Group of 77 and China. We reiterate that this is a
fundamental topic for developing countries, and the
process should be inclusive without leaving anyone
behind. We reaffirm that no process should replace or
undermine the mandates established by the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Sustainable Development Goals.
We hope that those errors will be corrected in the
next steps of these processes so that we can truly have a
Summit led by the Member States with a successful and
inclusive outcome that guarantees the well-being and
happiness of present and future generations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the explanation of position. We will now
hear statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Pieper (European Union): Before delivering
our prepared statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States, I would like to express
20/31

08/09/2022

our collective and sincere sadness over the passing of
Queen Elizabeth II. Our thoughts are with the royal
family, the United Kingdom Permanent Mission and
all those who mourn her in the United Kingdom, the
Commonwealth and worldwide. As President Charles
Michel wrote earlier today:
“[she] never failed to show us the importance of
lasting values in this modern world — values like
service, commitment and tradition.”
Now I will move to the resolutions adopted today.
I deliver this general statement in relation to both
resolutions under this agenda item, resolution 76/306,
on the establishment on the United Nations Youth
Office, and resolution 76/307, on the modalities for the
Summit of the Future. In the interest of time and in
view of the close interlinkage between the two items, I
will address both in one statement.
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, the
Republic of Moldova, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Georgia, Australia and Canada align themselves with
this statement.
With regard to the modalities of the Summit of
the Future, we welcome the consensual adoption
of resolution 76/307 and thank the Permanent
Representatives of New Zealand and Oman for their
tireless efforts to achieve such an outcome, which, we
agree, was no easy task. We joined the consensus on the
resolution as just now adopted, but it should come as no
surprise to hear us say that we would have appreciated
even more ambitious language.
The Summit of the Future is a key milestone of
the Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) process, which
we were looking forward to, and preparing for, in
September 2023, as proposed by the Secretary-General
in his report. We deeply regret that this ambition did not
find the support of everyone in the membership, despite
many across regional groups having spoken in favour.
Holding the Summit in 2023 would have paid
tribute to the urgency of agreeing a pact for the future
in response to the multiple burning issues that are
unfolding simultaneously across our planet — from the
ongoing global pandemic and the climate emergency to
ravaging conflicts, including the unprovoked Russian
aggression against Ukraine, which has triggered
a global humanitarian food and energy crisis of
massive proportions.
22-58466

08/09/2022

All of those crises require swift and common
responses. As the Permanent Representative of
Sri Lanka put it — far more eloquently than I can
now — during the first consultations on the Declaration
on Future Generations:
“If we do not act swiftly and decisively, there
will be no future to discuss anymore”.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is our common road map to address many of those
challenges collectively. The Sustainable Development
Goals Summit, in 2023, will take stock of progress on
its implementation. Holding a Summit of the Future
in 2023, during the same week, would have therefore
allowed us to demonstrate the complementarity between
those two summits, which the Secretary-General rightly
called “twin summits”, and to prove our determination
to live up to the expectations of future generations.
We regret that this opportunity has now been
pushed back to 2024. Nevertheless, we feel reassured
by many delegations that spoke out very vocally on the
need to maintain momentum on our common agenda
and in favour of preparing a Summit of the Future that
can be truly transformative in nature with a view to
preparing and agreeing an action-oriented outcome
document and to ensuring a process that is as inclusive
as possible, engaging all relevant stakeholders as
closely as possible throughout the preparatory process,
and the Summit itself.
When it comes to the substance, we welcome the
agreement to hold a preparatory ministerial meeting
during next year’s United Nations high-level week.
That meeting will be an important opportunity
for our principals to express their views on the
vision and ambition for the Summit of the Future
in 2024, an opportunity to take stock, reconfirm
our strong commitment and ambition and look
ahead. Such a meeting calls for thorough and wellstructured preparations.
We very much look forward to both the SecretaryGeneral’s guidance and the broad and inclusive
engagement with a wide array of stakeholders in the
upcoming seventy-seventh session and stand ready to
work constructively with all parties towards delivering
the ambition that the Secretary-General has called for
and that is needed to achieve the transformative change
that Our Common Agenda has set out to achieve.

A/76/PV.102

We welcome the strong language in the resolution
on the active participation of civil society and other
stakeholders, notably young people, and look forward
to their active participation in the months ahead.
More systematic and effective youth engagement
is a top priority and a clear deliverable of Our
Common Agenda, true to the notion of inclusive and
networked multilateralism.
The EU therefore welcomes the adoption of
resolution 76/306, on setting up a United Nations
Youth Office. We thank Guyana and Egypt, as well
as the Envoy on Youth, for their leadership and look
forward to the creation of a stand-alone, full-fledged
and properly staffed United Nations Youth Office that
will ensure close coordination on youth issues within
the United Nations system.
The new Office will have the crucial role of
promoting youth involvement and partnerships,
following a gender-responsive approach across all three
pillars of the United Nations and in humanitarian action.
We expect the Office to lead, promote and coordinate
efforts to advance the full realization of young persons’
human rights and opportunities.
The EU will engage constructively in the upcoming
discussions of the Fifth Committee, which will need to
ensure the sustainability of the initiative.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker under this item. May take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 124?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
(i) Approval of the appointment of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights
Note by the Secretary-General (A/76/939)
The Acting President: By its resolution 48/141, of
20 December 1993, the General Assembly decided to
create the post of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. In paragraph 2 of his note, the
Secretary-General, pursuant to the provisions of
resolution 48/141, proposes to appoint Volker Türk
of Austria as United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The effective date of the appointment
will be communicated to the Assembly at a later stage.

22-5846621/31

A/76/PV.102

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes
to approve the appointment by the Secretary-General
of Volker Türk of Austria as United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for a four-year term
of office?
It was so decided (decision 76/423).
Mrs. Arab Bafrani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
would like to extend our sincerest congratulations to
Mr. Volker Türk on his appointment to an extremely
demanding job. We wish him great success in his role
and his prospective work.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has always shown
its determination and willingness to contribute to
the promotion and protection of human rights while
remaining committed to cooperating with Member
States and the United Nations human rights mechanisms.
We have repeatedly rejected the manipulation of
human rights for political objectives and have instead
insisted on the imperative of the promotion and
protection of human rights in all countries through
constructive dialogue, engagement and cooperation.
We believe that the appointment of Special Rapporteurs
on the situation of human rights focused on specific
countries is a purely political process that does not lead
us to the promotion and protection of human rights.
We highlight that the new High Commissioner
should exercise all due diligence to bring balance and
a non-discriminatory approach in order to depoliticize
the situation of the Human Rights Council in Geneva.
Moreover, further consideration of human rights issues
should take into account the fundamental principles of
universality, transparency, impartiality, non-selectivity,
non-politicization and objectivity. We trust that
Mr. Volker Türk will properly address everything that
encompasses those important issues.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman): I would like to be very brief.
Oman welcomes the appointment of Mr. Volker Türk
to the position of United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
Mrs. Maille (Canada): I would like first to add my
voice to others in wishing sincere condolences to the
royal family on this sad day of the passing of Queen
Elizabeth II.
Canada warmly welcomes the appointment of the
new United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to this new role and looks forward to engaging
22/31

08/09/2022

with Mr. Türk on important and pressing human rights
issues brought before the Human Rights Council and
the world. We thank Ms. Bachelet once again for her
important contributions as the previous United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and, more
broadly, as a passionate human rights defender.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has taught
us that the world can change quickly. Existing
inequities can become exacerbated, particularly for
those experiencing vulnerability, and we are seeing
increasingly assertive authoritarian Governments
seeking to undermine universal human rights norms.
We are confident that the new High Commissioner,
through his Office, will meet those challenges.
The promotion of human rights is an integral
part of Canada’s history, policy and constructive
engagement in the world. We are a strong supporter and
funder of human rights defenders, and we look forward
to working together to better promote and protect their
work, particularly that of women, who are increasingly
under attack for raising their voices in the defence of
universal human rights.
In Canada, we strongly believe that openness to
ongoing reflection and constructive scrutiny not only
strengthens the society and institutions of each Member
State but also, more broadly, buttresses multilateralism,
which is essential to our collective efforts to address
the complex challenges of the twenty-first century.
We are strongly committed to constructive
engagement on human rights within a rules-based
multilateral system and to doing more both at home
and abroad. We look forward to working with the new
High Commissioner and his Office on following up on
the work of his predecessor, including the concerns and
recommendations of Ms. Bachelet as contained in her
last report, an assessment of human rights in Xinjiang.
We hold the independence and integrity of the
Office in its duties in high regard and stand ready for
ongoing collaboration in order to advance common
objectives and build a more effective, efficient, relevant
and accountable United Nations.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
joins the consensus of the General Assembly in
approving the Secretary-General’s appointment of
Under-Secretary-General Türk as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, in accordance
with resolution 48/141:
22-58466

08/09/2022

“The High Commissioner for Human Rights shall
be the United Nations official with principal
responsibility for United Nations human rights
activities under the direction and authority of the
Secretary-General; within the framework of the
overall competence, authority and decisions of
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Commission on Human Rights...”
(resolution 48/141, para. 4)
It is our hope that, once he assumes office,
Mr. Türk will lead the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in
the strict fulfilment of its mandate in line with the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council and commit to promoting dialogue
and cooperation on human rights. Propelled by a
few countries, there is currently a serious trend of
politicization, confrontation and division in the field
of human rights. A few countries, under the pretext of
defending human rights, arbitrarily interfere with other
countries’ internal affairs, a practice that the majority
of Member States categorically oppose. It is China’s
hope that Mr. Türk will lead the Office in strictly
abiding by the principles of objectivity, impartiality,
non-selectivity and non-politicization and commit to
promoting dialogue among Member States on an equal
footing — bridging differences, firmly opposing double
standards and rejecting the instrumentalization and
politicization of human rights for political purposes.
Human rights are universal, historical, specific
and real. For developing countries, especially the
least developed countries, their rights to life and
development are the most important human rights. We
hope that the OHCHR will promote all human rights in a
balanced manner, champion the reasonable aspirations
of developing countries, pay more attention to, and
invest more in, economic, social and cultural rights, as
well as the right to development, and assist developing
countries with human rights capacity-building, with the
consent of the countries concerned.
The OHCHR should always embrace diversity and
attract talents from all sources. Currently, there is a huge
imbalance in the personnel composition of the Office,
with developing countries vastly underrepresented,
which is deeply concerning to China and many
developing countries. We call for fundamental reform
to the OHCHR in order to ensure inclusiveness and
geographical equity.

A/76/PV.102

I would like to point out that just now the Canadian
representative, in her statement, mentioned the human
rights situation in China, which China firmly opposes
and categorically rejects.
Mr. Hilale (spoke in French) (Morocco): Like the
colleagues who have just spoken before me, I have
the pleasure to express our sincere congratulations to
Mr. Volker Türk on his unanimous appointment by the
General Assembly to occupy the post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
I would like to say here that, having known
Mr. Volker Türk, I can say that he is well acquainted
with the United Nations system. He is familiar with the
workings on the ground. He is a very sensitive person,
who is committed to impartiality and equal rights, but
also very committed to the promotion and protection
of human rights. His experience at the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees gives
him practically all of the skills and advantages that
he needs in order to succeed at the head of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights at a unique moment in international relations,
particularly following the coronavirus disease
pandemic — a time when human rights have been
violated or attacked and where a number of countries
did not keep their commitments when it comes to the
protection and promotion of human rights. It is time
for human rights issues to be restored to their pride of
place as a pillar of the United Nations system, alongside
development, security and peace in the world.
There can be no peace without respect for human
rights, just as there can be no development without
respect for human rights. Those three pillars must be
treated equally, and we have every confidence that
the Secretary-General’s choice is a good one. It is in
line with the current international circumstances and
satisfies the expectations of our respective countries for
human rights to be upheld all around the world.
I would like to assure Mr. Türk that the Kingdom
of Morocco will provide tireless support for his
work in Geneva and — just as it did for all of his
predecessors — will provide political, material and
financial support so that he can carry out his role in the
best possible conditions.
I would also like to take this opportunity to say that
while we have high expectations for countries when it
comes to respecting and protecting human rights, and
while we ask them to do a great deal, to do more and

22-5846623/31

A/76/PV.102

to lead by example, the fact is that here in the General
Assembly, especially the Fifth Committee, we forget that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights needs a budget and human resources
adequate to its work. It cannot function without financial
support and human resources and appropriate staffing.
Most importantly, as one speaker today pointed out, we
also need diversity and representativeness among the
senior officials of the United Nations.
Knowing Mr. Türk, I am sure that he will take the
task of strengthening the mechanisms of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to heart, as well as selecting and choosing
the best among the candidates proposed to assist and
support him in his mandate. I would once again like
to reiterate Morocco’s strong, constant and committed
support for Mr. Türk and thank the Secretary-General
for choosing him.
Ms. Carty (United States of America): I would
like to start by extending the United States’ deepest
condolences to the royal family and the people of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the Commonwealth of Nations on the passing of
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. The Queen lived an
extraordinary life dedicated to service. She was a dear
friend of the United States and will be sorely missed.
The United States welcomes the appointment
of Volker Türk as the next United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Mr. Türk’s
commitment to promoting and protecting human
rights around the world is already evident through his
distinguished career in the United Nations system,
including in his most recent role as Under-SecretaryGeneral for Policy, as well as his work on refugee and
humanitarian issues.
The role of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights is one of the most critical positions in the United
Nations system. The High Commissioner must serve
as an independent, impartial and unwavering voice
for human rights issues around the world. At a time
when civil and political rights are increasingly under
attack and the principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights are continually flouted, the High
Commissioner must be willing to call out human rights
violations and abuses wherever they occur. The High
Commissioner has a duty to reaffirm the universal
values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights through
24/31

08/09/2022

his work with the special procedures, treaty bodies and
the Universal Periodic Review, as well as civil society
and human rights defenders around the world.
We find ourselves in a time when human rights
violations continue to increase on a global level.
Mr. Türk has a challenging road ahead of him, but
he can count on the full support of the United States
as he undertakes the immensely important work of
safeguarding and defending human rights across
the globe.
Mr. Abdullah (Bangladesh): We would like to
join others in congratulating Mr. Volker Türk on his
appointment as the new High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We believe that his long experience in the United
Nations, particularly in the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, will add great value
to the work of his new Office. Under his leadership,
Bangladesh will remain fully committed to engaging
with the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms in
a spirit of constructive dialogue and cooperation. We
assure Mr. Türk of Bangladesh’s full support.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Forax (European Union): The European
Union (EU) and its member States warmly welcome
the appointment of Mr. Volker Türk as United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
we congratulate him. He can count on us to strongly
support his mandate and work. We call on all States
to respect the independence of the High Commissioner
and to cooperate with his Office.
The EU calls on all States to cooperate with and
grant the Office of the High Commissioner and the
human rights mechanisms access to their territories and
specific regions. All countries must uphold international
law and international human rights law, and we count
on the Office of the High Commissioner and the wider
United Nations system as a whole to guarantee the
protection and promotion of all human rights worldwide
and work relentlessly for accountability for violations
and abuses wherever they are committed. The report on
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) announced an update
to its human rights framework, which in addition to the
comprehensive implementation of the Call to Action for
Human Rights represents huge work ahead.
22-58466

08/09/2022

The EU supports the close involvement of civil
society, particularly human rights defenders, in the
work of the United Nations human rights system.
We strongly condemn acts of intimidation or reprisal
against those who have cooperated, cooperate or seek
to cooperate with the Office of the High Commissioner
and United Nations human rights mandate holders and
mechanisms. Those actions simply cannot be tolerated,
and we call on the new High Commissioner to actively
oppose them.
It is essential that Member States ensure that
budgetary support is commensurate with the high
expectations placed on the Office of the High
Commissioner and its capacities. The EU will continue
to actively pursue that objective. The EU and its
member States also continue to be the largest provider
of voluntary contributions to the Office of the High
Commissioner and will continue to strongly support its
work in order to enable and equip it to deal with the
many challenges it faces.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): First of all, let me
also express our deepest sympathies and condolences
on the passing of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Our
thoughts are with the delegation of the United Kingdom,
the royal family and the people of the United Kingdom.
Austria welcomes the General Assembly’s approval
by acclamation today of the appointment of the new
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Under-Secretary-General Volker Türk. In times of
increasing uncertainty, it remains a fundamental
principle of our rules-based order that every State has
to abide by its human rights obligations. The mandate
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights is
indispensable in that regard. The High Commissioner
reminds us as States Members of the United Nations of
our obligations and holds us to account. Austria strongly
supports that mandate and will continue to advocate
for full respect for the independence of the Office
of the High Commissioner and to urge all Member
States to cooperate with it and the special-procedures
mandate holders.
Let me underline that the mandate of the new
High Commissioner should start as soon as possible
to prevent a prolonged gap. There can be no break in
guaranteeing human rights for all. Finally, Austria
would like to congratulate Mr. Türk on his appointment
today and assure him of our continued support for his
mandate as High Commissioner for Human Rights.

A/76/PV.102

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the appointment of Mr. Volker
Türk as the new United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Switzerland underlines its full support
for the High Commissioner and will continue its close
cooperation with his Office. As the host country of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, it is a special honour for us to welcome
the new High Commissioner to Geneva. We look
forward to Mr. Türk’s contribution to strengthening
the three pillars of the United Nations and the links
between Geneva and New York.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventy-sixth session. In connection with the item, I
have been advised that the Permanent Mission of Kenya
requests its inclusion in the provisional agenda of the
Assembly at its seventy-seventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer the consideration of agenda item
14 and to include it in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-seventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/576).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 14?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021,
the Assembly decided to include this sub-item in the

22-5846625/31

A/76/PV.102

agenda of the seventy-sixth session. In connection
with the item, the President has received a letter dated
12 July 2022 from the Permanent Representatives of
Finland and Türkiye to the United Nations, requesting
its inclusion in the provisional agenda of the seventyseventh session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer the consideration of this sub-item
and to include it in the provisional agenda of its seventyseventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/577).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 35?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 41
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the
Assembly decided to include this item in its agenda
of the seventy-sixth session on the understanding that
there would be no consideration of this item by the
Assembly. In connection with the item, the President
has received a note verbale dated 13 April 2022 from
the Permanent Mission of the Comoros to the United
Nations requesting the inclusion of the item in the
provisional agenda of the seventy-seventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include this item in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-seventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/578).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 41?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine
Letter dated 4 August 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
26/31

08/09/2022

addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly (A/76/914)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-sixth session. In connection with the
item, a letter dated 4 August 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly has been issued as document
A/76/914, in which it is requested that the item be
included in the agenda of the Assembly at its seventyseventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include item 67 in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-seventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/579).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
delegations wishing to make statements of position on
decision 76/579.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to join in the condolences to the
people of the United Kingdom and the royal family on
the passing of Queen Elizabeth II.
The Russian Federation dissociates itself from the
consensus on the decision to include the agenda item
entitled “The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine” on the agenda of the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly. We regret
that the world’s most representative platform for
dialogue is once again being used for politicization
and to promote destructive approaches. Discussing
the situation in Ukraine in such a confrontational
manner is not conducive to finding real solutions to the
crisis, eradicating its causes and establishing peace in
the region.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): First of all, please allow
me to convey my heartfelt condolences to the people and
the Government of the United Kingdom and, of course,
the royal family, on the passing of Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II. It is a sad day for the entire world indeed.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the NordicBaltic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Latvia,
Lithuania, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Estonia.
There is no justification for the Russian Federation’s
ongoing war of aggression against Ukraine. The
22-58466

08/09/2022

bloodshed created by Russia at the very heart of Europe
is a major threat to international peace and security.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is therefore of
serious concern to every State in the United Nations
and must remain high on the agenda of the General
Assembly. We reiterate our strongest condemnation of
the cruel and reckless war that the Russian Federation
is waging on Ukraine, causing large-scale human
suffering and civilian casualties, including among
children. We also condemn Belarus for its involvement
in Russia’s aggression.
We once again reiterate our demand that the Russian
Federation stop this war against Ukraine, including all
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, and
call for Russia’s full respect for its obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. The
perpetrators of the war crimes — the Russian soldiers
who commit them as well as those who give them their
orders — will be held accountable. We would like to
point to the General Assembly’s conclusions that the
Russian Federation’s aggression against Ukraine is a
violation of international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations. We deplore the Russian Federation’s
failure to implement General Assembly resolutions ES11/1 and ES-11/2 of 2 and 24 March, respectively.
We reaffirm our unwavering support for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. We
demand that Russia immediately and unconditionally
withdraw all its troops from the territory of Ukraine
and implement the provisional measures ordered by the
International Court of Justice with immediate effect.
We fully support Ukraine in its request that the item
entitled “The situation in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine” be retained on the agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session.
Mr. Makarevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus expresses its deep condolences to
the people of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland on the passing of Queen Elizabeth II.
I would like to reiterate that Belarus opposes socalled country-specific decisions, including on the
issue under consideration, and would like to dissociate
itself from the consensus on decision 76/579, to include
agenda item 67 in the provisional agenda of the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly.

A/76/PV.102

Mr. Szczerski (Poland): It is now close to 200
days since Russia’s recent unprovoked and illegal act
of aggression against Ukraine. The full-scale war
Russia continues to wage is not the original conflict;
it has become a world war. Russia has not only
shown its true imperialistic face through its ongoing
killing, destruction and persecution inside Ukraine
but also continues to threaten the entire international
community with food, energy and humanitarian crises
resulting from the invasion.
The situation in Ukraine is deteriorating every day
as a result of the shelling of Ukrainian cities, towns and
villages by Russia’s troops. It is deteriorating because
of Russia’s weaponization of civilian nuclear-energy
installations and its forced deportations of Ukrainian
citizens to Russia. That is coupled with the ongoing
Kremlin-orchestrated disinformation campaign, a good
example of which we saw at today’s Security Council
meeting (see S/PV.9127).
The wolf in sheep’s clothing was once again trying
to turn things upside down. Let us not be fooled. Nearly
200 days ago, Russia invaded its neighbour using
military means. It is Russia and Russia alone that can
withdraw its troops from the internationally recognized
territory of Ukraine and stop the mayhem it has brought
on Ukraine, Europe and the whole world.
In the light of everything I have mentioned, Poland
fully supports decision 76/579, to include agenda item
67 in the provisional agenda of the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Inashvili (Georgia): Let me start by expressing
my delegation’s deepest condolences to the delegation
and the people of the United Kingdom on the passing of
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
I would like to few remarks in my national capacity.
Georgia supports Ukraine’s request to include
agenda item 67, entitled “The situation in the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine”, in the
provisional agenda of the seventy-seventh session
of the General Assembly. It is an item that not only
addresses the situation in one country but also directly
affects the maintenance of regional and international
peace and security. Maintaining close attention to the
situation in the temporarily occupied territories of

22-5846627/31

A/76/PV.102

Ukraine during the seventy-seventh session is therefore
of vital importance.
We reiterate our unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders and territorial
waters. We condemn in the strongest possible terms
Russia’s premeditated, unprovoked and unjustified fullscale invasion of Ukraine, which constitutes a grave
violation of international law and infringes upon the
fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, including
the principles of territorial integrity, the sovereign
equality of States, the non-use of force or threat of
use of force and the inviolability of internationally
recognized borders.

08/09/2022

of war crimes and other serious violations, as well as
the responsible Government officials and military
representatives, will be held accountable.
The EU and its member States reaffirm their
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders and extending to its territorial seas.
We reiterate our demand for the immediate cessation of
the military aggression against Ukraine by the Russian
Federation and the full, immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of its forces and military equipment from
Ukraine’s territory.

Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): First of all, in
my national capacity, before I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU), let me express my profound
sadness and most heartfelt condolences on the passing
of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.

In order for the General Assembly to be able to
continue following the situation in the temporarily
occupied territories of Ukraine in a comprehensive
manner, the member States of the European Union
therefore appreciate decision 76/579, to include the
item entitled “The situation in the occupied territories
of Ukraine” in the provisional agenda of the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly.

As to the matter at hand, I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area; as well as Georgia, Monaco and San
Marino, align themselves with this statement.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): The United
States supports decision 76/579, to include agenda item
67 in the provisional agenda of the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly, and it was good to
see that the decision was adopted without a vote. It
is entirely appropriate for the General Assembly to
continue its deliberations on Russia’s aggressive acts
against Ukraine, including its ongoing violations of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in the
Donbas and occupied Crimea.

It is essential for the General Assembly, as well
as the Security Council, to remain seized of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine. The EU reiterates its
strongest condemnation for Russia’s continued
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as its disregard of resolutions ES-11/1 and ES-11/2,
adopted in March by an overwhelming majority of
States Members of the United Nations. The EU recalls
previous General Assembly resolutions on the situation
in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine and
calls for their full implementation.

Mrs. Mudrenko (Ukraine): We join others in
expressing our sincere condolences on the passing of
Queen Elizabeth II.

We deplore Russia’s failure to comply with the
legally binding order of the International Court of Justice
to immediately cease its use of force against Ukraine,
and we call on the Russian Federation to comply with
its obligations under international law, including the
United Nations Charter, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The perpetrators
28/31

We would like to thank the General Assembly
for decision 76/579, to include the item entitled “The
situation in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine” in the provisional agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-seventh session.
Let me remind the Assembly that, just a few hours
after the consideration of that item on 23 February
in this Hall (see A/76/PV.58), the Russian Federation
cynically launched its unjustified and unprovoked
full-scale invasion of Ukraine. After the Security
Council failed to exercise its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
because of Russia’s misuse of the right of the veto (see
S/PV.8979), the issue of Russia’s aggression against
22-58466

08/09/2022

Ukraine was transmitted for the consideration of the
General Assembly.
On 2 March, by an overwhelming majority of
141 Member States, the General Assembly adopted
resolution ES-11/1, entitled “Aggression against
Ukraine”, which included very strong language, clear
definitions and qualifications of Russia’s actions
as aggression.
However, the Russian Federation continues its
complete disregard for the repeated requests and
demands of the General Assembly, the orders of the
International Court of Justice and its obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
in particular to immediately cease its armed aggression
against Ukraine and completely and unconditionally
withdraw all its military forces from the territory of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders
extending to its territorial waters.
For more than six months, Russia’s aggression has
resulted in enormous civilian casualties, the destruction
of vital civilian infrastructure, the displacement of
refugees and a humanitarian crisis on a scale not seen
in Europe since the Second World War. The war of
aggression against Ukraine has also posed serious risks
for global food and energy security and has exacerbated
global hunger. There is mass evidence and verified
facts, including from United Nations monitoring
mechanisms, of the heinous war crimes and crimes
against humanity that the Russian occupiers have
committed against the civilian population in Ukraine,
including in the occupied territories.
Russia’s recognition of the so-called independence
of the temporarily occupied parts of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine constitutes another blatant
violation of international law, including the United
Nations Charter, and aims to further undermine the
rules-based international order. Russia must be held
to account for all its violations of international law
in Ukraine, including its aggression in violation of
the Charter, as well as any violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
All perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against
humanity, genocide and crimes of aggression must
be brought to justice. Russia must bear the legal
consequences of all its violations, in particular through
internationally established mechanisms, including
by making reparations in relation to the damage, loss
or injury caused by its aggression against Ukraine.

A/76/PV.102

Everything that I have mentioned only increases
the need to use all the tools that are available to the
General Assembly.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
the explanatory memorandum submitted by Ukraine
(A/73/193, annex) that initially requested the inclusion
of the item in the General Assembly’s agenda at its
seventy-third session, which stipulated that,
“[c]lose attention to this issue with its consideration
by the General Assembly has to be consistently
maintained until the violations committed as a
result of foreign occupation of parts of the territory
of Ukraine are duly dealt with and the territorial
integrity of Ukraine is fully restored.”
My delegation therefore welcomes the consensus
decision of the General Assembly (decision 76/579)
to include the item “The situation in the temporary
occupied territories of Ukraine” in the provisional
agenda of its seventy-seventh session.
The Acting President: I would like to inform
everyone that it is 6.05 p.m. The interpreters have
kindly agreed to stay with us for another 10 minutes,
until 6.15 p.m., and I hope that we will be able to finish
our work by then. I would like to thank the interpreters
for their support for the work of the General Assembly.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to express our sincere
condolences to both the people of the United Kingdom
and the entire Commonwealth.
France fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I would like
to add a short statement in my national capacity
We regret that the Russian Federation continues
to disregard and violate the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, including
the decisions of the International Court of Justice. We
call on the Russian Federation to immediately leave the
illegally occupied territories in Ukraine and to respect
Ukraine’s sovereignty and independence. That is why
it is important and crucial that this issue continue to
be addressed in both the General Assembly and the
Security Council. We therefore welcome decision
76/579— which was adopted without a vote — to
include agenda item 67 in the provisional agenda of the
General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session.

22-5846629/31

A/76/PV.102

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 67?
It was so decided.

08/09/2022

The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 89

Agenda item 127

Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries

The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the
Assembly decided to include agenda item 89 in the
agenda of its seventy-sixth session. In connection with
the item, the President has received a letter dated 27 July
2022 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius
to the United Nations, requesting its inclusion in the
provisional agenda of the seventy-seventh session.
May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to defer the consideration of agenda
item 89 and include it in the provisional agenda of its
seventy-seventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/580).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 89?
It was so decided.

The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the
Assembly decided to include agenda item 127 in the
agenda of its seventy-sixth session.
In connection with the item, the President has
received a letter dated 7 September 2022 from the
Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations,
requesting its inclusion in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-seventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer the consideration of agenda item 127
and include it in the provisional agenda of its seventyseventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/582).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 156

Agenda item 121 (continued)

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations

The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021,
the Assembly decided to include agenda item156
in the agenda of its seventy-sixth session. It is my
understanding that it would be desirable to defer the
consideration of the item to the seventy-seventh session.

The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021,
the Assembly decided to include agenda item 121
in the agenda of its seventy-sixth session. It is my
understanding that it would be desirable to include
the item in the provisional agenda of the seventyseventh session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer the consideration of agenda item 121
and include it in the provisional agenda of its seventyseventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/581).
30/31

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer the consideration of agenda item 156
and include it in the provisional agenda of its seventyseventh session?
It was so decided (decision 76/583).
The Acting President: May I also take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 156?
22-58466

08/09/2022

It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should like to remind
delegations that the following agenda items remain
open for consideration during the seventy-sixth session
of the General Assembly: 9, 15, 16, 20, 20 (c), 20 (i), 21,
23, 23 (a), 25, 31, 33, 35, 35 (a), 37 to 40, 43 to 49, 72,
75, 75 (a) to (c), 78, 78 (a), 90, 109, 115, 116, 116 (g), 117,
117 (f), 117 (h), 118, 119, 122, 125, 131, 134 to 155, and
157 to 166.
As members are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly, with the
exception of agenda item 33, “Support by the United
Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote
and consolidate new or restored democracies”; agenda

A/76/PV.102

item 37, “Zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic”; sub-item (g) of agenda item 116, “Election of
members of the Permanent Forum of People of African
Descent”; agenda item 125, “United Nations reform:
measures and proposals”; and agenda item 149, “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
United Nations peacekeeping operations”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
9, 15, 16, 20, 21, 23, 25, 31, 33, 35, 37 to 40, 43 to 49,
72, 75, 78, 90, 109, 115, 116, 116 (g), 117, 118, 119, 122,
125, 131, 134 to 155, and 157 to 166 and their relevant
sub-items?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

22-5846631/31
