S/2020/891*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 September 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 8 September 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; and Mr. Saad Mohseni, Chief
Executive of MOBY Group, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives
of Belgium, the Dominican Republic, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in Afghanistan”
convened on Thursday, 3 September 2020.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Australia, the European Union, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the enclosed briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
President of the Security Council

*

Reissued for technical reasons 1 December 2020.

20-11710 (E) 110920 131020

*2011710*

S/2020/891

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Deborah Lyons
As I speak, Afghans representing the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan are
preparing to sit with representatives of the Taliban to discuss a political settlement
to the conflict. This is truly a historic moment. After four decades of war, the people
of Afghanistan have more reason than ever to hope that this devastating conflict may
come to an end.
This will be a long and challenging process. Already, the pre-talks phase has
raised difficult issues related to prisoner releases, which have taken some time to
resolve. Eventually, the negotiations will have to tackle a range of profound questions
about the kind of country Afghans want. These can be addressed only by Afghans
talking with other Afghans. Solutions cannot be found on the battlefield or imposed
from the outside.
At the same time, Afghans need and deserve our support to ensure that peace,
when it arrives, can be sustained. I would like to spend some time today updating
the Council on the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to prepare the ground for peace and the role of the international
community as the peace process unfolds.
Despite the air of cautious optimism, the level of violence on the battlefield
remains deeply worrying. The last few weeks have seen near-record numbers of
security incidents, including egregious attacks by spoilers targeting civilians
involved in the peace process.
We must keep in mind the terrible consequences of that violence. The conflict
continues to kill or injure hundreds of Afghans every week. It has displaced millions
of people, most of whom have no immediate prospect of returning to their homes.
It impedes humanitarian access, depriving many of life-saving assistance and
hindering the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. And,
as we look towards peace talks, it creates an atmosphere of mistrust that risks
derailing negotiations.
Let us recall what four decades of war have brought to Afghanistan. Despite
significant progress in the last two decades, Afghanistan remains one of the worst
places in the world to be a woman and one of the worst to be a child. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Afghans constitute
the largest protracted refugee population in Asia and the second-largest refugee
population in the world. After two decades of substantial financial assistance from
donors, millions of Afghans continue to live in conditions of extreme poverty. As
we congratulate Africa on the eradication of polio in Africa, we face a sobering
statistic: Afghanistan is now one of only two countries in the world where polio still
threatens the health of the population.
But it does not have to be this way. We continue to call on all parties to reduce
the level of violence. Along with many Afghans, we hope that one of the first items
on the agenda of intra-Afghan negotiations will be a humanitarian ceasefire. For
Afghanistan’s most vulnerable people, the stakes could not be higher. I urge all
Member States to amplify this call as negotiations begin.
The coming days will, hopefully, bring the formal launch of intra-Afghan
negotiations. We thank those Member States, including Qatar, the United States and
Pakistan, that have engaged in intensive diplomatic efforts to get us to this point. For
our part, the United Nations will be working with international partners to support
both parties and the host countries throughout the process. But a peace process, and
2/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

even a peace agreement, does not peace make. All of us must each do our part to
create a conducive environment for peace talks. In parallel, we must ensure that the
ground is prepared for peace to flourish once an agreement is reached.
One of the flagship issues for the United Nations will be the role of human rights
in achieving a sustainable peace. We know from long experience that peace processes
are more robust when they take into account the concerns of the victims of war. For
that reason, we have initiated a dialogue with the conflict parties on the inclusion of
victims’ voices in peace negotiations and on mechanisms for incorporating victimcentred justice. This is a difficult topic but an essential one. Only when victims’
grievances are acknowledged and addressed will true reconciliation be possible.
We have also spoken a great deal in this forum about the necessity of including
women in the process. Most recently, I was impressed by the strong declarations of
support for Afghan women by Member States during the Arria Formula meeting
in July.
But talking will not be enough. Women’s rights are already emerging
as one of the most difficult issues confronting the conflict parties as they enter
negotiations and one where any compromises could pose a difficult dilemma for
Member States. This issue will be more central in the Afghan peace process than in
any other peace negotiations in recent memory. In Kabul, I have initiated a series of
meetings with a countrywide network of Afghan women on the peace process, which
is giving us important insights into their concerns as well as possible avenues for
greater engagement.
But it is women’s representation at the peace table that offers the best
opportunity to ensure that their own rights are upheld and that their vision for a
peaceful Afghanistan is reflected. I commend the women members of the Islamic
Republic negotiating team and other peace structures for their energetic outreach and
substantive preparations for intra-Afghan talks. We are not aware of any women’s
representation on the Taliban side, but we remain hopeful that they, too, will find a
way of meaningfully including women in the negotiations.
Afghanistan’s vibrant media will also be crucial in fostering an inclusive and
sustainable peace. I pay tribute to Mr. Mohseni for his leadership on this issue and to
the many brave Afghan journalists who have taken considerable risks in the course
of their work. Next week I will be having the first of what I hope will be many
meetings with a consortium of national media to discuss how we can work, together
with civil society, to stimulate an active dialogue on what peace looks like for them.
Peace will truly take hold only if it delivers material benefits to the Afghan
people. This, too, will require substantial preparation by all parties: by the
Government of Afghanistan; by the countries of the region; and by the international
community. Alongside the Government, we have been working with the World
Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the private sector to identify the challenges
to economic development and the great economic dividends of peace.
Regional cooperation will be a vital element of this undertaking, both as a
contributor to and a beneficiary of peace. By deepening its regional relationships in
the areas of trade and transit, infrastructure connectivity, counter-narcotics, people
movements and knowledge transfer, Afghanistan can begin to realize its enormous
untapped potential and take full advantage of its strategic location at the heart
of Asia.
At the same time, a stable Afghanistan will bring about a more prosperous
neighbourhood. In the spirit of the Tashkent conference, the Mission has initiated
an ambassadors’ working group in Kabul bringing together the six countries
20-117103/34

S/2020/891

bordering Afghanistan to discuss concrete work in key thematic areas. I have been
gratified at the response from the six border countries — China, Iran, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan — and will continue to work with them,
the Government and the many United Nations agencies to realize the dividends for
all that peace in Afghanistan can bring. As this exercise develops, it will be linked
into other regional formats such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, among others.
For peace to take hold, Afghanistan will need strong, trusted public institutions.
I am pleased to note the Government’s announcement of the formation of its cabinet
as well as of appointments to the High Council for National Reconciliation. But
there is still much work to be done. The most recent UNAMA anti-corruption
report identified significant institutional gaps, which have stymied progress. We
are working with the Government, civil society and donors to encourage concrete
initiatives, including a comprehensive anti-corruption strategy and an independent
anti-corruption commission.
In the lead-up to the pledging conference in November, tackling corruption
is essential to building donors’ confidence. In preparation, we are working closely
with the conference co-Chairs, Afghanistan and Finland, as well as line ministries
and donors, to promote alignment between the Government’s priorities and the
expectations of the international community. This year we are facing the added
complication of the global fiscal crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
which will likely constrain the financial commitments of key donors. But we are
determined to help Afghanistan make the best case possible for ongoing donor
support. Just as peace can pave the way for development, continued international
support for development is needed to consolidate peace.
It is noteworthy that the pledging conference will be taking place in parallel
with intra-Afghan negotiations. Each process must reinforce the other. Combined,
the two will set the course for Afghanistan’s future. For that reason, we are engaging
regularly with the Taliban to ensure that it is well-informed about Afghanistan’s
obligations as a member of the global community, including through expanded
discussions on development and governance issues, as well as our ongoing human
rights dialogue.
This year, the COVID-19 pandemic has hit Afghanistan hard. More than
38,000 confirmed cases of COVID have been reported and more than 1,400 people
have lost their lives to this disease, although the actual figures are probably many
times higher. Millions of Afghans have suffered lost income and livelihoods.
Children have missed crucial months of schooling. Anecdotally — and, sadly, as is
the case in many countries around the world — women have suffered an increase in
gender-based violence. Rebuilding those lives will be a painstaking task.
I thank the members of the Council for their support for Afghanistan’s national
COVID-19 response and for the concern expressed by many of them for our staff
here on the ground. Fortunately, the situation seems to have stabilized since my most
recent briefing (S/2020/597, annex I), but the pandemic has affected our operations
dramatically, and we do not know what the autumn has in store.
Despite those challenges, it remains a privilege for us to execute the mandate
given to us by the Security Council in service of the people of Afghanistan. I am
confident that the next time we meet, we will discuss the progress that will have
been made in the intra-Afghan negotiations. The Council’s support and that of
Afghanistan’s neighbours and international donors will be essential for success. The
people of Afghanistan have heard Council members’ voices of support and appreciate
4/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

the ongoing commitment of the United Nations to their future. We stand ready to
assist them in any way we can.

20-117105/34

S/2020/891

Annex II
Statement by the Chief Executive of MOBY Group, Saad Mohseni
The Afghanistan to which I returned in 2002 was a radically different country
from the one I was forced to leave in the late 1970s. The Taliban and its predecessors
did everything they could to root out Afghanistan’s charm, possibility and progress.
It was no longer that proverbial Paris of Central Asia. In fact, it took only 20 years
of isolation to annihilate a century of modern statehood and 1,500 years of history.
But a lot has improved since 2002. Twenty years of State-building and help
from the international community has halved the rate of child mortality and boosted
literacy to almost 50 per cent of the population. Students now make up one-third of
the total population, and the country is better connected than ever; we have gone
from no media to more than 100 television outlets and hundreds of radio stations,
newspapers and online platforms.
Despite limited access to electricity, 95 per cent of the population regularly
watches TV, a medium that provides exposure beyond Afghanistan. There are
33 million mobile subscribers; that is up from zero in 2002. Furthermore, we have
12 million mobile data and internet subscribers — that is one-third of the population
with access to the Internet.
As I am in the media and news sector, I should like to highlight the vital work
that the international community has done in terms of rebuilding Afghanistan’s legal
infrastructure and its ongoing support of this sector. Today, the country has the
freest media from India to North Africa. It is not easy and it is certainly not safe, but
this has ensured that our journalists have the freedom to report with integrity.
My news organization, Tolo, alone has lost 11 staff, while the media family
has lost 132 journalists. Overall, there have been 1,600 violent incidents against
journalists and 30 news outlet attacks. The Taliban has claimed responsibility for
nearly every one of those attacks. The Government may not like what we have to say,
but at least we do not fear those types of reprisals.
The transformation of Afghanistan despite the many hurdles and challenges
has been extraordinary. With a clear majority of the country connected and plugged
in, half the population residing in our major cities and an economy that has grown
manifold, Afghanistan is on the upswing.
Of course, there are negatives. Opportunities have been squandered by both
the Afghans and the international community. Corruption is an issue at every level,
and the country remains in the middle of a deadly war.
And yet Afghanistan, with a median age of 18 — the youngest nation outside
of sub-Saharan Africa — remains hopeful. With its population set to grow to
100 million by 2060, Afghanistan will be the world’s sixteenth most populous nation.
So how can the Security Council help? The daunting task of fully reintegrating
the Taliban into the Afghan Republic will require the Council’s participation.
Collectively, the Council will maintain leverage as long as there is a unified
international position.
There needs to be a strong and consistent line on key issues. By way of example,
a total ceasefire was agreed to with international troops, while a mere reduction
in violence was good enough for the Afghans. This international position is not
coherent, which encourages the Taliban to make further demands, thus resulting in
an additional complication of the process and loss of life.

6/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

One condition of the Doha Agreement with the United States is for the Taliban
to distance itself from other terrorist organizations. Have they done so? How will
that be monitored and adhered to in future?
The world has to be careful not to embolden the Taliban through contradictory
statements and arrangements. With peace talks imminent, both the Taliban and
the Afghan Government will remain mindful of global opinion. The international
community’s positions must therefore be clear and unanimous.
That is particularly important when we consider the Constitution of the
Afghan Republic, which the Taliban want rewritten. This document was written in
the wake of Taliban human rights abuses and designed to safeguard against future
violations, with explicit protection for women and minorities. Protection of those
rights must be non-negotiable.
The international community still has enormous leverage in the aid it provides.
Going forward, that aid should be given on a strictly conditional basis.
Any compromise on progress made post-2001 will succeed only in
strengthening their position as a viable Islamic emirate as opposed to incorporating
them into the current system. What is certain is that the Afghans do not want to go
back. We cannot have another 20 years of isolation and misery.
Moreover, Afghanistan continues to remain vulnerable to regional politics.
Ensuring that our neighbours play ball should be a priority for the United Nations
and its members. The quiet, long-suffering majority of Afghanistan is emphatically
supportive of continued international involvement.
I would like to end with the findings of a survey by the Saltzman Institute of
War and Peace Studies of 8,000 individuals across the country, which confirmed
the following: 69 per cent of the population favours a republic, while only 7 per cent
favours an emirate; only 10 per cent support a religious leader to head Afghanistan;
35 per cent fear that a drawdown of international troops will bring more conflict; 42
per cent favoured a continued presence of those troops; almost 70 per cent have faith
in the Government; 65 per cent favour the disarming of the Taliban; and 95 per cent
favour the indictment and prosecution of war criminals and human rights abusers.
It is my hope and recommendation that the international community will
continue to remain involved, at least until this new generation of Afghans, which it
has invested so much in already, can find its feet.

20-117107/34

S/2020/891

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
We thank Her Excellency Rula Ghani, First Lady of Afghanistan, Her
Excellency Ms. Hasina Safi, Minister of Women’s Affairs of Afghanistan, Dr. Habiba
Sarābi, member of the negotiations team, Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Her Excellency Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qatar, for their statements. We have listened
closely to their recommendations and experiences, and I want to emphasize that they
can count on us to support their efforts.
In the past 20 years, Afghan society has made progress in realizing the rights
of women, as guaranteed by Afghanistan’s Constitution. I want to commend the
Afghan Government for its dedication and efforts. Women leaders are demonstrating
today, across all sectors of society, why a country should never exclude half of
its talent.
All eyes are currently focused on the intra-Afghan peace talks to be launched
in Doha. I reiterate the importance of the full and meaningful participation of
women of diverse and representative backgrounds in peace talks. The current female
participation should be scaled up and any future agreement must guarantee the
human rights of women and girls. We join the call of the vast majority of Afghans,
both men and women, who will not accept turning back the clock to darker times.
The level of violence in Afghanistan remains alarmingly high. We call on all
sides to immediately end this unacceptable suffering and stress the importance of
accountability. Sometimes women are specifically targeted, such as in the recent
atrocious attack on a maternity ward in Kabul, which the Council condemned in the
strongest terms. We also condemn violence against women-led non-governmental
organizations and women educators, health workers, journalists and human rights
defenders, including the killing of Fatima Khalil. Furthermore, we are concerned
about reports of an increase in domestic and gender-based violence as a result of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, and urge for the response and policies to be inclusive
and gender-sensitive.
The conflict in Afghanistan is the world’s deadliest for children. We are
deeply concerned about the scale and severity of grave violations of children’s rights
in Afghanistan. Protecting girls and boys should be at the centre of our work. We
urge all parties to swiftly implement the recommendations agreed by the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
From our side, we are supporting the implementation of the National Action
Plan on resolution 1325 (2000), together with UN-Women. We are also a proud
member of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan. The European Union
(EU) is working to prevent and end violence against women in Afghanistan through
the joint Spotlight Initiative with the United Nations.
As outlined in the latest EU Council Conclusions on Afghanistan, any
expected future support from Belgium or its EU partners will be conditional upon
their continued commitment to promoting and protecting the rights of women
and girls.
The promotion of women’s rights in Afghanistan falls squarely within the
mandate of the Council, which will soon renew the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We expect the promotion of women’s participation
and women’s rights to remain at the centre of its work.
8/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons for her comprehensive briefing
today. I would also like to thank Mr. Saad Mohseni for his excellent presentation
relating to media freedom in the country.
Let me start by presenting our condolences for the recent terrorist attack
perpetrated in a prison complex in Jalalabad on 2 August. Our thoughts are with the
families of the victims, as well as those affected by last week’s devastating floods in
north of the country.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the political agreement signed in May
between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah Abdullah, and we recognize the
efforts made to appoint the Cabinet. We believe that the formation of an inclusive
Government can stabilize the country, advance the peace process and strengthen the
response against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which remains challenging.
Likewise, the appointment of the members of the High Council for National
Reconciliation is a clear signal of positive steps that will lead the way to meaningful
peace negotiations. In such an arduous process, it is critical that constructive steps
continue to be taken.
This is a historic moment for Afghanistan. It is a first step in a long path
towards peace. In that sense, we are concerned that women’s hard-won gains could
be compromised, especially if a peace settlement is limited to the core security issues
of terrorism. The protection of women’s rights, child protection and addressing the
needs of young Afghans must be some of the main objectives of this process and any
future agreement.
We therefore encourage an inclusive Afghan-led process, with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women and youth in order to achieve a sustainable
solution that includes guarantees for the protection and promotion of fundamental
rights and freedom for all Afghans.
We are deeply concerned about the security situation in the country. Even
though the Eid Al-Fitr and Eid Al-Adha ceasefires offered some pause, the conflict
remains one of the deadliest in the world.
We deplore in the strongest terms the attacks against civilians, particularly
women, children, human rights defenders, media workers and civil society
activists. We call on all parties to cease such violence and immediately establish a
humanitarian ceasefire. We reiterate that all parties must respect their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law and take immediate measures
to prevent civilian casualties.
We recognize the progress made by the Government of Afghanistan on child
protection, including regarding the prevention of the recruitment and use of children,
in line with the action plan, through the Law on Protection of Child Rights.
However, Afghanistan continues to be the deadliest country for children.
There continue to be attacks on schools and hospitals, and increases in child
marriage and sexual and gender-based violence, exacerbated by social norms and
gender inequality. Since the COVID-19 outbreak, there has been an increase of more
than 100 per cent in the recruitment and abduction of children by armed forces and
armed groups.

20-117109/34

S/2020/891

We urge the parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligations under international
law and call on the Government of Afghanistan to swiftly pass the child protection
law through to the Parliament in order to prevent future violations against children.
We also call for the release of children detained for their actual or alleged association
with armed groups and for them to be treated as victims.
The country is facing harsh economic conditions during the COVID-19
pandemic. Afghanistan needs continued and reliable assistance to address their
humanitarian needs and the long-term social challenges they face. We commend the
close cooperation of the Government of Afghanistan with the United Nations and
other international agencies, and we urge all sides to continue to fully cooperate with
the United Nations agencies and other stakeholders.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic acknowledges the important role
that the United Nation Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is playing through its
outstanding contributions, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic.

10/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I would like to begin by thanking the briefers — Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mrs. Adela Raz, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and Mr. Saad Mohseni — whose presentations
reminded us of the attention we must pay to the freedom of the press and the safety
of journalists around the world, and especially in Afghanistan.
While inter-Afghan peace negotiations could begin soon, I would like to recall
that the peace process can only succeed in the long term if the democratic and human
rights gains of the last 20 years are preserved. We cannot accept a return to the
past. Human rights, the freedom of the press, the effective participation of women
in political life and consideration for the needs of the victims of the conflict are all
sine qua non conditions for lasting peace. The Afghan Government has committed
itself to the path of peace by taking confidence-building measures and appointing a
negotiating team.
It is up to the Taliban to respect the commitments they made under the
29 February 2020 agreement, notably by severing their ties with international
terrorist organizations, particularly Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. Reducing violence must be a priority if we are to create conditions
conducive to the launch of inter-Afghan negotiations. The conflict in Afghanistan
continues to claim the lives of too many civilians, particularly women and children.
The continuing spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic is greatly exacerbating
the humanitarian situation. Attacks on civilians and health infrastructure are
absolutely unacceptable. Every effort must be made to implement resolution 2532
(2020), with an immediate cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause. Respect
for international humanitarian law is, of course, an obligation for all parties. The
protection of civilians, women and children, including humanitarian and medical
personnel, must be a top priority.
Furthermore, the economic and social development of Afghanistan must
continue, with the help and support of the international community. In that regard,
I welcome the progress made in preparation for the donors conference, to be held
at the end of the year. However, I would like to recall that the European Union’s
support will be conditional on respect for key principles, in particular with regard
to democratic governance and respect for human rights. Afghanistan’s development
will be sustainable only if we continue the fight against the scourge of drugs while
we support the country’s economic and social development. As we all know, the
persistence of drug trafficking feeds terrorist groups and endangers the lives
of thousands of Afghans. The commitments made in the fight against drugs and
terrorism and in ensuring respect for fundamental rights must be kept. Afghanistan
will continue to be bound by the freely ratified international conventions, particularly
those relating to respect for human rights.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we must, more than ever, remain
united. The international community, in particular, must remain united to support
Afghanistan on its path towards peace, stability, democracy and economic and social
development. France will continue to stand by the Afghan people and fully support
the peace process. Finally, I would like to commend the essential role of the United
Nations and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, whose mandate
we are going to renew this month. I also thank Special Representative Deborah
Lyons, who has our full support.
20-1171011/34

S/2020/891

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
My first remark is on the recent outbreaks of violence we have seen in
Afghanistan. In March, the Secretary-General called for a global ceasefire. In
July, the Security Council did the same. We will have a discussion next week in the
Security Council on the follow-up. Violence in Afghanistan has once again claimed
numerous victims. The persistently high-level of attacks by the Taliban against
Afghan security forces, like the current escalation around Kunduz, is diametrically
opposed to the creation of an environment conducive for peace negotiations. Recent
targeted killings are especially heinous crimes that must stop immediately. Our
thoughts are with the families of the victims.
On the peace process, a negotiated and inclusive political settlement, owned
and led by the people of Afghanistan, including the women of Afghanistan, is vital.
All talks and negotiations need to build on what has already been achieved in the area
of human rights, including those of women, girls and minorities. We might witness
the start of intra-Afghan negotiations very soon. I listened very carefully to Ms.
Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
who informed us that we are speaking about days, not weeks. The Security Council
should welcome that. The international community must encourage both sides to
take constructive and confidence-building steps towards successful negotiations
and peace. Germany will continue to support that process in close cooperation with
its partners, including our co-penholder Indonesia, as well as Norway, Uzbekistan,
Qatar and the United States. We highly recommend that the United Nations play an
active role.
Let me say a word on UNAMA. We commend the important role that the
Mission plays in engaging with conflicting parties and supporting the preparation
of negotiations, but also in coordinating international assistance, particularly during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Council members should continue to
lend their support to this vital Mission. Germany and Indonesia have started engaging
with Council members to renew its mandate. I call upon all sides to approach the
negotiations with a spirit of cooperation. Let us build on the progress reached in the
most recent negotiations of September 2019. The United Nations needs to continue
to play an important role in Afghanistan. Protecting human rights, safeguarding
women’s and children’s rights and promoting sustainable development in Afghanistan
will remain important tasks for the United Nations and the international community.
That brings me to COVID-19 and the future role of international assistance.
We all know that the COVID19-crisis will continue to affect Afghanistan for years
to come. Beyond safety and security, Afghanistan needs continued and reliable
international assistance to address the immediate humanitarian needs and the longterm economic and social challenges ahead. The 2020 Afghanistan conference,
to be co-hosted by Finland and Afghanistan in Geneva, will be a gauge of future
support. Continued funding is vital if we want to minimize the risk of jeopardizing
the progress achieved over the past 19 years, which Mr. Saad Mohseni, Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer of MOBY Group, just recalled in such an inspiring way.
Such a commitment must be based on the joint understanding that Afghanistan will
continue on the path of reform and adhere to international human rights, especially
those of women, girls and minorities. I think it is politically important to bear that
in mind.

12/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

Let me finish by asking Mr. Mohseni a question. We appreciate the
Government’s commitment to reform the law regarding non-governmental
organizations. I would be interested to hear his assessment of the Government’s
attitude towards non-governmental organizations and the reform process. I would
also like to commend the people of Afghanistan for its progress on press freedom
in the country. Afghanistan performs quite well in press freedom indices. What
perspectives does he see in that regard, given the context of the peace process ahead?

20-1171013/34

S/2020/891

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, and Mr. Saad Mohseni, for their insightful briefings. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Adela Raz for her statement.
Germany, our co-penholder, has said a great deal, so I shall just add some points.
Although the present moment presents certain challenges, it also abounds
with the hopes of the Afghan people for a peaceful, united and prosperous homeland.
Despite years of conflict, terrorism, displacement, poverty, natural disasters and,
now, the coronavirus disease exacting a heavy toll, the people of Afghanistan have
been remarkably resilient. The potential commencement of the peace process is a
ray of hope — not only for the Afghan people, but for the world. The Council and
Afghanistan’s partners must also play their role effectively to help ensure that the
sacrifices of common Afghans are not in vain.
In response to the briefings, let me focus on three points.
First, we need to advance intra-Afghan negotiations. It is undeniable that the
world is now waiting for intra-Afghan negotiations to start. In our view, that would
be historic, as negotiations would finally open the door of opportunity for the parties
to discuss what a future stable and prosperous Afghanistan will look like.
It is very encouraging that all main Afghan parties have expressed their
willingness to engage in meaningful intra-Afghan negotiations.
Indonesia underlines that Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace negotiations
should commence without delay. It is crucial that the plurality of Afghan society,
including women and minorities, are reflected in those negotiations. Over the last
19 years, vibrant change has taken place in Afghanistan. Women and other groups
increasingly participate in public life. The gains in human rights must not be
reversed. As the peace process shapes up, the role of media, human rights defenders
and civil society will be extremely important.
Secondly, priority must be given to reducing violence and protecting civilians.
Despite the fact that the main parties have expressed support for intra-Afghan
negotiations, violence and civilian casualties remain very high. All sides must make
the protection of civilians their top priority. This is important for restoring the trust
of the Afghan people and for providing space for peace talks. Indonesia strongly
condemns all attacks against women and children, critical infrastructure such as
hospital and schools, and humanitarian and human rights workers, media and other
innocent parties. Perpetrators must be held accountable. We also call on parties to
abide by resolution 2532 (2020), which has called for a global ceasefire. Furthermore,
we are concerned by terrorist activities and narcotics cultivation. We support
increased cooperation among all relevant entities in order to combat terrorism and
narcotics, including through the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Thirdly, we stress the important role played by countries of the region and
the international community, including the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). As the road for reconstruction and post-conflict recovery
commences, sustainable economic growth is required for a stable and secure postconflict Afghanistan. Regional cooperation and international support will be crucial,
including from UNAMA.
For its part, Indonesia continues to support capacity-building programmes in
various fields, including women’s empowerment in Afghanistan. We will continue
14/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

with determination to assist the country, including in facilitating the peace process.
As a penholder in the Council — together with Germany — on Afghanistan, we will
also continue to garner effective support for the country, including with the timely
renewal of a high-quality UNAMA mandate.

20-1171015/34

S/2020/891

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: English and French]
First, I would like to thank Ms. Lyons for her briefing. The Niger recognizes
the good work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in promoting peace, governance and development for the benefit of all Afghans.
We are well aware of the importance of the coordination among all United Nations
entities and other humanitarian actors in maximizing the effectiveness of Ms. Lyons’
actions, especially in these times of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I would also like to express my appreciation to Mr. Mohseni for his presence and his
briefing today. He can be proud of his leadership in the promotion of a free press and
of women journalists.
As we have reiterated on many occasions, peace in Afghanistan can come
about only through a negotiated political solution. In the spirit of seeking peace
and stability as a priority, we welcome the latest measures taken by the Afghan
Government, including the release of 4,600 prisoners. We hope that all remaining
obstacles will be overcome and the way for intra-Afghan dialogue finally opened.
Similarly, my delegation would like to stress the need for a reduction in violence,
which would contribute positively to peacebuilding and reconciliation in the country.
As in any good, negotiated solution, the protection of the constitutional rights of
Afghan women throughout the peace process and the preservation of the gains of the
past two decades, including human and minority rights as enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution, must be protected and strengthened.
In closing, I would like to stress the importance of the international community’s
support for the Afghan people, including in development, the humanitarian sector and
in the fight against terrorism and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage
Afghanistan’s friends and donor countries to continue their much-needed support at
a crucial moment in the country’s history.

16/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
At the outset, let me extend our deepest condolences to our Afghan friends —
the people and the Government of Afghanistan — in the wake of the unprecedented
flash floods that affected nearly 3,000 families and took dozens of lives.
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Deborah
Lyons, for her observations on and assessments of the situation in Afghanistan. We
believe that UNAMA has an important role to play in coordinating the international
assistance pledged to the country. The Russian Federation supports the mandate
and activities of the Mission. We also thank the Head of the MOBY Group, Mr.
Saad Mohseni, for his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Adela Raz, for her statement.
We have carefully studied the recent report of the Secretary-General on
the activities and efforts of the United Nations in Afghanistan (S/2020/809). The
country is now at a critical juncture, and the long-held desire of its people to seize
the opportunity to achieve sustainable peace is evident. It is high time to focus all
efforts on promoting national reconciliation that will lead to the end of a protracted
war and the revival of a peaceful, united and independent Afghanistan that is free of
terrorism and drug crime.
Let me reaffirm once again Russia’s commitment to Afghanistan. We will
continue to support the inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. An
inclusive political settlement, which involves representatives of all parties, ethnic
and religious minorities, sociopolitical groups and women, is at the heart of our
efforts. As a friend and partner of Afghanistan, Russia has always stood and will
stand ready to facilitate negotiations. We wish to enable Afghan parties to find
an agreement that is acceptable to all and achieve a sustainable peace. This is the
goal of our efforts within the troika plus Pakistan and our own interaction with all
Afghan sides.
The swift start of intra-Afghan negotiations remains our highest priority.
We note the recent progress made in terms of the release of prisoners. We do hope
that all remaining hurdles will be removed in the coming days and that no further
delays of the prompt launch of inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations will take place.
Otherwise, this fragile peace process will simply be put in jeopardy. We strongly
believe that Security Council members should once again speak with one voice on
the importance of speeding up the start of the talks.
Against this backdrop, the security situation in Afghanistan remains volatile.
We are seriously concerned about the continued presence of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. Major acts of terrorism occur regularly
in various Afghan cities, including Kabul. This is clear evidence that ISIL is still
very strong in the northern and eastern parts of the country. It is too premature
to celebrate its defeat in the region: we are worried about ISIL’s sleeper cells in
north-eastern Afghanistan and the group’s diversifying methods and channels for
recruiting civilians to its ranks, especially Afghan youth. ISIL represents a real
threat to the security of Afghanistan and its neighbours, the rest of Central Asia
and Russia’s southern regions. We strongly believe that this problem should not be
underestimated.
Another challenge is the drug problem in Afghanistan, which is a threat that
remains of serious concern for the country as well as for the region and the world as a
20-1171017/34

S/2020/891

whole. Drug cultivation, production, trade and trafficking are sources of significant
financial support for terrorism. We are concerned about the delays in the submission
of the annual Afghanistan Opium Survey by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC). We do expect all the obstacles to be overcome. The problem
must be completely eradicated. We are ready to fulfil our obligations by assisting the
collective efforts against this threat, including through our active participation in the
UNODC, as well as the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. Russia continues to provide training for narcotics squads
from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the countries of Central Asia, as well as regular
assistance under the auspices of UNODC’s global Paris Pact initiative.
Afghanistan needs the full support and attention of the international
community, especially against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic. We truly
believe that actors from the region can and should play a substantive role in promoting
the peace process. Their cooperation and assistance are critical to Afghanistan’s
peace, stability and sustainable development.

18/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

Annex X
Statement by the Counsellor of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
the United Nations, Diani Jimesha Prince
At the outset, we thank the President of the Security Council for convening
today’s meeting and convey our appreciation to Ms. Deborah Lyons and Mr. Saad
Mohseni for their informative briefings.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to promote a durable political
settlement and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is currently at a critical juncture, as the volatile security and
political situations have been further compounded by the spread of the coronavirus
disease, natural disasters, food insecurity and other humanitarian concerns. More is
expected of the United Nations: in particular in terms of leading international efforts
towards a peaceful solution of the nearly two-decades-long conflict in the country
and of coordinating the provision of humanitarian assistance. We appeal to members
of the international donor community to renew their support for Afghanistan and
cooperate closely with the United Nations to ensure that the urgent humanitarian
needs are addressed.
We also emphasize the importance of regional consensus, which is imperative
for the success of intra-Afghan peace and reconciliation. As we look towards the
upcoming intra-Afghan negotiation, Afghanistan’s partners in the region should
engage constructively in support of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
We also call on partners in the region to strengthen relations and facilitate direct
peace talks with the Taliban.
In the area of security, the situation in Afghanistan remains unpredictable and
highly volatile. We strongly condemn all acts of violence and intimidation directed
against civilians, the Afghan National Security Forces, United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel, and other collateral targets. We reaffirm our serious concerns
at the number of civilian casualties reported by UNAMA in its midyear update on the
protection of civilians and reiterate our full support for a zero-tolerance approach to
addressing serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in
Afghanistan, especially against women and children. The rights of all Afghans must
be respected, in line with the Afghan Constitution and international law. Once more,
we echo the Secretary-General’s calls for a global ceasefire, which is an imperative
for successful intra-Afghan negotiations.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our strong commitment to UNAMA and the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.
We remain convinced that a durable political solution to the conflict can only be
achieved through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process that ensures the
full, equal and effective participation of women in decision-making processes at
all levels.

20-1171019/34

S/2020/891

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
I wish to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and Mr. Saad Mohseni, Chief Executive of the MOBY Group, for their
insightful briefings. We also welcome the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Raz, to the Security Council and thank her for her statement.
Let me take this opportunity to extend South Africa’s sincere condolences
to the people and the Government of Afghanistan following the loss of life from
the devastation brought about by intense flash flooding in recent weeks. Natural
disasters, such as those that have ravaged Afghanistan over the past few weeks,
continue to affect the humanitarian situation in the country, which is already of
concern owing to the continuing violence, high levels of food insecurity and the
additional strain caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In this regard, South Africa appreciates the measures taken by the Afghan
Government and UNAMA to limit and respond to the spread of the virus and calls
on the international community to continue its support for the Afghan people by
ensuring that the necessary equipment and medical supplies are available to all those
in need.
The only way to achieve long-term peace in Afghanistan is for an Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned peace process and inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations. In this regard,
South Africa welcomes President Ghani’s recent announcement of the members
of the High Council for National Reconciliation, led by Mr. Abdullah Abdullah.
Additionally, we urge the Afghan leadership to fully adhere to the provisions of
the political agreement signed in May 2020 and enhance their cooperation to fully
implement this agreement, including the appointment of Cabinet Ministers and the
filling of other Government positions. Accordingly, we express the hope that the
parties can build on these positive developments by giving renewed impetus to an
early start of intra-Afghan negotiations.
In this regard, it is essential to take on board the voices of all sectors of society,
and South Africa supports the necessary inclusion of women in the Afghan peace
negotiations. The unique views, perspectives and approaches of women are essential
to establishing a safe, secure and peaceful Afghanistan. We know that all women
involved at all levels of the peace process will continue to play an active role to this
end. This includes ensuring that the gains made in the past two decades in restoring
the fundamental human rights of women and girls are maintained and that greater
opportunities and achievements for all Afghan women and girls will be part of
their future.
In order for these peace talks to be effective, there must be a cessation
of hostilities so that an environment conducive to intra-Afghan peace talks is
created. We therefore call on all parties to cease their violent actions, particularly
as this violence affects the most vulnerable members of society, namely, women
and children.
Indeed, South Africa remains deeply concerned at the scale, severity and
recurrence of violations and abuses endured by children in Afghanistan. All those
responsible for conducting acts of grave violations against children must be brought
to justice and held accountable, including through timely, systematic, impartial and
independent investigations, and, as appropriate, prosecution and conviction.

20/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

In conclusion, allow me to extend my appreciation to the leadership, troops and
personnel of UNAMA, all of whom operate in a challenging environment. UNAMA’s
continued engagement with national, regional and international stakeholders, its
efforts find an end to the violence, its work in support of a ceasefire, its promotion of
intra-Afghan negotiations and its encouragement of confidence-building measures
are all necessary and significant components in bringing long-term peace, security
and prosperity to Afghanistan and the wider region.

20-1171021/34

S/2020/891

Annex XII
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
James Roscoe
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons for the
remarks. I commend you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to invite Mr.
Mohseni to brief us today and to offer a perspective of Afghanistan’s dynamic and,
as you heard, a vibrant civil society and media.
I was really struck by his vision of a peaceful Afghanistan where the Afghan
people can be free from war and are able to reach their full potential. I was also
struck by the polling that he set out for us that tells us what the people of Afghanistan
really want for their future. I think it is important that we in the Security Council
listen to and reflect on that.
I thought his vision clarified for us the objectives of the Afghan peace process,
which we are all eager to support. We — the Afghan people and the international
community — are not working towards an end to conflict alone, vital though
that is. We are working to ensure that Afghans of all ethnicities, tribes, sexes and
backgrounds can live in a country at peace where they can trust well-governed,
accountable institutions, where they can enjoy the full extent of their fundamental
human rights and where they can build their own future for themselves, for their
families and for their communities.
For that reason, it is essential that the upcoming intra-Afghan negotiations be
fully inclusive and lead to a long-lasting and sustainable peace. That means ensuring
effective and timely transitional justice for the victims of conflict and the protection
and advancement of rights, such as the freedom of expression, as Mr. Mohseni
highlighted today.
It also means that groups that suffered so much under Taliban rule must be
able to have confidence that their rights will be protected. That is why the United
Kingdom, as co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Women of Afghanistan, has made
the participation of women and girls in the peace process and the protection of their
rights such a priority here in New York, as well as in Afghanistan in the work of our
Embassy in Kabul. I take this opportunity to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lyons for her participation in the Arria Formula meeting on this
issue that we co-hosted with Afghanistan, Germany and Indonesia in July.
That is the vision, and today we are closer than ever before to achieving it.
We were glad to hear from Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons
that the intra-Afghan negotiations will start within days. Afghanistan and its people
potentially stand on the threshold of a new beginning. As Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Lyons said, we have more reason than ever to hope for an
end to conflict. But we also stand at the beginning of a process that will be long and
challenging. It will require the support of all of us.
We commend the Afghan Government for taking the bold steps to remove
obstacles that have allowed this moment to happen. We also commend the negotiating
team of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for its preparations, including
outreach to women’s groups and other civil society actors across the country. We
note the continuing efforts to form the Cabinet and the High Council for National
Reconciliation and hope both can be fully established and begin their work swiftly.

22/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

However, there are two sides to this negotiation. Let me emphasize that the
Taliban, too, must demonstrate that they are a credible partner for peace. That means
the following.
First, they must end the violence now. They cannot expect to be accepted back
into Afghan society when they continue to attack and harm Afghan men, women
and children.
Secondly, they must fulfil the commitment to countering terrorism
by completely breaking with all terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, and
condemning all acts of terrorism in Afghanistan, which continue to claim too many
innocent lives.
Thirdly, they must engage in good faith in the upcoming negotiations.
With regard to the roles of the United Kingdom and the international
community, for its part, the United Kingdom stands ready to provide its support at
any stage of the upcoming peace process. We also lend our full backing to the work
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons and the United Nations
in supporting the talks. As one of the largest donors in Afghanistan, the United
Kingdom is providing assistance via the United Nations Global Humanitarian
Response Plan for COVID-19 and, with our partners, we are planning how we
can support Afghanistan in mitigating both the immediate health impact and,
critically, as Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons said, the severe
socioeconomic effects.
We are also working closely with Finland, the United Nations and other
partners to prepare for the meetings later this year to secure Afghanistan’s immediate
financial stability and set out the future parameters of the international donor
communities’ medium-term support for Afghanistan.
Yesterday in London, the United Kingdom created the new Foreign,
Commonwealth & Development Office. We will continue to bring the best of our
diplomacy and development expertise to support the people of Afghanistan as they
stand at this crucial juncture. We join Mr. Mohseni and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lyons in their pragmatic and cautious optimism.

20-1171023/34

S/2020/891

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Special Representative Lyons for her briefing and for her leadership
in guiding the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in support of peace, human rights, women’s empowerment and economic
development in Afghanistan. I also thank Mr. Mohseni for the work that he has done
to promote freedom of expression in Afghanistan.
I would like to begin my remarks by commenting on the string of recent
targeted attacks in and around Kabul. Those attacks are reprehensible and must end
immediately. They erode the safety and security of Kabul’s residents and workers,
and they threaten the efforts of those working towards peace. For example, among
the individuals targeted and killed in recent weeks was Mr. Abdul Baqi Amin, a
scholar and an activist firmly committed to peace. The United States condemns that
and all acts of terrorism, and we offer our sincere condolences to his family, his
friends and everyone affected by those explosions and killings.
We urge all sides to move swiftly to deny spoilers the opportunity to shake
the faith of those demanding peace now, when Afghanistan is closer than ever
to advancing its peace process. President Ghani’s decree paving the way for the
Government’s release of members of the Taliban, following the brave decision of
the Loya Jirga, allows for the next steps of the peace process to occur and for intraAfghan negotiations to begin soon.
The United States is encouraged by the Afghan Government’s recent decision
to finalize the make-up of the High Council for Peace and National Reconciliation
and to fill the majority of its Cabinet positions. Delays in implementing the May
political agreement between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah threaten progress on
the peace process and governance reforms, as well as the Government’s response to
the coronavirus disease. An inclusive and unified Government is needed to serve the
interests of all Afghans at this critical moment.
Another necessary component of a prosperous and secure Afghanistan is the
meaningful participation of women in the peace process. Their essential role goes
beyond addressing the issues that uniquely affect them. Their participation is vital
to achieving economic progress and stability in Afghanistan, and that is why it is
critical that their rights be protected and advanced. The United States has spoken
clearly on what will happen if these rights are not maintained: No current, or future,
Afghan Government should count on international donor support if that Government
restricts or represses the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women
and girls.
I would like to pause for a moment to say something that I truly believe needs
to be said: It is utterly cruel and incomprehensible that we have to be excited about
something that should be a given. Why in the world have Afghanistan’s women been
so marginalized? It could be argued that, if women had participated fully in their
country’s development, Afghanistan would have not been held back for so long and
would not be facing such a difficult path today. Since when do women have to justify
their role in humankind? Do men negotiate their place? Women’s leadership in the
region is nothing new. Look at Indira Gandhi and Benazir Bhutto.
We have to be thankful for the progress that has been made, however much
more needs to be done. Women make up four out of 21 members of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan’s negotiating team, and we firmly believe that these women
must have the opportunity to be heard. That is why we are appalled at the recent
24/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

attempted assassination on the life of the negotiator Ms. Fawzia Koofi. We strongly
condemn this attack and hope that it will not deter Afghan women from continuing
to speak out courageously and with conviction about their country’s future.
Meanwhile, the Trump Administration continues to follow through on
its long-standing commitment to Afghanistan through the provision of critical
humanitarian aid, recognizing that Afghanistan’s humanitarian crises serve only
to compound one another. Since the beginning of fiscal year 2020 alone, the United
States has provided nearly $99 million in humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
In addition to the $99 million, the United States has provided more than $24 million
in humanitarian assistance and roughly $35 million in development assistance to
support the response to the coronavirus disease pandemic in Afghanistan.
I would like to take this moment to thank the men and women of our
military and humanitarian workers who have been killed or wounded trying to help
Afghanistan build a better future.
Finally, as members in the Council are aware, we are in the midst of negotiating
a new UNAMA mandate. As the intra-Afghanistan negotiation process begins, we
must ensure UNAMA’s mandate is especially clear and robust during this pivotal
moment in history. All of us must display discipline and the political will to focus
the mandate on the core issues that will support the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in achieving peace.
The United States seeks a sovereign, unified and democratic Afghanistan that
is at peace with itself and its neighbours. Let me again express my appreciation to the
United Nations and other international partners for their support in strengthening
Afghanistan’s democratic institutions and in support of the peace process.
Surrounding nations and neighbours also deserve credit for their constructive
role in supporting refugees and humanitarian assistance that has been instrumental
in so many Afghan lives. Together, we must all continue to support Afghanistan for
a better future for the Afghan people.

20-1171025/34

S/2020/891

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Australia to the
United Nations
Australia welcomes progress towards intra-Afghan negotiations, and it stands
ready to support where it can.
We appreciate progress made to appoint Cabinet members and delegates to the
High Peace Council and encourage all stakeholders to work together to finalize these
appointments through Parliament.
Afghanistan needs a strong, stable and unified Government to tackle the
challenges of peace, development and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Australia urges all parties to build on the momentum of the recent Eid al-Adha
and Eid al-Fitr ceasefires to reduce violence and begin to negotiate a comprehensive,
durable and resilient intra-Afghan peace agreement.
A significant barrier to peace is the ongoing high level of violence. We
strongly condemn all attacks on civilians, and we call for an end to targeting human
rights workers and peace negotiators. We condemn, in the strongest terms, the
attempted assassination of Fawzia Koofi, a member of the Afghan Government’s
negotiating team.
Australia encourages all parties to the intra-Afghan negotiations to be inclusive
and consultative towards a peaceful future. The rights of women and girls, and the
inclusion of youth, are fundamentally important to the success and sustainability
of Afghanistan’s peace process. We call on all parties to ensure that the voices of
women and girls are included in each part of the peace process, recognizing that
women’s participation is essential for Afghanistan’s future as a modern economy
integrated with the region and the wider world.
Afghanistan needs its women and youth to play an equal part in development,
building on gains, but also reaching new heights. A healthy, safe and educated society
needs women health workers, teachers and participants in economic life.
Australia expects continued progress on the hard-fought gains that have been
made over the past 19 years, including further progress on the rights of women
and girls.
Australia continues to be concerned about the impact of COVID-19 on the
people of Afghanistan. The scale of the crisis requires a robust response from all
parties to avoid a new wave of poverty and despair. Australia echoes calls by the
Afghan President, the Secretary-General and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Lyons for a humanitarian ceasefire as the best chance for Afghanistan to
combat this deadly epidemic.
There are 14 million Afghans in urgent need of humanitarian assistance —
almost 4 million close the famine level. We therefore encourage the international
community to respond to their needs. We have responded by pivoting our
development programme to assist, including support to humanitarian and healthcare interventions.
We would like to stress the importance of seizing the moment. Now is the time
for peace, and there is real hope for a lasting resolution that will consolidate, protect
and build upon the gains of the past 19 years in Afghanistan, especially for women
and girls.

26/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

We will continue to work closely with the Afghan Government, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, NATO and our fellow supporting
nations to help end the long-lasting despair and conflict within Afghanistan.

20-1171027/34

S/2020/891

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the European Free
Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic Area,
as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan free of terrorism is not only essential
for its own stability and development,but also for that of the entire region and beyond.
A negotiated political settlement leading to peace must result from an inclusive
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process. The peace process should be built
on the democratic and human rights achievements made by the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan since 2001.
The European Union (EU) and its member States urge the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban to seize the current historic opportunity for lasting
peace and genuine reconciliation and engage in intra-Afghan negotiations. This will
mark an important step towards the peace the people of Afghanistan deserve and have
long demanded. We call for the parties to accompany the start of the peace talks with
a ceasefire that would stop the unnecessary suffering and create the right conditions
for the negotiations to prosper. We also call on Afghanistan’s neighbours and regional
stakeholders to actively and honestly engage in promoting a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. We underline the need to safeguard women’s active participation in
the talks.
The political process should strengthen the independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity, constitutional order and national unity of Afghanistan. To this
end, the EU is working with all parties to ensure that peace negotiations are inclusive
and respectful of the wishes of Afghans to live in a peaceful, secure and prosperous
country, providing new opportunities for all of its citizens, where rights are upheld
and vulnerable groups protected.
The EU and its member States are ready to support the parties as they
embark on this peace process and wish to see the immediate start of intra-Afghan
negotiations that are truly representative, where the voices of all Afghans, including
persons belonging to minorities, are represented in a meaningful way. The EU
notes in particular Afghanistan’s commitment to enhancing women’s meaningful
participation in the peace process in its national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. The intra-Afghan
negotiations must lead to a fair democratic process, and therefore reinforce the
fundamental rights and freedoms of all Afghans.
The EU and its member States remain concerned at, and condemn the
unacceptable levels of, violence — including sexual and gender-based violence —
in Afghanistan, which have continued even after the Doha agreement. The EU’s
position remains clear and unchanged: Afghanistan needs a comprehensive ceasefire
to accompany the peace negotiations and create a conducive environment for
sustainable peace in the country as well as stability in the region. The EU and its
member States fully support recent Security Council resolutions and the SecretaryGeneral’s call, of 23 March, for a global ceasefire, which have so far gone unheeded.
The Afghan Government has so far proven its readiness to start the talks.
The Loya Jirga Assembly, composed of political leaders and elders in Afghanistan,
28/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

sent in its last recommendations a loud signal of peace, compromise and goodwill,
including by recommending the release of thousands of prisoners convicted of the
worst crimes. The Taliban must now demonstrate their willingness for peace, by
entering into negotiations through dialogue and accepting the genuine ceasefire the
people of Afghanistan deserve. Lasting peace cannot come at any cost and must not
be built on impunity.
The EU and its member States, together with the United Nations and the
international community, have demonstrated their commitment to remaining
engaged in supporting the process and ensuring the best conditions for achieving
a sustainable political settlement. We support NATO-led Resolute Support Mission
efforts to provide further training, advice and assistance to the Afghan security
forces and institutions.
The unanimous adoption by the Security Council, on 10 March, of resolution
2513 (2020), which the EU fully supports, goes in that direction. The message
sent by the Security Council was clear: the international community is ready to
constructively support the start of intra-Afghan negotiations towards a lasting peace
in Afghanistan, but commitments have to be met and sanctions will not automatically
be softened or lifted only in correlation to their genuine commitment to peace.
The EU’s sustained support for peace and development in Afghanistan will
not be unconditional but assessed against political progress and the commitment of
the parties to the conflict to a meaningful peace process. The European contribution
will be rooted in our transparent, democratic values-based and principled approach,
including safeguarding the human rights and fundamental liberties of all Afghans,
including women, youth, minority groups, as well as victims of war, which must be
preserved and further promoted.
The EU also expects strong structural reforms to be carried out, especially
to reinforce the rule of law, promote good governance and better fight corruption,
illegal immigration and drug-trafficking, as well as further enhancing cooperation
regarding readmission. Financial support remains above all a political commitment.
We recall that the EU, together with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and international partners, has been mobilizing significant
resources to support the Government in its fight against corruption. Assuring donors
that funds are being used efficiently and appropriately is an essential step. To see
reforms fade or fail now would also mean a loss of these investments and a loss of
Afghanistan’s credibility. International partners will therefore carefully follow the
progress made. At this point, a strong and positive signal is needed.
Looking ahead, the upcoming November 2020 Afghanistan conference in
Geneva will be an important opportunity for the international community to confirm
its continued commitment, including financially, to a peaceful, prosperous and selfreliant Afghanistan. Afghanistan is at a major crossroads and needs support from
us all now more than ever. The EU reiterates its full support to the Government of
Afghanistan, Finland and the United Nations in organizing that conference.
The spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic in the country and the lack of
a health care system is also a matter of serious concern.
Finally, the EU recalls the strong and crucial role played by UNAMA and all
United Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people, encouraging peace and
reconciliation, monitoring and promoting human rights, as well as implementing
the commitments from the 2018 November ministerial conference on Afghanistan.
The EU will continue to fully support UNAMA and cooperate closely with it on the
ground and in all related international formats for the ultimate benefit of Afghanistan.

20-1171029/34

S/2020/891

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
The people of Afghanistan are currently passing through a crucial stage in
their decades-long struggle to overcome insecurity and instability and achieve their
long-awaited aspiration: genuine and durable peace in their country. To that end, the
swift commencement of the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process involving
all Afghan factions, including the Taliban and other political, ethnic and religious
groups and minorities, enjoys strong national, regional and international support.
The process, in addition to preserving Afghanistan’s past achievements,
particularly its Constitution and political system, as well as ensuring the rights of
women and all ethnic and religious minorities, must also aim at establishing solid
foundations for comprehensive and lasting peace and sustainable socioeconomic
development in the country.
Genuine and durable peace cannot be dictated or imposed. The right to decide
about Afghanistan’s future belongs exclusively to Afghans themselves. This must
be recognized and respected by all. Accordingly, the international community,
including the key regional and international players, while avoiding interference
in the internal affairs of Afghanistan, must encourage, facilitate and support its
people’s efforts to determine their own future. At the same time, addressing the
legitimate interests of Afghanistan’s neighbours will ensure regional support for the
establishment of an enduring peace in that country.
The Government’s efforts, such as the formation of the High Council for
National Reconciliation and the peace negotiating delegation, as well as the recent
decisions of the Consultative Peace Jirga, indicate its seriousness about peace.
To ensure the success of the peace process, certain additional measures need to
be taken, the most important of which is agreeing on a ceasefire, which can promote
trust and confidence among conflicting parties. This, however, must not include
combating the activities of terrorist groups, particularly Da’esh, whose terrorist acts
are on the increase, endangering peace and security in Afghanistan and the entire
region, including through the expansion of its operations into Central Asia. Taking
effective measures to contain the coronavirus disease pandemic is another important
step towards the establishment of peace in Afghanistan.
As a prerequisite for sustained socioeconomic development and stability in
Afghanistan, we reiterate our strong call for a time-bound and responsible withdrawal
of all foreign forces from that country, regardless of their mandate and structure. We
also underline the high importance of supporting and strengthening Afghanistan’s
National Defence and Security Forces.
Following our intensive efforts aimed at bringing the two sides within the
Government together, which facilitated the conclusion of a political agreement on
the formation of the Cabinet of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran has also
conducted extensive consultations with Afghan leaders and regional and international
players to facilitate the peace talks, and stands ready to host the talks if the parties
so desire.
In addition, as peace cannot be achieved and sustained in the absence of
socioeconomic development, Iran, in parallel with its diplomatic efforts in support
of peace, has continued its cooperation with the Government of Afghanistan in
areas such as trade, transportation and health, which include projects concerning
the development of Chabahar port, to be utilized by the Government of Afghanistan
30/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

for import and export, and the construction of roads and railroads to facilitate
Afghanistan’s access Afghanistan to the high seas and Central Asian countries.
While we spare no effort to promote our economic relations with Afghanistan,
the inhumane sanctions of the United States against Iran have negatively affected the
benefits that such efforts can bring for both Iran and Afghanistan.
Finally, Iran stands ready to support the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Iran reaffirms once again its resolve to support
the fraternal people and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

20-1171031/34

S/2020/891

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I thank you, Sir, for convening this open video-teleconference on Afghanistan.
I also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Deborah Lyons for
her briefing and her tireless efforts to lead the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the challenging environment caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
At the outset, let me express my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families
of those who lost their lives due to the damage caused by heavy rains and flash
floods in eastern Afghanistan last week. I express my sincere wishes for the early
recovery of the afflicted areas.
Achieving sustainable peace in Afghanistan is of paramount importance
not only for the people of Afghanistan but also for the stability of the region and
the whole world. Japan supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
and appreciates the continued efforts of the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan and its partners to commence an intra-Afghan negotiation. We hear
reports that the start of the negotiation is imminent, and hope that it will begin at
the earliest possible time and that, once started, it will produce a concrete outcome
in achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan. We welcome, in this respect,
the announcement of the full cabinet nominations by the Afghan Government
earlier this week. Japan stands ready to play a constructive role in creating an
environment conducive to moving the peace process forward, in partnership with the
international community.
As we await further progress in the peace process, we continue to see the
unbearable human toll of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan. We are deeply
concerned about unabated violence in certain parts of the country. Japan reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, which has been
supported by the statement issued on behalf of around 170 Member States and by
Security Council resolution 2532 (2020), and hopes that this call will be observed by
all parties in Afghanistan.
Sustainable peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only through the efforts of
the Government and the people of Afghanistan towards self-reliance, in partnership
with members of the regional and international communities. Japan commends the
initiative of the Governments of Afghanistan and Finland, as well as the United
Nations, to review the progress made under the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework and to prepare for the upcoming pledging conference in November.
As Afghanistan’s long-standing partner, Japan continues to be fully committed
to supporting its reconstruction and nation-building efforts. As a sign of this
commitment, this year Japan has already provided around $110 million, including to
assist the nationwide response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key areas that necessitate international support are health, education and
infrastructure, as well as security service delivery. Vulnerable populations, such as
returnees and internally displaced persons, as well as women and children, have to
be protected and empowered. More needs to be done in the field of human resource
development and institution-building to realize good governance, the rule of law and
the fight against corruption. They are the prerequisites for ensuring human security,
constructing resilient societies and achieving self-reliance.
In concluding my remarks, I reiterate Japan’s commitment to continued
support for peace and development in Afghanistan.
32/34

20-11710

S/2020/891

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Hadi Sinirlioğlu
I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons
and Mr. Saad Mohseni for their briefings, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Raz, for her statement. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2020/809).
The volatile security situation in Afghanistan remains alarming. The
continuing violence has devastating repercussions for all Afghans, in particular for
vulnerable groups, which have already suffered immensely for decades.
The Secretary-General reports that the security situation in the country puts
the lives of children at risk more than those of any other group. The United Nations
verified more than 600 child casualties during the second quarter of 2020 alone. The
conflict also continues to take a heavy toll on women and girls.
The deliberate targeting of civilians and humanitarian workers is a stark
reminder that those who wish to derail the peace process have no scruples about
violating even the most fundamental human values. We strongly condemn these
attacks and reaffirm our full support for Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has increased the vulnerability of the
civilian population by deepening poverty and reducing access to essential services.
The provision of sustained health services to those in need remains all the more
critical, which requires collective effort and cooperation by the Afghan Government
and the international community.
The spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Afghanistan serves to further
underscore the urgency of reducing violence in the country. An effective fight against
the pandemic and the stability of Afghanistan will depend on improved security.
In the face of such enormous challenges, Afghanistan needs the international
community’s support more than ever.
With this understanding, Turkey has delivered health-care assistance to
Afghanistan as a solid display of its solidarity with the Afghan people and as another
reflection of the deep-rooted relations between Turkey and Afghanistan, on the eve
of their 100th anniversary next year.
There is now a historic chance for peace in Afghanistan. The Afghan people
urgently need a sustainable peace, and the opportunity presented by the current
momentum must be seized. At this critical juncture, unity has become even more
essential within Afghan political groups in order to master the challenging tasks
ahead for the future of Afghanistan. We stress the importance of an inclusive,
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
We welcomed and supported the United States-Taliban agreement of 29
February, with a view to paving the way for the intra-Afghan negotiations aimed at
achieving a just and lasting peace in the country. Peace should be built on the gains
of the past 19 years. We should preserve and strengthen respect for fundamental
rights. All our efforts towards the empowerment of women and girls should not
be wasted.
We fully embrace the international community’s call for an immediate
humanitarian ceasefire, which is essential to creating a conducive environment for
the peace talks.

20-1171033/34

S/2020/891

Regional consensus is a must for an enduring peace. At the same time, we see
a proliferation of initiatives and formats seeking to ensure regional and international
support for an eventual peace. Existing platforms that enjoy a vast membership and
great expertise, such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, can be utilized as an
umbrella platform at this critical time, as well as to assist post-peace stabilization
efforts. Let me emphasize Turkey’s readiness to contribute to peace efforts in its
national capacity or through regional processes.
In the run-up to the Geneva conference, we expect that donors will also consider
the increasing needs on the ground in the face of the pandemic. For the years 2018
to 2020, Turkey has pledged $150 million for Afghanistan’s development. From 2018
to date, we have conducted almost 300 projects throughout the country, focusing
primarily on education, health, good governance, capacity-building and agriculture.
We will continue to play our part in helping the Afghan people, particularly in terms
of capacity-building, education for girls and developing health infrastructure.
Let me also emphasize our strong support for the central role assumed by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in assisting the
Afghan people in various fields. We hope that the negotiations regarding the renewal
of its mandate will be finalized successfully so as to enable UNAMA to continue
with its critical activities.
Finally, Turkey reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. We remain
committed to Afghanistan’s development on all fronts, and we will continue to
support the Afghan people’s aspirations to a peaceful, secure and stable future.

34/34

20-11710
