A

UNITED

NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/P.ES/47/150
31 March 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 78 (Q)
P.ESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the Second Committee (A/47/718/Add.3))
47/150.

Strengthening the United Nations response to world
food and hunger problems

The General Assembly,
Takina note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1992/32 of 30 July
1992, and the decisions of the World Food Council at its eighteenth
session,!/
Taking note also of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Review of
the world Food Council, 1/
Deeply concerned about the gravity of the world food security situation,
in particular the worsening problems of hunger and malnutrition,
Stressing the urgent need for a more effective and better coordinated
United Nations response to world food and hunger problems,
Underscoring the increasing importance of intergovernmental policy
guidance in this field,
Noting with concern that, despite its efforts, the World Food Council,
by its own acknowledgement, has not been able to achieve political leadership
and coordination to the extent expected by its founders,

!/
Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 19 (A/47/19), part one.

1/

A/47/19/Add.l.

I • ••
93-18616

A/RJ!.S/47/150
Page 2

1.
Affirms the critical importance of establishing the most effective
arrangements for the management and coordination of the United Nations
response to world food and hunger problems;
2.
Underlines the need to consider the role of the World Food Council
and how its mandate and functions might best be ~arried out within the wider
context of the overall restructuring of the social and economic activities of
the United Nations system;
3.
Decides to address these issues in the context of the discussions
on restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic,
social and related fields at the resumed forty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, and, in this context, invites the World Food council to continue its
attempts to agree on appropriate measures to be taken and to communicate any
agreed conclusions to the Assembly.

92" d plenary meeting
18 December 1992
