S/2003/695

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 July 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 8 July 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In my letter of 28 June 2003 (S/2003/678), I brought to the attention of the
members of the Security Council the grave situation prevailing in Liberia, which
threatened the lives of the civilian population and the stability of Liberia and the
countries of the subregion. I appealed to the Council to take urgent action to
authorize the deployment to Liberia of a highly trained and well-equipped
multinational force with the primary objective of preventing a major humanitarian
tragedy in Liberia.
The members of the Council are aware of the rapidly unfolding political
situation in Liberia. In the light of these developments, I should like to bring to the
attention of the Council a number of urgent initiatives that I have taken. I have
decided to appoint Mr. Jacques Klein (United States of America) as my Special
Representative for Liberia to lead and coordinate the activities of the United Nations
in that country. In anticipation of the early deployment of the multinational force and
consequent improvement in the security situation in the country, I have instructed my
Special Representative to expedite the return of all United Nations agencies
providing humanitarian assistance to the people of Liberia. Prior to his arrival in
Liberia, my Special Representative will assist in coordinating, at Headquarters, the
work of various departments and agencies in their tasks related to Liberia.
Furthermore, and with a view to assisting in advancing developments on the
political front, I have dispatched Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, Special
Representative for West Africa, to Accra. He will provide full United Nations support,
in cooperation with ECOWAS, to the ongoing dialogue among the Liberian parties,
chaired by the former Nigerian Head of State, General Abdulsalam Abubakar. I have
also requested my Representative in Liberia, Mr. Abou Moussa, and the Resident
Coordinator, Mr. Marc de Bernis, who were recently evacuated along with other
United Nations personnel, to return immediately to Monrovia and assist in the
preparations for the return to Liberia of United Nations and associated personnel.
It is my fervent hope that a successful conclusion of the Accra talks and the
recent visit of President Obasanjo to Monrovia will lead to the early establishment
of transitional arrangements in Liberia.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-42449 (E)

100703

*
0
3
4
2
4
4
9
*
