A/RES/74/210

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2020

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 19
Sustainable development

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 19 December 2019
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/74/381)]

74/210.

Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone
management for achieving sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1 Agenda 21, 2
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the Johannesburg
Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation) 5
and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, entitled “The future we want”, 6 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of
the International Conference on Financing for Development 7 and the Doha
Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow -up
International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation
of the Monterrey Consensus, 8

__________________

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Resolution 66/288, annex.
7
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18−22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1,
annex.
8
Resolution 63/239, annex.
1

19-22423 (E)

140120

*1922423*

Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone
management for achieving sustainable development

A/RES/74/210

Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 9 which
provides the legal framework for ocean activities, and emphasizing its fundamental
character, conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need
to be considered as a whole through an integrated, interdisciplinary and intersectoral
approach,
Recalling the ecosystem approach advocated in the Convention on Biological
Diversity, 10 which is described as a strategy for the integrated management of land,
water and living resources that promotes conservation and sustainable use in an
equitable way,
Reaffirming the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want” and, inter alia, the
commitments concerning the coastal and marine environment contained therein,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ”, in which
it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its c ommitment to
working tirelessly for the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition
that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty,
is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for su stainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three
dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated
manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development
Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming further its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports
and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to
address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels
for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Reaffirming the Paris Agreement 11 and its early entry into force, encouraging all
its parties to fully implement the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change 12 that have not yet done so to deposit their
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as
soon as possible,
Noting with concern the findings contained in the special reports of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C and
The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate,
Recalling the importance of strengthening the sustainable management and
protection of the marine and coastal ecosystems, of restoring, where necessary, the
resilience of coastal ecosystems to avoid adverse impacts and of achieving healthy
and productive oceans,
Recalling also the commitments contained in Agenda 21, including those related
to the integrated management and sustainable development of coastal areas, while
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1833, No. 31363.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
11
Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
9

10

2/5

19-22423

Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone
management for achieving sustainable development

A/RES/74/210

noting that integrated coastal management under national jurisdiction has been widely
recognized since then, which offers the opportunity to strengthen i nternational
cooperation in this field,
Stressing the importance of the priorities outlined in the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 13 in particular with regard to building resilience
and reducing disaster risk in coastal management,
Noting that coastal hazards preparedness, responses and recovery are important
components of integrated coastal zone management,
Recognizing the work on integrated coastal zone management conducted by the
United Nations Environment Programme and the regional seas conventions and action
plans,
Recalling resolutions related to integrated coastal zone management adopted by
the United Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations Environment
Programme, including resolution 2/10 on oceans and seas 14 and resolution 4/11 on the
protection of the marine environment from land-based activities, 15
Noting that area-based management approaches, including integrated coastal
zone management, are used to deliver a range of polices that align with the
Sustainable Development Goals and associated targets and that can include societal
engagement, conservation, the sustainable management of natural resources, food
security and climate change adaptation,
Recognizing the contribution of the integrated coastal zone manageme nt
approach in the promotion of sustainable development in various areas, including
sustainable tourism,
Recognizing also that integrated coastal zone management can contribute to
poverty eradication,
Noting that coastal and marine resources contribute significantly to the economy
and that maintaining a high-quality coastal and marine environment provides
ecosystem functions and services in support of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and, in particular, Sustainable Development Goal 14,
Noting also various initiatives to address threats and problems in coastal and
marine areas that originate from land-based activities and may have a negative impact
on coastal and marine ecosystems,
Recognizing the efforts and actions that Member States, together with other
stakeholders, are undertaking to address the threats and problems for coastal and
marine areas originating from land-based activities,
1.
Emphasizes that the use and implementation of the integrated coastal zone
management approach and other area-based management approaches can contribute
significantly towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and
their targets; 16
2.
Also emphasizes that coastal areas are an essential ecological and
economic resource and that their management and planning from a sustainable
development perspective need an integrated management approach;
__________________

Resolution 69/283, annex II.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 25
(A/71/25), annex.
15
UNEP/EA.4/Res.11.
16
See resolution 70/1.
13
14

19-22423

3/5

A/RES/74/210

Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone
management for achieving sustainable development

3.
Underlines that integrated coastal zone management is a dyna mic process
for the sustainable management and use of coastal zones, taking into account at the
same time the fragility of coastal ecosystems and landscapes, the diversity of
activities and uses, their interactions, the maritime orientation of certain acti vities and
uses and their impact on both the marine and land parts;
4.
Encourages Member States to consider the definition and implementation
of an integrated coastal zone management approach, including through appropriate
national planning tools and an ecosystem approach that integrates land, sea and
watershed areas;
5.
Also encourages Member States to consider strengthening, or where
applicable establishing, coordinating mechanisms for the integrated management and
sustainable development of coastal and marine areas and their resources, at the local,
national and regional levels;
6.
Further encourages Member States to take concrete measures to integrate
poverty eradication, quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure,
sustainable transport, science, technology and innovation into integrated coastal zone
management;
7.
Stresses the importance of policies and plans for disaster risk reduction to
build resilience and reduce the impacts and costs of natural disasters, also stresses the
importance of biodiversity preservation and nature-based solutions, and encourages
Member States to incorporate these elements as part of their approach to integrated
coastal zone management;
8.
Also stresses the importance of promoting coordination at the national and
local levels with regard to coastal areas, with the aim of ensuring policy coherence,
as well as the effectiveness of coastal management measures, while ensuring the
participation of all relevant stakeholders, including people in vulnerable situa tions;
9.
Emphasizes the importance of partnerships, of bringing together
multi-stakeholder actors to enable the integration of different interests and knowledge
into planning processes or strategies and of helping to ensure that area -based
management approach design is based on the best available science;
10. Also emphasizes that international and regional cooperation, including
North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation, and through capacity-building
and technical support for developing counties and public-private partnerships, are an
important factor in promoting the integrated coastal zone management approach by,
inter alia, promoting peer learning and cooperation, developing the necessary coastal
systematic observation, research and information management systems and
developing technologies, the science-policy interface and technological capacities, as
well as building effective linkages among global, regional, subregional and national
processes, as appropriate, to advance the achievement of t he Sustainable
Development Goals;
11. Calls upon the United Nations Environment Programme and other relevant
United Nations entities, within their mandates and existing resources, to support the
efforts of Member States in promoting and implementing the i ntegrated coastal zone
management approach, as well as in mobilizing partnerships and initiatives at the
local, national and regional levels;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-sixth session an action-oriented report on the implementation of the present
resolution, within existing resources, and decides to include in the provisional agenda
4/5

19-22423

Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone
management for achieving sustainable development

A/RES/74/210

of its seventy-sixth session, under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, a subitem entitled “Strengthening cooperation for integrated coastal zone management for
achieving sustainable development”.
52nd plenary meeting
19 December 2019

19-22423

5/5
