TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING: 16 DECEMBER 197 1
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1616) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent

. . . .. . .. .. . . .... .I. ...

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council(symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEENHUNDREDANDSIXTEENTHMEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

(Sierra Leone),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l616)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent.
The meeting was called to order at 12.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the India/Pakistan subcontinent

1. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will recall
that at a previous meeting [1606th meetinglthe Council
decided to invite the representatives of India and Pakistan
to participate in the debate of the problem currently under
discussion
by the Council, without the right to vote. In
accordance with that decision, and with the consent of the
Council,
I shall invite the representatives of India and
P,akistan to take their places at the Council table.

At
(India)

the invitation of the President, Mr, Swaran Singh
took a place at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council had also decided
/ 1607th and 1615th meetings] to extend invitations to the
representatives
of Tunisia, Saudi Arabia and Ceylon to take
the seats reserved for them in the Council chamber, with
the understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.
At the invitation of the President. Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia),
Mr. J. M.
Baroody
(Saudi Arabia)
and Mr. H. S.
A merasinghe (Ceylon) took the places reserved for them in
the Cozkncil chamber.
3. The
following
by Italy

PRESIDENT:
The Council has before it the
draft resolutions: the draft resolution submitted.
and Japan as contained in document S/10451 ; the

16 December

1971 at 10.30 am.

draft resolution submitted by Poland contained in document S] 10453~~ih~;~~~~~~-~~~~~~~~
by the
Syrian Arab Republic contained in document S/10456; the
draft resolution submitted by France and the United
Kingdom contained in document S/10455; the draft resolution submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
contained in document S/10457; in addition there is lhe
draft resolution submitted by China contained in document
S/10421 and the draft resolution of the USSR contained in
document S/10428, which were not pressed to the vote
earlier.
4. I give the floor to the Foreign Minister of India,
Mr. Swaran Singh.
5. Mr. SWARAN SINGW (India): I have to give some very
brief information to this Council, The Prime Minister of
India has made a statement and I have been informed that I
should convey this information to the Security Council. I
quote the statement that the Prime Minister of India has
made :
“We have repeatedly declared that India has no territorial ambitions. Now as the Pakistani armed forces have
surrendered in Bangla Desh and Bangla Desh is free, it is
pointless in our view to continue the present conflict.
Therefore, in order to stop further bloodshed and
unnecessary loss of life, we have ordered our armed forces
to cease fire everywhere on the Western front with effect
from 2000 hours, repeat 2000 hours, IST (Indian
standard time) on Friday the’ 17th, repeat 17th December
1971. It is our earnest hope that there will be a
corresponding immediate response from the Government
of Pakistan.”
6. I should like to add only one word: Friday, 17
December 1971, at 2000 hours in Indian standard time is
equivalent to 10.30 a.m. New York time, on 17 December.
This is the information that I wanted to convey to the
Council.
7. In a nutshell, the fighting in Bangla Desh has already
stopped, and in the West the Prime Minister of India has
unilaterally issued orders to stop fighting, effective from
10.30 a.m. on 17 December. I thought that this information would be relevant in the context of the problem that is
before the Security Council.
8. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take his seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

light of the international
covenants on human rights %%%c&&
we passed after having addressed ourselves
to @x%
secutiniaing every human right, for about 18 years.

g. Mu. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I refrained from taking
the floor last evening, although I was listed as one of the
speakers, hoping against hope that some draft resolution
would emerge, satisfactory to all the parties concerned. But
my hopes have been dashed on the cocks of despair. The
United Nations, including the Security Council, has been
reduced to a shadow of what it should be. The responsibility for such a sad state of affairs may be attributed to the
violations of the purposes and principles of the Charter by
permanent members of the Security Council, who cannot
divest themselves of the habit of invariably placing their
national interests first and foremost, without due regard to
whether the position they often assume serves the cause Of
peace and justice.

12. people die like flies, not necessarily in war, but a. 5%
consequence of war, and this tragedy will grip the rz&.,
continent. Indians and Pakistanis alike, milIions wilt
and we sit here well clothed, well fed, but we ark
blame. We ace honest men, here around this table.
who ace to blame are those who ace behind YOU, gentlenke~
in the capitals, who fix the policies of States and pa@+&
us, as I have mentioned time and again, with the straitja&z~
of instructions and, as if it were not enough, we ai:@ pm:-:
on-as you have witnessed, Sic, time and again-the
t&$:
pants of procedure, and confuse the issue. I wish mm I%?
not invented language, because the birds, chirpir~g
e~ci~r
when they quarrel amongst themselves,
quarrel itm r
beautiful way. Semantics, that is what we BR ~.i.ng
engaging ourselves in different interpretations
of la~~~~~

IO.
If the national security of a permanent member of the
Council is at stake, it is quite understandable that such a
State has no choice but to resort to the veto, if the veto is
imperative for the prime defence of that State. On the
other hand, Council decisions that ace taken by consensus
may be as unsatisfactory-1 repeat, may be as unsatisfactory-as the veto if such decisions do not establish peace
and justice in any conflict of the magnitude of the one
currently confronting us. It seems to me that incessant
consultations such as those you have been having and which
we non.membecs of the Council have witnessed-consultations aimed at achieving a weak consensus-will serve no
purpose unless the war is stopped and peace is founded on
justice. Short of such a goal, consultations seem to me to be
a farce and, at the same time, a face-saving device to
extricate certain members of the Council from appearing as
having failed in their responsibilities and obligations to the
world community. Face-saving of members does not stop
the war or the consequent conflict between India and
Pakistan. A concocted consensus will no longer fool
anyone, because it contrives to achieve a spurious agceement on an ineffectual common denominat,oc which will
not resolve the conflict-and by conflict I do not mean war
but what will ensue after the war. Therefore it is neither the
veto nor a concocted consensus that will bring about peace
between India and Pakistan,

13. I do not digress; and at that time I warned
mp
colleagues, the Russians-the Soviet Union, excuse me zzz&
the Americans and Lord Cacadon, who was
then rep
senting the United Kingdom, that that resolution adopt&
by this Council is typical of what may be considered a.$ &VZ
knot in the wood which would break the carpenter% “w*
And any resolutions that can be interpreted in aceur&aa;~~
with the whims of certain parties are not worth the a,~*
and ink with which they ace written. And the saw lte~k”. 3‘: Z
may use a parallel, is the Security Council. I acn 0‘::
touching on the substance of that resolution 242 (IQ?+?+
the word “the” had been left out so that certain interpret&,
tions or constructions could be put on the phrasecrl~~ F~:Y
that resolution. What a shame that by taking out d~c a~~~2
“the”, war goes on, conflict continues. Does that rcdo-a~&
to our honour here, to our dedication to the cause c,f
when we interpret resolutions by substcacting or ad
word to give those resolutions different meanings? IF ah& :*t
not failure, if this is not bankruptcy, 1 should like to g,ma
what is.
14. It occurred to me that we may have to establish cc,e~~~~:~
for the Council. I am not a member of the Council. $pua z
may suggest such norms. It occurred to me that we FLUE
have to establish norms for the Council rathar than *G&X,
long in repetitive speeches about lofty purposes-- the I~~~?~~
purposes and principles of the Charter. We are all tired -,75
hearing speakers say that they act on the basis of a prinz&r
or a set of principles. How often we have heard speakers &9r
that they agree in principle; and no sooner have t11ey s:j,:
that, than they add the word “but”. Any principle & $&
Charter should be assessed by the end result which it rn~iz
achieve. I repeat: any principle of the Charter sholrf
assessed by the end result which it must achieve
principle is valid if it leads to the untold suffeciry
%-“”
millions upon millions of innocent people in the
subcontinent.

11. Should we therefore amend the Charter and eliminate
the Security Council, or perhaps merge it in the General
Assembly? But even if we do this there is no assurance that
a resolution adopted by the General Assembly would be
observed or implemented, because we all know that General
Assembly resolutions ace merely recommendatory and it is
YOU here, gentlemen, who ace supposed to declare youcselves on questions of peace and security. I have been here
for 26 years and with one or two exceptions-when perhaps
YOU Were fortunate because circumstances between the
parties concerned turned out to be favourable to their
coming to an agreement-you have accomplished nothing in
the Council. That is the truth. It pains me because I have
spent 26 years of my life in this Ocganization, hoping
against hope that we might find machinery .to establish
Peace with justice-because it could be the peace of the
grave, too. When somebody dies they say “May God rest his
soul in Peace”. We do not want the peace of the dead; we
Want peace for those who ace alive, who will take us to
task, who will cry to high heaven that we have failed them
individually in the light of what we have proclaimed in the
UniVerSal
Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 and in the

15. Most of you gentlemen speak here of self-deterti
tion in its shallow implications, without taking into ammx?:
that secession might be artificial if it is brought about b
the intervention of forces from outside a given State. la ~-a.$
my privilege in the United Nations, together with a numb:
of colleagues, to elaborate the principle of self-dctecccu.~&~

2

r--

tion into a full-fledged human right, without which no
other fundamental human rights may be fully enjoyed. And
I am not speaking lightly. Rebellion inside a State, even if it
gathers momentum so as to become a civil war or a bloody
conflict-call
it revolution-should
never be exploited by
outside forces. Nor need it call for secession as an ultimate
solutidn to that rebellion or revolution.

between brother and brother. In consequence, what will
happen? More struggle animated by more rancour and
hatred; and what assurance do we have, if Pakistan is
dismembered, that all the East Pakistanis will back a newly
constituted Government which, in order to thrive if not to
survive, must be supported by India, and by the Soviet
Union for that matter?

16. So that we may not be lost in abstractions, allow me
to cite a few examples of the consequences of revolutions
and civil wars.

23. Let us face the facts. I do not like that word
“realities” which has been used time and time again here.
This is semantics-facts,
let us face the facts. Who can
guarantee that there will not be millions of East Pakistanis
who prefer to identify themselves with their Muslim
brothers of West Pakistan whom they consider to be the
defenders of their faith? Why should the Queen of England
be a “Defender of the Faith” and the West Pakistanis not
consider themselves defenders of the faith? I am not
talking about religion now, but it so happens that Pakistan
was based on Islam. How do we know, my dear friend the
distinguished Foreign Minister of India, much as you and I
decry religious intolerance, that there will not be some who
will foment religious intolerance inside a secessionist East
Pakistan?

17. Take the French Revolution, for instance. There were
several attempts from outside to stem it, to change the
course of history. And although France was torn asunder
by internal strife and revolution devoured its own sons,
external interventions failed miserably and France emerged
a stronger Power than it had ever been under Napoleon.
18. A little over three decades after the United States
gained its independence in 1776-I mean, more precisely, in
.1812-the
British did not give up attempting to recapture
what once had been their colonial domain in the new
hemisphere.
A British fleet sailed up the Potomac and
subjected the capital to bombardment. But it was of no
avail. Foreign intervention failed miserably, and the British
had to retreat.
19. The American Civil War of 1860 was one of the most
brutal conflicts in relatively modern times. The Northern
Americans,
for economic reasons, mostly-of course, they
had to have a motivation, to free the slaves,but mostly for
economic reasons-wagedwar on their Southern brothers,
who wanted to secedebecausethey thought they were
being exploited by the industrialist North. Attempts were
made to exploit that Civil War from outside,but, finally,
the magnanimity of Robert E. Lee of the South and
Abraham Lincoln prevailed and woundswere healed.And
the territorial integrity of the United Stateswaspreserved.
20. Blood soaked the soil of Russiaandimmensetreasure
was lost in the Revolution of 1917. And I am a contemporary of that Revolution; I was 12 yearsold in 1917 and,in
the twenties, in the wake of the Revolution, I wasa young
man and I know what it entailed of suffering. We had
received many refugeesfrom Russiain my region and we
gave them food and shelter. Military campaignswagedto
restore the Tsar&t regimefailed miserably.
21. What is the moral that we may be ableto deducefrom
the lessons of history? I can best answerthis questionby
an ancient Arabic proverb which I shall recite for the
benefit of my Arab-speakingcolleagues.Translatedinto
English, it reads: My brother and I againstmy cousin;and
my cousin and I againstthe stranger.
22. East and West Pakistanisare brothers and they have
been fighting one another, most probably for economicas
well as for political reasons,and any bloody conflict among
brothers is usually much more intensethan amongstrangers. Even if in the context of the proverb which I havejust
cited, we consider the Indians as cousinsof the Pakistanis
rather than strangers,in the long run the East Pakistanis
will blame the Indians for having interfered in a struggle

24. There are millions who are religious,whether rightly
or wrongly is beside the point, and the psychology of the
massesin the twentieth century is asvalid and asright asit
has been before. In 1933 I happenedto be in Paris, in an
hotel overlooking the Place de ia Condorde, the Crillon. I
emerged on to the Place de la Concorde and there were
thousands upon thousandsmilling in that beautiful square
of Paris. I did not know what was going on. I was very
young then, in 1933 I was 27 years old. I found myself
sucked into the crowd and shouting with them. I am an
Arab, was an Arab and still am an Arab and I wasshouting
with them without knowing what the issuewas, “Down
with the Government”, until I heard machine-gunbullets
whiz overhead and people fell in front of me. Then I
articulated to myself in my own language.I said“Jam&”
(my first name) “what are you doing here? Why should
you be involved? ” Do you think I was the only one
involved? The psychology of the masses
engulfedme and I
becameone of them.
25. What if there are, not one or two, but hundreds of
Muslim East Pakistanis who will say, “We will not have
allegianceto that State”? Who can prevent sucha thing? I
am not saying whether it is right or wrong; I amnot saying
it is possible,it is probable, I shall tell you why. I mention
this because rumours are afloat that the East Pakistani
Government is intent on proclaiming a secularregime. On
the whole, the religion of a devout Muslim is more precious
than his own life. You may say that they parrot suchwords
but this is not parroting. In my country you may curse
anybody or anything but one’sreligion and one’sfather or
mother, and a man whose religion is cursedmay commit
murder and will be exonerated by the judge. Religion,
whether fortunately or unfortunately is besidethe point, is
part of us.
26. A secular State? Are all those 76 million or so
atheists? They are devout Muslims,most of them, I would
say 90 per cent. It is the so-calledintelligentsiathat want to
proclaim an irreligious state and the intelligentsia,not only

3

circumstances. Verbal compromises that are expedient in
the Council usually backfire. Unfortunately,
the draft
resolutions which I have seen, and those that have been
vetoed, will not solve the problem. Only India and Pakistan
can solve the problem, without interference from outside.

in that part of the world but all over the world,
unfortunately, the bigoted intelligentsia, have made a mess
of the world. They think they are intelligent but they are
the stupidest people. They are in love with themselves
because they are enamoured of their own verbal expressions
and they think they are great. Are we given to understand
that 76 million Muslims in East Pakistan would feel
comfortable in a secular State?

32. One last warning to my Asian brothers, Should, as I
realize might happen, this conflict be protracted, not
necessarily by military operations on the battlefield but by
the instrumentality that is open to many activists, on both
sides, by the fomenting of religious intolerance, by the
exploitation of India from outside-and for that matter
Pakistan has no dearth of friends-what
will happen by
attrition? Millions upon millions will perish, and will curse
all those who caused their misery before they die.

27. Remember that Islam is not only a creed; the Holy
Koran embodies the law which regulates the life of the
Muslim individual and not only his individual rights but his
rights in relation to society. I want to be frank with you all
and perhaps somewhat unorthodox in my approach to this
sad situation. A secular State in East Pakistan will foment
the flames of religious intolerance and brother will rise
against brother and there will be interminable massacres
and how will India, the cousin in this context of the
proverb, benefit from such a sad situation? I am not
talking about texts or a cease-fire, I am talking about what
might happen, my dear distinguished Foreign Minister of
India. I should like to consider myself your brother and I
am duty bound as an Asian to talk frankly to you because I
consider every Indian here, from Ambassador Sen down, as
a brother, as I also do the Pakistanis.

33. What is the object of my having made this speech,
which I delayed making since yesterday, hoping against
hope that some solution-not
practical, but practicablecould be found that would take into account the elements I
mentioned in my speech? My hope is that the hour is not
too late. An Asian country should be designated where our
Pakistani and Indian brothers could meet with representatives of several Asian States of the higher echelon, wit11
possibly a representative, or a co-ordinating committee, of
the Security Council, to define the norms: that no one will
exploit the refugees, who are, we know, a burden on India,
for their own benefit-which
is not their own benefit, I
must say.

28. Let us not be drunk with military successes. There is
no such thing as a military victory. We have seen how the
victors suffered economically after the Second World War
while the defeated emerged not only solvent but as leaders
in industry, because they had suffered and were disciplined
by conflict, and not drunk with victory.

34. There are three things that these norms I have
suggested would have to envisage: first, respect for the
territorial integrity of Pakistan, with the proviso that the
representatives of East and West Pakistan would meet and, I
hope, try to bury the hatchet; India would have to be aided
so that the refugees could be repatriated; and, finaIly, no
big Power would try, through a treaty, written or unwritten, to exploit such a sad situation, because if they
continue to do that we had better close shop and perhaps
go back to the situation that existed even before the League
of Nations.

29. Secession? The Soviet Union, I was told the other
day, comprises 15 states. It seems I made a wrong
statement when I said it was 16. But, my good friend from
the Soviet Union, I believe you forget that state which you
no longer recognize-that
Jewish state that you once
established. You do not count it. That is why l was under
the impression that there were 16 states. You established a
Jewish state, at one time, somewhere in Siberia, but you do
not recognize it. Probably it did not work out. Never mind,
let us not quarrel about whether it is 15 or 16.

35. However, I have not lost all hope. I am sure that the
magnanimity of our Indian and Pakistani brothers wiH
finally,prevail; and if they can use our good offices we are
available to them, without any violation of the high and
lofty principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations.

30. There are different cultures. Some might say that the
people of East Pakistan speak a different language from
those of West Pakistan. So what?
My good friend
Mr, Issraelyan comes from Armenia, and all the Armenians
are jubilant at being a republic in the Soviet Union. I have
been introduced to the Foreign Minister of Lithuania, and
he seems content to be a representative of a state
component of the Soviet Union. So, this argument that the
language of East Pakistan is different from that of West
Pakistan-is
it a basis for secession? The other day I
mentioned our Belgian friends. They have Flemish and
French ethnic groups inside the State. What about the
United States? What about Puerto Rico, which speaks
Spanish and acquires English? What about Canada, which
speaks French and English? They are not seceding. There is
no relevance in the argument that because a different
language is spoken in East Pakistan secession should follow.

36. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I should like, Sir, to make a
practical proposal; but before doing so I wish to state that
my delegation has listened with great attention to the
announcement which the Foreign Minister of India made
this morning. We are somehow relieved, in spite of our
many misgivings and the feelings of distress and sadness
that we had through all these very long days and nights, to
hear from him that India has no territorial ambitions and
that India has ordered its armed forces to cease fire on all
frontiers.
37. I also listened with great attention to what
Mr. Baroody has said. I appreciate, as I Usually do, his
comments on crucial issues, and I was especially gratified
by the tribute he paid to us when he acknowledged what

31. It is axiomatic that no good judgement can be based
on expediency or the exigencies directed by force of
4

we, as individual persons, had done in order to try and
bring about some decision from the Council.
38. I feel, however, duty bound to take minor exception
to what Mr. Baroody said whf:n he included all Governments represented here in a ganeral criticism. In fact, and
with all respect, I draw thr: attention of Ambassador
Baroody to the following. As far as my Government is
concerned, I must say that ;t never ceased to make all
efforts possible to bring about dome slow-down of this crisis
as soon as possible. I stated at our previous meeting, and I
reiterate it here now, that my delegation along with another
delegation took the initiative 12 days ago, that is, Saturday,
4 December, when we in.troduced a very short draft
resolution [S/l041 71 calli~:g for a cease-fire with a view to
stopping as soon as possiLie the fighting, the killing, the
misery and the suffering cf millions of people. I think that
at least some of us can szy-and I reiterate what I said on a
previous occasion-that u 2 have a clear conscience.
39. I turn now to my proposal. Mr. President, I believe
that under your guidance we had some very useful
preliminary
consultations this morning. I would propose
that we adjourn this meeting in order to continue and
intensify those consultations to see whether they can lead
us to some decision, even at this late hour. I would propose
to leaie it to you, Mr. President, to call a meeting as soon as
we know the results of the consultations.
40. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has listened
carefully to the statement made by the Foreign Minister of
India in which he announced that his Government had
ordered a cease-fire effective from 2000 hours Indian
standard time on Friday, 17 December. It is a matter of
deep regret to my delegation that that cease-fire was not
brought about when on 7 December the General Assembly
called upon both India and Pakistan to cease hostilities
/resoEution
2793 (XXVI)/. However, since a cease-fire has
now been ordered on the part of the Indian Government,
my delegation would like to know as a matter of urgency

what proposals the Indian Government has in mind for
withdrawing its armed forces from the territory of East and
West Pakistan.
41. The PRESIDENT:
India.

I call on the Foreign Minister of

42. Mr. Swaran SINGH (India): I would earnestly suggest
that the announcement made by the Indian Prime Minister
that she has issued orders for a unilateral cease-fire effective
from 2000 hours Indian standard time on 17 December is
an important announcement. I appreciate the anxiety of
the international community to bring about the cease-fire
immediately. The response of the West Pakistan Government to this unilateral proposal of the Prime Minister of
India is not yet available. In consonance with the general
desire expressed by the international community to bring
about a cease-fire immediately, I believe that the proposal
made by the Government of India is a positive and a
constructive one. After this peace proposal is consolidated
and the cease-fire actually becomes operative, all these
other matters can be gone into.
43. I have already answered the inquiry which the
representative of Somalia has made, and if he cares to go
through the record he will find the answer to it. But at the
present moment I would earnestly suggest that this Council
may think it. more profitable to bring about the cease-fire,
and that thereafter all these other matters can be discussed.
I am not shying away from any discussion. It is a very
important and a very relevant matter, and I am prepared to
discuss it. But I thought that in response to the universally
expressed desire for bringing about a cease-fire, the proposal made by the Government of India is a positive one. I
would appeal to the Security Council to bring about a
cease-fire before we discuss the other juridical or other
matters.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p*m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprbs de votre libraire
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
ICAFC

IIOJIYIEITb

EISAAHHiI

OPrAHM

SAI&,aIJ

UNIES
et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OIi%EANHEHHhIX

HAI&HH

I-Xci~a~n.~ Opranusaqnu
06-m~membrx
HauaR
MOWIO kynu~b
B KARIKHLIX uaraJNH&X N &rewrcTB&x
ao Bcex pafioaax
uapa.
HasoAuTe
cnpasrt3
06 ri3Aamiax
B
aamen
I~HEIIKH~M Mara3nrie
unn nanmre
no anpecy : Opramisaqnff
OBlbe~naeanhrx
HaqnA,
Cexuus
no nponaxe
u3AannR,
Hmo-Ffopx
WIN Zenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
eatin en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccicin de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82255--July

1974~‘2,050
