United Nations

S/PV.9322

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9322nd meeting
Tuesday, 16 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the operationalization of the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (S/2023/328)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-13745 (E)
*2313745*

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

people displaced internally this year, compared to the
3.5 million people who needed humanitarian assistance
in 2022. In Mali, a staggering 8.8 million people will
need humanitarian assistance this year, compared to
7.5 million people who required such assistance in
2022. Women and children still bear the brunt of the
violence and the food insecurity.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (S/2023/328)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa
Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa in the
Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
Peace Operations; Mr. Eric Tiaré, Executive Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel; and Ms. Aïssatou
Diouf of Enda Energy, Coordinator of the Climate
Action Network for West and Central Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/328, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee: I thank you, Madam, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council.
Since I last briefed the Security Council on the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) (see S/PV.9194),
the security situation in the region has remained very
worrisome. Non-State armed groups continue to carry
out large-scale attacks against civilian and military
targets and to engage in confrontations over access to
resources, territorial control and influence. Terrorists
and violent extremist groups frequently target border
areas, in particular the tri-border area of Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger — the Liptako-Gourma. In
that regard, we also observed an upsurge in clashes
between the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and
Jama‘at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin earlier this
year. The security crisis is exacerbating an already
dire humanitarian situation. In Burkina Faso, there
are growing humanitarian challenges as a result of
the violence, with roughly 4.7 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance and more than 2 million
2/19

16/05/2023

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force has made steady
progress in its operationalization. Joint Force units
have gained practical experience and developed
enhanced efficiency in their operations, particularly in
the areas of coordination and responsiveness. Against
the background of strategic and operational shifts in the
Sahel, including the reconfiguration of the European
and French forces, and also in the context of Mali’s
withdrawal from the G-5 Sahel and the intensification of
threats in the border area, the Joint Force is restructuring
in response to those new realities. Although the
reconfiguration of the Joint Force has resulted in the
cessation of major military operations since January,
G-5 Sahel member States seem determined to strengthen
intraregional cooperation, including by establishing
bilateral and multilateral cooperation mechanisms with
the Malian armed forces in the fight against terrorism,
as demonstrated by the recent strengthening of bilateral
military cooperation between Mali and Burkina Faso
and between Mali and the Niger.
However, despite those efforts, insecurity in the triborder area continues to grow. The tripartite agreement
between the European Union, the G-5 Sahel and the
United Nations is expected to end in June. I wish to
warmly thank the European Union for its invaluable
support under that agreement, which provided funding
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to deliver
life-support consumables to the Joint Force. With the
expiration of the tripartite agreement, MINUSMA’s
logistical and operational support to the Joint Force, as
part of its mandate, will cease to be in effect.
MINUSMA has spared no effort in providing
operational and logistic support to the Joint Force
whenever it was requested, in accordance with its
mandate to support the Joint Force. That included fuel,
rations, medical evacuation and engineering support
such as building camps. In total, MINUSMA has
provided more than 275,000 individual ration packs
and 83,000 litres of lubricants and 6 million litres of
fuel. That support helped to fill critical gaps hindering
the mobility and operational tempo of the Joint Force.
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Unfortunately, the international community’s efforts
have fallen short of what is required to render the
Joint Force fully operational and autonomous, with
the capacity to help stabilize the Sahel region. A lack
of consensus among partners and donors on the most
effective support mechanism for the Joint Force has
proved a significant obstacle to its operationalization.
The admittedly limited support provided by
MINUSMA to the Joint Force did not fundamentally
change the situation.
Be that as it may, the end of the tripartite agreement
among the European Union, the G-5 Sahel and the
United Nations presents an opportunity to reflect on
how the international community should renew its
approaches to supporting regional security mechanisms.
The upcoming deliberations in the Council later this
month, on the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017) and considerations related to the financing of
African Union peace support operations mandated by
the Security Council, will undoubtedly provide a timely
opportunity for the Council to consider the issue.
Through the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United
Nations has pursued its support to the Joint Force in
operationalizing its international human rights and
humanitarian law compliance framework. Important
institutional, legal and behavioural progress and
changes have been recorded. Notably, the Joint Force
currently has an internal mechanism that enables it to
attribute responsibility for incidents, analyse patterns,
take necessary remedial action and adapt its operational
conduct. Looking ahead, continued human rights work
with regional and national security actors in the Sahel
will remain critical in the context of the deteriorating
security situation. Indeed, the G-5 Sahel countries
must ensure that their military strategies to counter
terrorism and violent extremism are fully anchored in
respect for human rights and place the protection of
every population at their core. That is necessary if the
desired results are to be achieved.
In that context, the political and operational support
of partners remains essential to the stabilization of Mali
and the Sahel. It is urgent to address the challenges
faced by the Sahel in a sustainable and effective
manner and support national actors in their efforts to
implement the initiatives that they themselves have
devised. Multifaceted support will prevent the crisis in
the Sahel from upsetting the fragile political balances

S/PV.9322

in the region, and will help prevent further spillover
of insecurity into the coastal countries. For its part,
the United Nations stands ready to further support the
efforts of the G-5 Sahel, including through capacitybuilding support in areas such as the prevention of
violent extremism and radicalization and the promotion
of the rule of law and border-security management.
Regardless of the support extended to the G-5
Sahel, stabilizing the region hinges on aligning our
policies and approaches and putting the people of
the region at the forefront of our efforts. The United
Nations is committed to working with all partners to
ensure that governance structures are more democratic
and open and that the people of the Sahel have more
confidence in their institutions. If we are to achieve
durable peace in the region, we must address its
underlying governance, development, human rights
and humanitarian challenges. It was in that spirit
that the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the G-5 Sahel and the United
Nations established the Independent High-Level Panel
on Security and Development in the Sahel. Under
the leadership of Mahamadou Issoufou, the former
President of the Niger, the Panel is actively working
to help us reshape our approaches in the region and
maximize our collective impact through innovative,
coherent and coordinated action.
We desperately need to see resolute advances in the
fight against terrorism, violent extremism and organized
crime in the Sahel. Without significant gains, it will
become increasingly difficult to reverse the security
trajectory in the Sahel and the further expansion of
insecurity towards the West African coastal countries.
The recent instability in the Sudan, in the eastern part
of the Sahel, is yet another cause for concern. The
devastating effects of continuing destabilization would
be felt far beyond the region and the African continent.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Pobee
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tiaré.
Mr. Tiaré (spoke in French): I would first like
to congratulate your country, Switzerland, Madam
President, both on its election in June 2022 by the
General Assembly to the Security Council and this
month on its presidency of the Council for the first
time in Switzerland’s history. I wish Switzerland
a constructive term and hope it will be re-elected
in future.

23-137453/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

I would also like to thank you for this opportunity to
address the Security Council following the presentation
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/328) on the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I thank all the members
of the Council for their participation in this meeting,
which attests to their interest in the issues at stake
in the current situation in the Sahel and in Africa. I
commend the representatives of the African members
of the Council for their important contribution to the
debate within the Council on issues related to peace and
security in Africa and convey our full support. Lastly,
I would like to commend Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa
Pobee for her outstanding and informative presentation
of the report, which I am sure held Council members’
full attention.
The complex situation in the Sahel in general, and
in the G-5 Sahel countries in particular, which the
Secretary-General accurately describes in his report, is
of concern to all of us, especially the Security Council,
whose primary responsibility is the maintenance
of international peace and security. The fact is that
despite the efforts made so far, both individually by the
countries directly affected by the crisis and collectively
within the regional framework of the G-5 Sahel, the
security situation has continued to deteriorate. It is
very different from the situation in 2014, when the G-5
was founded, and in 2017, when the Joint Force was
established for the specific purpose of addressing the
rapid expansion of armed and violent extremist groups
and the deteriorating situation in the region.
It has become clear that the attacks by armed groups,
which have increased over the past years, primarily in
the three border areas, have been carried out by two
groups — Jama‘at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin and the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. The groups clearly
rely not on foreigners but on local actors and leaders,
who are based in their area of operations and coordinate
all the groups’ actions. Facing this new situation, and
looking back, we are prompted to ask if we could have
avoided these problems in the area represented by the
G-5 Sahel and encompassing the countries of the Gulf
of Guinea if we had listened to the many calls to step
up the Joint Force’s operationalization and response.
We must also acknowledge that the G-5 Sahel is in a
particularly difficult situation, among other things
because of a poor understanding of that situation and
the failure of the international community to draw
lessons from it. Indeed, since its establishment, in 2017,
4/19

16/05/2023

the Joint Force has been unable to be truly operational
because of a lack of sustainable funding and of aircraft
and intelligence equipment. Nonetheless, as mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/328), in spite
of that, and as other reports have also shown, the Force
has achieved results on the ground, notwithstanding the
insecurity it faces.
With regard to support, the logistical support
programme must be commended. The Force benefited
from the programme following the 2018 tripartite
agreement among the United Nations, the European
Union and the Executive Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel,
which expires on 23 June, and the implementation of
the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework. In that regard, I am pleased
to inform the Council that earlier today, at 10 a.m.,
at the headquarters of the G-5 Sahel, General Hanena
Ould Sidi, Minister of Defence of Mauritania, presided
over the opening ceremony of a technical workshop in
support of the regional protection of civilians strategy in
the G-5 Sahel space. Work has been under way for some
days, and participants include officials of the État-major
de Coordination de la Force Conjointe du G-5 Sahel,
representatives of the G-5 Sahel Women’s Platform,
young people and partners within the United Nations
system and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
As members know, the Heads of State of the G-5
Sahel, at their sixth extraordinary summit, held on
20 February under the presidency of His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Ould Cheikh El Ghazouani, President
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, reaffirmed their
readiness to preserve and strengthen the G-5 Sahel as an
important framework for cooperation and coordination.
They welcomed the new structure of the Joint Force and
its adaptation to the current environment and expressed
their firm willingness to support, through appropriate
means, the new configuration of the Joint Force and the
implementation of the État-major de Coordination de
la Force Conjointe du G-5 Sahel, with Niamey as its
headquarters, along with a reduced team of 15 for the
time being. The concept of operations has already been
finalized at the expert level with respect to personnel,
battalions, chain of command and operating budget.
Everything is ready and awaits only the endorsement
of the G-5 Sahel Ministers of Defence and Army Chiefs
of Staff. The concept of operations will be submitted
to the African Union Peace and Security Council
for endorsement before being transmitted to the
Security Council.
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

Given that the Sahel is at a crossroads, with everincreasing terrorism, which poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, it is absolutely vital
that we provide support for the operationalization of the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, which is now one of the rare
forces in the subregion with a strategy and 14 battalions
that are ready to engage with armed terrorist groups.
When rewriting the concept of operations, military
experts laid the groundwork for the Force to achieve
optimal results in addressing security issues. However,
in order to be as effective as possible, the Force needs
what it has always lacked and has always sought to be
operational — sustainable funding and equipment. As we
seek to counter terrorism, all our efforts must be geared
towards providing a clear response. How do we mobilize
all local, national, regional, social, cultural, economic
and other forces in order to eliminate the root causes of
insecurity, while using military means to stem its effects?
In addition to its military strategy, because the G-5
Sahel knows that the fight cannot be won by weapons
alone, it also works on other aspects of the issue, such
as development, the prevention of violent extremism,
climate change and so on. With regard to climate change,
I would like to congratulate Switzerland for adding the
issue of climate change to the priorities of the Security
Council. Indeed, while already grappling with a deepseated political, security, social and humanitarian and
crisis, the Sahel is considered one of the regions that is
most vulnerable to climate change, which has an adverse
effect on human freedoms and on keeping the peace, in
particular in rural areas.
Given the respective positions of Council members,
they all know what is occurring in the Sahel. There are
hundreds of victims, civilians and troops alike, and
millions of internally displaced persons, as mentioned
in the Secretary-General’s report, including women
and children. All they ask is to be able to return to their
villages, live in dignity and return to their traditional
jobs. There are thousands of children on the streets
because schools are now closed. The Council also knows
what is happening at the borders of some countries of the
Sahel and the Gulf of Guinea, and what will happen if
the situation at the tri-border area is not brought under
control. That is why we need to provide an urgent, robust
and strong response. To achieve that, a comprehensive
and action-oriented strategy is required that draws on
existing mechanisms, although those mechanisms have
challenges. In that regard, I would like to commend
the Secretary-General’s position on the issue, as he

S/PV.9322

recognizes that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force remains an
important regional initiative that complements the
multifaceted efforts of the United Nations and other
international partners in the region and deserves the
support of the international community.
The message is very clear. We also take this
opportunity to thank the European Union for its
commitment to working with us to determine the
operational support that the European Union can provide
to the G-5 Sahel to contribute to meeting the needs of the
Joint Force. Although we must act swiftly in the short
term to ensure that the serious crisis in the Sahel does
not spread to other parts of Africa, it is absolutely vital
that we address the root causes of the crisis. We therefore
hope that the recommendations of the Independent HighLevel Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel,
chaired by the former President of the Niger, Mahamadou
Issoufou, will receive the necessary attention and
support from the international community and all
partners in order to ensure a return to peace, security
and development in the Sahel so that the Sahelian people
can thrive.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Tiaré
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diouf.
Ms. Diouf (spoke in French): First of all, I would
like to thank Switzerland for giving me the opportunity
and honour to brief the Security Council on the issues of
climate change and security in the Sahel.
The issues of climate change and security are closely
linked, as climate change is the cause of phenomena that
provoke tensions, violence and conflicts. The risks and
impacts are particularly acute in exposed, unprepared
and vulnerable regions such as the Sahel. The Sahel is
one of the areas most exposed to climate risks and one
of the most vulnerable due to its fragile institutions and
low resilience. Some studies recognize the Sahel as one
of the three ecological hotspots, which include areas
under increased environmental stress and more likely
to collapse. The climate of the Sahel is characterized
by extreme temperatures, fluctuating rainfall and
severe drought. According to the United Nations, the
region is particularly vulnerable to climate change,
with temperatures rising 1.5 times faster than the global
average. Almost all Sahelian countries are affected by
multiple phenomena — droughts, water stress, land
degradation and declining yields. Problems of access to
water and food are also the cause of health problems
and migration.

23-137455/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

In recent years, the impact of environmental
problems on the stability of some African territories, in
particular in the Sahel, has become clear. Competition
over access to water or natural resources is the source
of tensions among communities. For example, it was not
many years ago that Lake Chad provided sufficient water
for the populations of the Niger, Nigeria, Cameroon and
Chad, but since the lake has been gradually drying up,
entire populations have been migrating towards Chad to
continue to benefit from it. As resources become scarcer,
the struggle for access to them increases — a context
in which Boko Haram prospers. This large lake, which
is shared by five countries with more than 43 million
inhabitants, has seen its water levels fall by 80 per cent
in 40 years, making the communities vulnerable and
increasing poverty. That creates a potential recruiting
ground for men, and sometimes even women, as well as
desperate young people who are ready to do anything to
earn a living, including joining a terrorist organization.
Another important factor for conflict in the Sahel
region is that the percentage of fertile land is diminishing
and causing farmers to migrate, often to lands belonging
to nomad pastoralists, who are being prevented from
using their traditional transhumance routes. In some
cases, the herders then take over private or protected
property in order to keep their animals alive. The
situation in the Sahel is therefore a prime example of
the various problems that can arise from intensified
competition for resources, including conflicts between
nomadic herders and farmers, migration, radicalization
and the exploitation of resources.
The Sahel’s climate and security crises are acute.
Strengthening the capacities of communities and local
actors to respond and adapt to shocks is essential and
urgent. Insecurity and cross-border conflicts in the Sahel
countries are driven by many actors and by complex
factors. Some of those are related to poor governance,
discrimination, inequities, the scarcity of resources
and poverty, which contribute to insecurity and the
intensification of civil conflict and violent extremism.
There is a worrisome possibility that the tensions and
conflicts could be inflamed by the increased competition
over resources — land, water and food — as well as the
ongoing degradation of the land, while some of those
factors could be further exacerbated by climate change.
Because of its arid climate, recurring droughts and
humanitarian crises, the threat of climate change is ever
present in the Sahel. In Mali, for example, reports of
Islamic extremists and transnational criminal networks
in the Sahel region are raising concerns that the Sahel
6/19

16/05/2023

could become an area where terrorism will take root
and flourish if appropriate measures are not taken to
address the security and climate crises simultaneously
and very rapidly. The Niger and Burkina Faso have both
experienced episodes of drought and food insecurity and
are marked by factors that analysts believe are strongly
correlated with instability and conflict, in that they
are landlocked and have very low revenues. All those
factors add to the complexity of the challenges that
they face in building resilience to climate change and
ensuring the security of their citizens. In both countries
there are a number of underlying sources of conflict that
could potentially be triggered or exacerbated by future
climate stress. In addition, the continued insecurity
and conflict have led to increased displacement in
the region. For example, in Burkina Faso, more than
2 million people have been displaced, the majority of
them women and children. The massive displacement
of the country’s population has put additional pressure
on its already limited resources and threatens to ignite
intercommunity rivalries.
The current situation in the Sahel clearly shows
that terrorism feeds on conflict, despair and the
vulnerabilities of communities, especially those that
are caused by climate change. Before I conclude, I
would like to make some recommendations. Addressing
the multiple crises affecting the Sahel in a sustainable
manner requires coordinated responses. It is no longer
relevant to address the crisis in the Sahel on the basis
of security issues. We need multisectoral responses
that take into account current and future climate
issues. The solutions provided must also be built with
and by the communities to ensure sustainability and
ownership. The local level is a good entry point for
integrating the climate change and security dimension
into community-based policies and projects that are
suited to the populations’ needs and do not harm their
rights. Those initiatives should be inclusive and put
both young people and women and the centre.
Finally, it is crucial to provide the necessary
climate financing to facilitate adaptation with a view
to strengthening community resilience. The cost of
adaptation remains very high for the Sahel countries,
whose State budgets cannot fully cover it. It is all very
well to talk about how vulnerable the Sahel region is,
but ultimately if it does not receive adequate funding
for addressing the various challenges, the crisis there
is likely to stagnate. We do not want that. And our
communities do not deserve that.
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

In conclusion, I would once again like to commend
and thank Switzerland and the members of the Council
for taking the time to listen to me. May peace, security
and serenity return to the Sahel.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Diouf
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Pobee, Mr. Tiaré and Ms. Diouf for
their briefings.
The primary challenge in the Sahel is obviously a
political one, as it involves strengthening State systems
and consolidating democracy. France calls for the
transitions in Burkina Faso, Mali, Guinea and Chad
to be carried out within the agreed time frames. We
welcome the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States to support those processes. Twenty
years after their adoption, the ECOWAS protocols
remain a reference framework for democracy and good
governance, including by promoting freedom of the
press, assembly and peaceful demonstrations and the
possibility for political parties to participate freely in
elections, and by dedicating an entire chapter to the
participation of women and young people.
Next, I would like to mention climate change, which
is having particularly noticeable effects in the Sahel. We
can already see its effects on populations, food security
and access to water. The diminishing of cultivation
and grazing areas is a clear factor in the region’s
destabilization. It is urgent that the Security Council listen
to its African members, who are constantly reminding
us about the links between climate and security and
did so today quite vividly. France commends the work
being done in the field by the climate, peace and security
advisers of the United Nations missions and calls for that
network to be strengthened. We also call on the Member
States to join the Climate Security Mechanism. What we
have to do is establish a virtuous circle of development
and climate action. That is the essence of the Great
Green Wall initiative, which aims to combat the effects
of climate change, desertification, food insecurity and
poverty, from Senegal to Djibouti. France has helped to
mobilize €16 billion for that project. Finally, it is urgent
that we respond appropriately to the threat of terrorism
in the region, and by that I mean three things.

S/PV.9322

First, the response must be sustainable, and to that
end, it must be based on respect for the rule of law.
Abuses against civilians and the disproportionate use
of force are unacceptable and only fuel the dangerous
spiral of violence. That is why France will continue
to condemn the actions and abuses of the Wagner
Group in Africa and elsewhere. The actions of these
mercenaries are deadly, incompatible with the rule of
law, inefficient and predatory for natural resources and
State budgets. In that respect, the United Nations report
on the abuses committed against civilians in Moura,
Mali in March 2022 is concerning. It is an important
step towards recognizing the victims and their need for
justice, as well as the fight against impunity.
Secondly, the response must be a collective
one. We cannot oppose a national and regional
approach. Progress is possible only if we work on all
levels — both by strengthening the national armed
forces and enhancing cooperation between them.
The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
remains relevant in that respect, and we welcome
the reconfiguration efforts under way, which reflect
the commitment of the four countries concerned to
adapt to the new context. The Accra Initiative and the
Multinational Joint Task Force are also major initiatives.
We hope that the report of the Independent High-Level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel, led
by President Issoufou, will give new impetus to those
regional coordination efforts.
Finally, the response must be substantial. France
and the European Union (EU) have been engaged in
partnership with the region for over a decade. The EU
recently deployed a new military partnership mission,
in response to the Niger’s request. The international
community must therefore do more. France and its
partners stand ready to support regional initiatives.
Their framework and the expectations of the actors in the
region must be spelled out. Furthermore, France fully
subscribes to the idea that African operations should
benefit from sustainable funding, with the help of the
United Nations. We will discuss this again on 25 May.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and
Executive Secretary Tiaré for their briefings. I also
thank Ms. Diouf for her important remarks centred on
the link between security and climate change.

23-137457/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

The United States welcomes the efforts of Burkina
Faso, Chad, Mauritania and the Niger to revitalize
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including
through the 20 February extraordinary summit of Heads
of State. In particular, we applaud Mauritania’s efforts
as the newly appointed G-5 Sahel to revitalize the G-5
Sahel institution and refocus its political security and
development goals, as outlined in its recently published
road map.
The United States is especially concerned about the
security, humanitarian and political crises unfolding in
the Sahel. These stem primarily from governance failures.
While we respect the need for Sahelian States to address
the scourge of terrorism and other violence within their
borders, we urge them to recognize the limitations of
militarized approaches and to redouble efforts to address
structural drivers of instability. That includes enhancing
governance, strengthening democratic institutions,
improving access to services and justice and respecting
human rights and the rule of law. We remain concerned
about State-led military operations in Mali and Burkina
Faso that have led to large-scale civilian casualties and
reports of human rights violations.
In Mali, the transition Government’s short-sighted
partnership with the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group
has not produced greater security for the Malian people.
Instead, reported human rights abuses are fuelling
grievances among already marginalized groups.
According to the February report of the United
Nations Development Programme on violent extremism
in Africa, Government-led human rights violations
and abuses often serve as a trigger event, accelerating
recruitment into violent extremist organizations among
at-risk groups. We are appalled by the egregious
disregard for human life exhibited by elements of the
Malian armed forces, in cooperation with the Wagner
Group transnational criminal organization during the
operation in Moura last year.
We commend the United Nations for its diligence and
tenacity in investigating the horrific civilian massacre of
civilians in Moura, especially considering the restrictions
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We recall
that the Mission is mandated to investigate and report on
allegations of human rights violations and abuses, and
we are deeply troubled by the transition Government’s
restrictions on the MINUSMA’s freedom of movement,
in violation of the status-of-forces agreement.
8/19

16/05/2023

We urge the transition Government to uphold its
responsibilities as host country to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. We encourage the transition
Government to fully consider the recommendations
outlined in the United Nations report, including
pursuing an independent, impartial, efficient,
exhaustive and transparent investigation to hold those
responsible accountable. We remain disappointed in
Mali’s decision last year to withdraw from the G-5
Sahel and urge transition authorities to immediately
rejoin the coalition. The interrelated threats of
terrorism and violent extremism, climate change
and criminal networks span borders and require
transnational approaches.
We extend our support to Burkina Faso, Chad and
Mali to complete their transitions to democratically
elected civilian Governments. We and other partners are
keen to consider restarting currently restricted support.
The election of democratic Governments would help
us resume such assistance. In that regard, we welcome
the Malian transition Government’s announcement of
a new date for the delayed constitutional referendum
and encourage strict adherence to the agreed timetable
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for completing Mali’s political transition.
We look forward to the joint strategic assessment on
the Sahel being undertaken by the United Nations,
the African Union, ECOWAS and the G-5 Sahel. The
United States stands ready to deepen our support for
effective solutions to advance peace and security in
the region.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Executive
Secretary Tiaré for their briefings. I also listened to the
briefing made by Ms. Diouf.
Recently, countries in the Sahel, in the face of
the complex and difficult international and regional
situation, have worked hard to maintain common
security, restore economic and social development and
strengthen regional solidarity and cooperation, with
some positive results.
As pointed out in the Secret General’s report
(S/2023/328), maintaining security and stability in
the Sahel is of major strategic importance to the
consolidation of peace and development in the subregion
and the African continent The international community
and the Security Council should pay more attention to
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

the difficulties and needs faced by the countries of the
region and provide help and support that is more fit
for purpose.
First, interregional solidarity and cooperation
is the only way to address common challenges.
The Sahel faces multiple threats, such as terrorism,
humanitarian crisis, poverty, underdevelopment and
climate change. In February, countries in the Sahel
convened a special summit to reaffirm the need to
strengthen regional solidarity and to pool together to
address challenges. China welcomes that initiative.
The countries of the region should uphold the concept
of common security and common development and
restore and strengthen regional cooperation on the
basis of a balanced accommodation of the concerns of
all parties. The international community should respect
the sovereignty and ownership of the countries of the
region and provide constructive support for deepening
regional cooperation. The international community
should draw lessons from the situation in the Sudan,
maintain an appropriate level of patience with regard
to the political transition of certain countries, provide
more support and encouragement and safeguard overall
regional stability. China looks forward to the United
Nations-African Union joint assessment coming
up with practical and viable recommendations as
soon as possible, thus injecting new momentum into
regional cooperation.
Secondly, combating terrorism is a top priority.
Recently, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
agreed to restructure its joint force. The Economic
Community of West African States announced the
operationalization of its standby force. Countries,
including Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger, are
actively carrying out counter-terrorism operations
and deepening their cooperation in the security sector.
Those efforts deserve to be commended.
Meanwhile, violent and terrorist activities in
the region are still on the rise, with terrorist groups
attacking armed forces, ransacking villages and
blocking roads, causing massive civilian casualties
and displacements. The situation on the ground is dire.
The international community should give top priority
to supporting regional efforts to combat terrorism and
maintain stability; focus on helping countries of the
region strengthen security sector capacity-building and
respect their right to engage in independent external
security cooperation. In response to the needs of regional
counter-terrorism operations in terms of equipment,

S/PV.9322

logistics and funding, among other needs, the European
Union and other major donors should maintain their
level of assistance, while the United Nations and the
Security Council should actively explore new ways to
provide support.
Some colleagues referred to the issue of human
rights. In our view, counter-terrorism operations are
fundamentally about safeguarding human security.
Human rights should surely be respected and protected.
However, human rights should not be used as a political
tool to interfere with counter-terrorism operations,
much less coupled with the provision of counterterrorism support.
Thirdly, by deepening systemic development, we
can address the heart of the problem. According to a
report by the United Nations Development Programme
issued in February, destitution, unemployment and the
lack of livelihoods were among the main drivers for
people in the Sahel to join violent extremist groups. To
root out terrorism in the Sahel, military and security
means alone are not sufficient. We must tackle both
the symptoms and the root causes. The international
community should support the development of
the Sahel with a greater sense of urgency, give the
development agenda more prominence, guarantee and
improve people’s livelihoods, and protect and promote
human rights through development. Only in doing so
can people in the region acquire greater prosperity
and security.
Promoting sustainable development is a key
objective for the practical cooperation between China
and countries in the region. China has worked with
Mali on agriculture technology, built solar power plants
for Burkina Faso and provided emergency food aid and
medical supplies to Mauritania, the Niger and Chad,
bringing tangible help to the countries in the region
to improve their livelihoods and promote nationally
owned development. China stands ready to work with
the international community to provide more support
to regional countries in the areas of poverty reduction,
food security, agriculture, livestock production,
infrastructure, construction and development financing.
And we hope that the Office of the Special Coordinator
for Development in the Sahel and other United Nations
agencies will play a greater role in mobilizing resources
for development.

23-137459/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Ms. Martha
Pobee and Mr. Eric Tiaré for their informative briefings.
We listened attentively to Ms. Diouf.
While recognizing the challenges faced by the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), we should
highlight the remarkable resilience it has shown. In
the past few months, we witnessed the first Summit
of Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel since 2021, which
underscores the determination of the four remaining
countries to continue to engage in order to tackle
common problems.
However, as the Secretary-General pointed out
in his most recent report (S/2023/328), the process of
reform of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has brought about
the cessation of military operations. That development
is one more instance of how political factors can hamper
efforts to combat violence and terrorism.
The transnational nature of the security challenges
in the Sahel demand regionally based responses. In
that context, Brazil is encouraged by the many regional
initiatives, based on diplomacy and cooperation, that
have been promoting coordinated responses to the
security issues that are affecting West Africa, especially
the continuous rise of terrorist activities. I highlight,
in particular, the creation of the Joint Military Staff
Committee of the Sahel Region, the establishment
of the Multinational Joint Task Force of the Accra
Initiative, as well as the standby force of the Economic
Community of West African States.
There can be no lasting peace and stability in the
Sahel if the root causes of conflict are not addressed.
It is a well-established fact that armed groups take
root in areas with little or non-existent State presence.
Democratic and inclusive institutions, with regular,
free and fair elections, as well as respect for minorities,
are necessary to create stable societies. In that vein,
Brazil encourages the transitional authorities in the
region to implement the respective transition plans
without delay in order to allow for the complete return
to constitutional normality.
We must also address the dire humanitarian
situation in the region. Food insecurity, forced
displacements and a lack of economic prospects are
aggravated by the actions of terrorist and other illegal
armed groups. Desperate individuals are easy prey
for such organizations. As mentioned by Brazil in
March (see S/PV.9296, p. 14), a recent United Nations
Development Programme report on extremism in
Africa shows that economic incentives are important
10/19

16/05/2023

drivers that pull individuals towards terrorist activities.
The report makes it clear that we must move away
from exclusively security-driven responses and adopt
development-based approaches.
In that regard and in conclusion, we look forward
to the recommendations that will be included in the
independent strategic assessments currently being
prepared by the Independent High-Level Panel on
Security and Development in the Sahel.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the statements this morning by Ms. Martha
Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa; Mr. Eric
Tiaré, Executive Secretary of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and the statement by Ms. Diouf, civil
society expert on climate change.
The information we received describes a worrisome
security situation in the Sahel region, which is of
strategic importance not only for the African continent.
The indiscriminate use of violence and the presence
of terrorist groups in the region has a direct impact
on the civilian population, forcing them to flee and be
displaced. The humanitarian situation is critical. There
are millions of internally displaced persons owing to
the current violence, which affects and harms primarily
women and girls.
Ecuador has rejected and condemned terrorism in
all its forms, regardless of its origin. In some regions,
terrorism is connected to transnational organized crime
and exacerbates the illicit trafficking in arms and natural
resources, drug trafficking and other related activities.
We are convinced that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations is
essential to overcome the global challenges posed by
terrorism in the world. And we agree with the SecretaryGeneral that transnational problems require cooperative
and comprehensive responses. That is why the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force is key to combating groups operating across
porous borders.
A large part of the international community considers
Mali’s withdrawal from the Joint Force to be detrimental
to the effectiveness of its operations, as it disrupts its
geographical continuity. Ecuador shares that view, and
therefore welcomes the meetings between Mali and the
Niger in early March, in which they agreed to strengthen
bilateral cooperation against terrorism. We believe that
the return of Mali to the Joint Force would benefit the
entire region. Without peace in Mali there cannot peace
in the Sahel.
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

We appreciate the efforts undertaken by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to fulfil its mandate to implement the
technical agreement to provide supplies to the G-5
Sahel Joint Force, despite the complex technical and
operational conditions. These conditions would also
improve with the return of Mali to the Joint Force.
We also appreciate the progress made in reforming
the Joint Force’s structure and revitalizing its security
architecture. We hope that these efforts will result in
greater effectiveness in its operations and also allow it to
cooperate with other bodies focused on the fight against
terrorism in the region, such as the Accra Initiative
and the Joint Military Committee of the Sahel Region.

S/PV.9322

Finally, we highlight the role of the Peacebuilding
Fund as a catalytic fund for financing in countries
vulnerable to conflict and recall that political
stability is key to progress towards a peaceful and
secure environment. We hope for an early return to
constitutional order in all countries of the region,
including those in political transitions, namely,
Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali. Political transition must
be accompanied by a commitment to implementing
measures to achieve lasting peace and security in
the region.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee, Executive Secretary Tiaré
and Ms. Diouf for their briefings.

This fight must be pursued within the framework of
respect for international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and refugee law. In this regard, we
commend the support offered to the Joint Force by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner in the
implementation of the compliance framework for these
rights, as well as the human rights due diligence policy.
The progress in capacity-building in the Joint Force is
encouraging. It is also important to counter the corrosive
narratives and hate speech, intolerance and xenophobia
that fuel violent extremism, for example by drawing on
the experiences of countries in the region, such as the
Niger and Mauritania, which have taken initiatives to
foster intracommunal and intercommunal dialogue.

The Sahel is in crisis: escalating violence at the
hands of extremist groups, democratic governance and
human rights under threat, and vast humanitarian needs
and food insecurity, all exacerbated by climate change
and the impact of Russia’s war in Ukraine.

How can we achieve sustainable peace in the Sahel
region if we do not address the root causes of conflict to
complement security responses? It is essential to address
the primary needs of the population and strengthen State
presence across all territories and throughout the region.

First, with three States of the region in the middle
of political transitions, the continued leadership of
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union is vital. We urge the Burkinabe,
Chadian and Malian authorities to adhere to agreed
election timetables.

It is in that context that we appreciate the written
advice of the Peacebuilding Commission whose role
we support. It is necessary to channel the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals as a priority, for
which we recognize the need for enhanced coordination
and cooperation between Governments and national and
regional offices of the United Nations, as well as with
international financial institutions. It is necessary to
open more financial channels and flows for the benefit of
national programmes, projects and strategies. Listening
to Ms. Diouf on climate change, for example, could be
very useful in the light of the agreements reached in the
main forum to address this issue, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and its
Paris Agreement.

Those challenges need to be tackled by the
countries of the Sahel, supported by international
partners, through a determined show of political will,
commitment to human rights and regional cooperation.
The United Kingdom remains committed to supporting
the Sahel and its people. We contributed approximately
$284 million to the region last year.
Let me set out three priorities for the coming period.

Secondly, counter-terrorism operations must
respect human rights and international humanitarian
law. To do otherwise risks aggravating grievances,
undermining trust with local communities and driving
recruitment to terrorist groups.
We welcome the Group of Five for the Sahel’s
reaffirmed commitment to the compliance framework
under its new structures and its ongoing work with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR). We continue to urge further
progress towards implementation of human rights
due diligence mitigation measures, as recommended
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

23-1374511/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

At the same time, we are deeply concerned by the
disturbing findings in last week’s OHCHR report on
the massacre of hundreds of people in Moura, Mali by
Malian security forces and the Russian-backed Wagner
Group. As High Commissioner for Human Rights Volker
Türk has said, such cases of summary executions, rape
and torture amount to war crimes. We fully support
MINUSMA’s role in investigating and reporting on
human rights violations and abuses, and we urge the
Malian authorities to strengthen their cooperation with
the United Nations and respect MINUSMA’s freedom
of movement.
New reports of around 150 civilian fatalities, including 45 children, following an attack by armed forces in
the village of Karma, Burkina Faso on 20 April, are also
deeply disturbing. We urge all States in the region to
fully respect their obligations under international law.
Thirdly, we agree with the message in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/328) that regionally
led solutions are the most effective way to create
lasting peace and stability. The Accra Initiative is a
promising example, and we look forward to supporting
its members’ efforts. We hope the forthcoming report
of the Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel will bring greater coherence
between different initiatives in the Sahel.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee, Executive Secretary of the
Group of Five for the Sahel Tiaré and Ms. Diouf for
their briefings.
Albania considers the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to be an important regionally led
initiative in strengthening stability and security in
the Sahel, particularly as the region grapples with a
multidimensional crisis.
Allow me to focus on three key areas. First, we
are concerned about the worsening of the security
situation in the Sahel. Terrorism and violent extremism
have reached unprecedented levels, risking spillover
to coastal States and threatening regional stability.
Sustained counter-terrorism initiatives, operations
and security cooperation remain vital and should be
conducted in respect of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
We welcome the restructuring of the Joint Force,
which represents an opportunity to further mainstream
it. We also encourage the continued engagement with
12/19

16/05/2023

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to uphold international humanitarian
law, including through the compliance framework,
setting an important precedent for United Nations
engagement with regional forces, as mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/328).
At the same time, the Moura report published
last week is a testament to the necessity to conduct
military operations in accordance with human rights
and international law. The findings of the report are
disturbing and raise concerns about the presence of
the Wagner Group. We call for those responsible to be
held accountable.
Secondly, the political environment in the Sahel
remains fragile. With several States under military
rule, we urge the transitional authorities to respect the
timelines agreed with the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and facilitate a timely
return to civilian rule. The trend of unconstitutional
changes of Government risks undoing the democratic
gains already made. In that regard, regional
cooperation remains critical. We encourage the G-5
Sahel to continue dialogue and cooperation with its
members and to sustain the momentum to invigorate
collaboration. We welcome the leadership of the African
Union, ECOWAS and the United Nations, as well as
the recent discussions under the Accra Initiative, as a
mechanism to foster greater security and regionally
led solutions. We look forward to the issuance of the
recommendations of the Independent High-Level Panel
on Security and Development in the Sahel, led by
former President Issoufou, on strengthening responses
to address the Sahel crisis.
Thirdly, with about 30 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, the Sahel crisis requires a
holistic approach that addresses the root causes of
the conflict. As we heard from Ms. Diouf, we need to
address the adverse effects of climate change, which
is a major driver of insecurity and even amplifies
conflicts by increasing the fight for resources.
Therefore, military interventions alone are not enough
to tackle the crisis; they must be complemented with
humanitarian and development efforts to strengthen
institutions, enhance the rule of law and promote
socioeconomic opportunities, while advocating for the
representation and participation of women and young
people at all levels.
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

In conclusion, it is clear that the G-5 Sahel remains
critical for promoting regional security. We commend
the sustained efforts to operationalize the Joint Force.
However, we must see genuine political will and
engagement to advance the agreed reforms. All States
in the region have a part to play in strengthening the
collective fight against terrorism in order to build a just
and prosperous Sahel for its people.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Gabon, Mozambique
and Ghana (A3).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/328) and thank Assistant Secretary-General
Pobee, as well as Ambassador Tiaré, Executive Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), for their
comprehensive briefings and pertinent insights concerning
the situation in the Sahel. We also welcome the remarks
of Ms. Diouf, who spoke on behalf of Enda Energy and
the Climate Action Network for West and Central Africa.
We welcome the positive developments within the G-5
Sahel since the previous briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.9194), including the Heads of State summit held
on 20 February, which witnessed the successful rotation
of the Group’s presidency to Mauritania, as well as the
subsequent ministerial meeting held on 20 March, at which
the revitalization of the Group’s security architecture,
as well as its efforts to sustain dialogue with Mali, was
discussed. We also welcome the support provided by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force relating
to the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework, and we commend the latter for
its determination to comply with existing obligations.
Despite those positive developments, we remain
worried about the deteriorating security situation in the
Sahel, characterized by increasing incidents of terrorist
attacks and the use of improvised explosive devices.
While strongly condemning such attacks against
civilian and security personnel in the region, including
in Burkina Faso, we pay tribute to the gallant soldiers
who continue to sacrifice their lives for peace in the
region, and we commiserate with the families of all
those who have lost their lives.
The A3 recalls that the destabilization of the Sahel
region is directly connected to the destabilization of
Libya. We note with concern the spillover effect on
the Sahel of the lingering crisis in Libya, as well as its

S/PV.9322

spread to coastal countries such as Togo and Benin. We
therefore call for coordinated action to help manage the
adverse impact of that development on the countries of
the region and to provide the G-5 Sahel Joint Force with
the support it requires to enable it to operate effectively.
In that regard, we also note that the Joint Force, which
has been successful in carrying out major operations
against terrorist organizations and insurgency groups,
has not enjoyed the same measure of financial support in
recent times. Indeed, we believe that, notwithstanding its
challenges, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force remains an essential
complementary mechanism for addressing the evolving
security situation in the Sahel. It is therefore important
to enhance our collective efforts to galvanize the required
support for the Joint Force.
Further to the issues I have raised, the A3 wishes
to highlight the following points, which we consider
to be critical for enhancing the responsiveness of the
Joint Force.
First, we encourage the further efforts of the Heads
of State and Ministers of the Group to revitalize the Joint
Force through the adoption of a reconfigured concept
of operations and additional operational arrangements
to meet the new security dynamics. We also welcome
the nomination of a new Force Commander and the
adoption of additional prudential measures to operate a
more cost-effective Group and Joint Force.
Secondly, we welcome the prioritization of efforts to
address governance and development challenges in order
to undercut the radicalization agenda of terrorists and
other armed groups, which have targeted young people
and local communities in their efforts to destabilize the
countries of the G-5 Sahel, while looting their natural
resources. In that context, we encourage coordination
across the three pillars of governance, resilience and
security of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, and we urge the leveraging of the commitment
made at recent meetings of the Group’s Heads of State
and Ministers. We encourage further investments in
non-kinetic measures to tackle the underlying causes
of instability, including with regard to governance and
development deficits. We consider it useful to embrace
a multidimensional and whole-of-society approach that
empowers, at all levels, critical agents of change, such as
women and young people, in the development, conflict
prevention and governance processes of the countries
of the Sahel. Equally important is the intervening role
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in addressing
the dire socioeconomic conditions, including through

23-1374513/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

agricultural self-employment and other developmental
interventions, such as quick-impact community
projects. In that regard, we also welcome the forwardlooking recommendations contained in the advisory
note of the PBC for today’s meeting.
Thirdly, we encourage further support from
Member States, especially donor partners, in addressing
the infrastructure deficits of the Joint Force, which
have manifested themselves in the ongoing technical
and operational challenges resulting from the lack of
storage capacity at some battalion locations and the
insufficient maintenance of storage equipment, as well
as insecurity along supply routes.
Fourthly, while underscoring the critical logistical
and operational support provided to the Joint Force
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), we remain
worried about the logistical and operational challenges
facing MINUSMA itself, including as a result of
the gradual withdrawal of some troop-contributing
countries from the Mission. In that regard, the consistent
call by the Secretary-General for the Council to have
a convergence of views on addressing the logistical
and funding challenges facing the Mission in order to
enhance its robustness is essential. While we reflect on
the options provided by the Secretary-General in the
strategic review report of the Mission (S/2023/36), it
is important for us to do so in a manner that enables
us to arrive at an option that would make MINUSMA
effective, as well as able to sustain its support to the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force in responding to the challenging
security environment.
Fifthly, we need to leverage the complementary
role of other regional mechanisms, such as the Accra
Initiative, the Nouakchott process and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, in addressing the security challenges
of the Sahel. We remain hopeful that the broad
consultations by the Independent High-Level Panel on
Security and Development in the Sahel, led by former
President Issoufou, on the strategic assessment on
the Sahel will provide practical and forward-looking
recommendations that will help to harmonize all
relevant regional mechanisms in order to consolidate
the gains made in tackling the security situation in
the Sahel.
Sixthly and lastly, we remain concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation arising from heightened
insecurity in the region, including the increased
14/19

16/05/2023

displacements. The adverse impact of climate change
on the security and humanitarian situation also requires
greater attention. While appealing to development and
donor partners to consider scaling up their funding
support for the region’s humanitarian fund, we also urge
for prioritizing support for building climate resilience
among member countries. It is equally important for the
Council to be united in its views on providing support
to the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel to execute its mandate, including in the area of
advocacy related to the impact of climate on security.
In conclusion, the A3 believes it is important for
the Council to move beyond the narrative of affirming
support for the critical role of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
by heeding the long-standing call to provide predictable
funding to help deal with the logistical and operational
challenges affecting its effectiveness. The future of the
region of the Sahel is threatened by the deteriorating
security situation, and it is now more important than
ever to embrace both stronger political will and deeper
cooperation at the national, regional and international
levels if we are to salvage the situation. The A3 stands
in solidarity with the peoples of the Sahel, and we
reaffirm our respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all countries of the region. There is no
better time to act than now.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee, Mr. Tiaré and Ms. Diouf for their
informative briefings.
Malta believes that a stable, consistent and viable
regional response, backed by international support, is
urgently required as part of the solution to the terrorism
and violent extremism that has gripped the region.
Malta is deeply concerned about the wave of violence
that has increased tenfold in recent years, as well as
about the humanitarian situation in the region. We must
never lose sight of the grave impact that the violence is
having on civilians, especially the devastating toll it is
taking on children, with staggering increases in killing
and maiming, the systematic burning and looting of
schools and food insecurity brought about by blockades
on villages and the sabotage of water networks.
Furthermore, the confirmed killings of hundreds
of people in Moura by the Malian armed forces and
foreign military personnel are deeply saddening and
disturbing. It is important to acknowledge the victims.
Justice is needed to combat impunity.
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

The key to unlocking progress for peace and
development among the countries of the region has to
confront the multiplicity of their existing challenges,
which can be tackled only through enhanced regional
leadership and cooperation and the sharing of expertise
and solidarity between the Sahelian and coastal
communities. Ensuring the protection and welfare of
civilians must always be a priority. On that note, and
despite the significant challenges of the past year, Malta
remains fully supportive of the continued efforts to
operationalize the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel. We thank the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali for its
continued invaluable support for the Joint Force. In
parallel, we look forward to the outcome of the work
of the High-Level Panel on Security and Development
in the Sahel in proposing innovative ways to address
the security challenges aggravated by the spiralling
humanitarian and economic problems in the region. We
must also take into account the severe consequences
of climate change in the region, threatening access to
food and water by undermining agricultural activity
and severely impairing the health and welfare of
vulnerable communities. That triggers conflict over
food and water resources, leading to significant
difficulties in sustaining livelihoods and amplifying
the effects of existing vulnerabilities. And as we have
heard today, women and children bear the brunt of that.
A holistic and effective counter-terrorism
strategy for the region must include a comprehensive
understanding of the drivers of violent extremism and
insecurity, as well as whole-of-society approaches to
tackling the issues. Resilience should be bolstered by
trust in Government systems and their institutions,
coupled with respect for human rights. Malta calls
on the Governments concerned to deliver the level of
governance and justice that their people deserve through
transitions to democratic rule and respect for the rule of
law. The Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union have a central role to play in
such efforts. Malta welcomes the cooperation between
the Joint Force and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in its support
for the Organization’s respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law obligations, which must
underpin the conduct of all military operations.
Malta strongly advocates for increased support for
women peacebuilders as agents of change in developing
strategies to counter terrorism and violent extremism,
including through early-warning mechanisms. We call

S/PV.9322

for more gender-responsive capacity-strengthening
and protection efforts to enable the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in building and
sustaining peace and preventing relapses into conflict.
Meanwhile, we will continue to back significant efforts
for regional cooperation in the Sahel that are aimed at
strengthening security and governance, based on respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee and Executive Secretary Eric Tiaré for their
comprehensive briefings. We also thank the Peacebuilding Commission for its valuable recommendations,
including on the importance of a regional approach to
promoting stability and security in the region.
The United Arab Emirates believes that the Sahel
region has a host of opportunities for the achievement
of security and development for its people, which will
require continued coordination and strengthened efforts
to address the region’s numerous and varied challenges,
particularly considering the spread of terrorism to the
West African coast and the threat that poses to regional
and international peace and security. In that context,
we welcome the outcome of the recent meeting of the
leaders of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
and the subsequent ministerial meeting, and commend
their efforts to reformulate their collective approach to
tackling their common challenges and their collective
efforts to overcome obstacles. In the context of today’s
meeting, I would like to discuss four important points
that are key to achieving sustainable peace.
First, it is important to make tangible progress in
the transition processes that are under way in various
countries in the region. That depends on establishing
inclusive political processes that can ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and
provide young people with opportunities to take part
in building institutions that reflect their aspirations.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations such as the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States to support political processes by helping the
States concerned strengthen their governance and
return to constitutional systems, while considering the
specific contexts of each State. The States of the region
should also continue their cooperation and dialogue
with regional and international actors with a view to
building bridges and reaching understanding on ways
to achieve stability.

23-1374515/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, we must continue to support regional
initiatives and mechanisms established to address
transnational threats such as terrorism and organized
crime, while exploring ways to make such support more
effective by actively listening to the views of regional
leaders and understanding their needs. Strengthening
coordination and consultations in the context of such
regional initiatives would undoubtedly contribute to
sharing information and lessons learned, ensuring
concerted efforts and achieving better results at various
levels. The G-5 Joint Force is a critical tool that deserves
continued support, and the Security Council should
carefully consider the best ways to assist its efficient
and sustained operations. We also look forward to the
recommendations of the Independent High-Level Panel
on Security and Development in the Sahel. Given the
complex nature of the challenges facing the region, it is
essential for the international community to continually
update its methods to keep pace with the evolving
conditions on the ground.
Thirdly, we must focus on addressing the root causes
of conflicts and extremism, with the goal of promoting
the principles of tolerance and peaceful coexistence.
It is therefore imperative to implement development
initiatives that bridge social and economic gaps and
meet the people’s needs. By doing so, we can prevent the
creation of vacuums that extremist and terrorist groups
can exploit to spread their destructive ideologies. In
that regard, the closure of approximately 9,000 schools
owing to violence in the central Sahel, reported by
the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), is deplorable and deeply concerning.
Education is a critical pillar for protecting societies
from extremism and empowering younger generations
to build promising futures. If the desired results are to
be achieved, we emphasize the importance of aligning
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
with national priorities and needs.
Fourthly, the humanitarian crisis in the Sahel region
demands that we find ways to respond effectively to
the populations’ urgent needs. According to OCHA,
nearly 30 million people are in need of assistance. For
its part, the United Arab Emirates has been proactive
in addressing those conditions by providing more than
$600 million to the five Sahel States over the past five
years. Recently, we have also focused on providing
relief aid to cope with the influx of people displaced
from the Sudan to Chad.
16/19

16/05/2023

Fifthly and lastly, we stress the need to focus on more
sustainable approaches to addressing food insecurity
and achieving security and stability in the region. That
includes continuing to deepen our understanding of
the linkages between climate change and instability in
the Sahel, especially the impact of climate change on
agriculture, which in turn causes food insecurity and
worsening conflict.
We thank Ms. Diouf for her briefing, which
highlighted important factors related to climate action
in the region. In that regard, we commend the projects
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, such as the
Liptako-Gourma region project in Mali, which aims
to address conflict patterns associated with climate
change. We recognize how important it is to continue
building on those efforts.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee, the Executive Secretary of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), Mr. Tiaré, and Ms. Diouf
for their briefings. I also thank the Peacebuilding
Commission for its valuable written comments.
Japan is gravely concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in the Sahel. Growing violence and
displacement have exacerbated humanitarian needs.
Food and energy insecurity, climate change and
environmental degradation are compounding existing
vulnerabilities. Joint regional and international efforts
are ever-more important in tackling those multifaceted
challenges. The G-5 Sahel remains an important
framework for regional cooperation and cross-border
security and development. Japan welcomes the continued
commitment shown at the sixth extraordinary summit
of Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, held in February,
and the initiative taken by Mauritania in assuming the
rotational presidency of the Group. Japan echoes calls
by the G-5 Sahel for Mali to rejoin the Group.
The framework should be supported by regional
actors and the international community. In that regard,
Japan appreciates the tripartite European Union-G-5
Sahel-United Nations agreement, which arranged
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to support
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. We also commend
the initiatives launched by regional partners to combat
terrorism and violent extremism, such as the Accra
Initiative. Japan welcomes the recent appointment of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Simão
as head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

the Sahel. Japan further hopes that the recommendations
in the report to be submitted by the Independent HighLevel Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel
will contribute to the improvement of joint regional and
international responses, based on a candid assessment
of the region’s challenges.
On the issue of predictable and sustainable
resources for regional peace operations, Japan remains
fully committed to discussing the matter, including in
the context of the recent Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/328). Political stability can be derived only
from resilient democratic institutions and accountable
governance based on the rule of law. Japan calls on the
authorities of Mali, Burkina Faso and Chad to prepare
for timely, open and inclusive elections — a process
that must include the meaningful participation of
women, young people and minorities. Japan takes note
of the efforts they have made to date and welcomes the
role played by other partners, including the Economic
Community of West African States and the African Union.
Terrorist groups and violent extremists are
exploiting societal fragility. All security operations
should have a holistic and comprehensive approach,
with a long-term perspective, while incorporating
measures to foster social cohesion and address structural
fragility by ensuring local ownership through dialogue
with community leaders and civil society. Security
operations must also respect the rule of law, human
rights and international humanitarian law. Japan
commends the work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and MINUSMA
to support the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in human rights
and humanitarian law compliance, capacity-building
and the fight against impunity.
The Council should remain united in supporting
the region, especially given the spillover of violence
and insecurity into the northern regions of the coastal
States and more recently the potentially destabilizing
effects of the conflict in the Sudan. As Prime Minister
Kishida announced during his visit to Ghana earlier
this month, Japan will contribute to peace and stability
and promote sustainable growth in the Sahel and the
neighbouring coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea.
We remain committed to engaging with the region and
supporting regional initiatives.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Martha Pobee and the Executive Secretary of the

S/PV.9322

Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), Mr. Eric Tiaré,
for their briefings. We also listened very carefully to
Ms. Aïssatou Diouf.
Terrorism is one of the most pressing pan-African
issues. The most complex and serious terrorist threat
is in the Sahara-Sahel region. The situation is further
compounded by the subversive activities of several
extremist groups, against a backdrop of persistent
internal political and socioeconomic crises in the
States in the region. Terrorist International, which
is entrenched in the Sahara-Sahel region, is stepping
up its activities and extending its geographical reach,
which poses a direct threat to the coastal States of the
Gulf of Guinea. The tri-border area of Mali, Burkina
Faso and the Niger remains the epicentre of tensions.
Militants of the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara
and the Jama‘at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin are
highly active in that triangle. The most serious issues
are prevalent in Ménaka, Mali, where extremists are
fighting for control of the main transportation arteries.
It is important for the States of the region to continue to
cooperate on security matters. On 24 March, the Niger
announced that it would engage in anti-terrorist raids
jointly with Mali and is activating its special forces
units against the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara in
the Hamarat region. Signatories to the Algiers peace
agreement are also joining the fight.
We can see that the situation is also serious
elsewhere in the region. The activities of Boko Haram
cells and those of the Islamic State in West Africa, in
particular, are exacerbating the worrisome situation
in Nigeria and the Niger. The situation in Burkina Faso
and Chad remains extremely unstable. In that context, it
is worth recalling that the current high level of threats
to security and stability in the Sahara-Sahel region is
a direct consequence of Western countries’ military
intervention in Libya in 2011 and the subsequent collapse
of Libyan statehood.
France’s attempts to destabilize the Sahel have
not borne fruit. Furthermore, the terrorist threat has
increased as a result. On that note, we are not surprised
to have heard the representative of France express
concern about its inability to rectify the situation in the
country. France has lost its post-colonial position, and
as a result all it can do is pin the blame on someone else.
Paris’ intransigent unilateral actions, aimed at effecting
regime change in Bamako, continue to cause significant
damage to Africa’s collective efforts to achieve stability
in the Sahara-Sahel region. The most recent report of

23-1374517/19

S/PV.9322

Peace and security in Africa

the Secretary-General (S/2023/328), which we have all
carefully read, includes information on the European
Commission’s decision to end the funding provided to
the Joint Force by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali for logistical
and operational support.
We understand the reasons for Mali’s withdrawal
from the G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force. As a result, the
political and military capacities of the Force have been
significantly reduced. Against that backdrop, a complete
overhaul of our approach to cooperation in the area of
counter-terrorism is required, which we have not seen to
date. We are convinced that the lead role in supporting
peace and security in the Sahara-Sahel region should
be played by the States of the region, with the tangible
support of the international community. However, it is
worth underscoring that the international assistance
provided to the Sahel States should be based on the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, respect for national sovereignty and the principle
of African solutions for African problems. The States
of the Sahel should exercise full control — through
actions, not words — over their decision-making in the
fight against terrorism, because the security situation
is hugely significant for every country in the region.
When there is a terrorist threat, There are clear military
responses that can be made to terrorist threats, and they
should be swift. If bilateral agreements between the
armed forces of the countries of the region are the most
effective way to do that, we can only support them. In
such situations, all political considerations, let alone
geopolitical considerations, should take a back seat.
We commend the commitment of the leading regional
associations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), to
getting involved in the task of combating the terrorist
threat in the Sahara-Sahel. What is important is moving
from words to action as quickly as possible, and the
decision at the ECOWAS summit in Abuja on 4 December
2022 to fast-track the mobilization of $1 billion for the
implementation of the ECOWAS 2020–2024 action
plan on counter-terrorism was aimed at precisely that.
Strengthening coordination among the region’s peace
and stability structures is a top priority.
Russia will continue to participate constructively,
including as a permanent member of the Council, in the
collective efforts to ensure security in the Sahara-Sahel
region. We will also continue to provide bilateral support
to the States in the region, including by building the
18/19

16/05/2023

capacity of their armed forces, training their military and
law-enforcement personnel and providing humanitarian
assistance, as in the past. All of that engagement is
perfectly legitimate and is welcomed by the countries of
the region. However, we are not surprised by the repeated
attempts to denigrate our efforts to provide assistance to
Mali and other countries in the region. That now seems
to have become a main theme of the statements delivered
in the Council by the representatives of the United States,
as well as a favourite topic of America’s so-called free
media. We deplore the impact of that on African States,
including Mali — which is now facing serious challenges
on all fronts, especially in the area of security.
Unfortunately, Western States are now using
every possible lever at their disposal, including, very
regrettably, the levers of the United Nations. In that
regard, we consider the report by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) regarding
the events in Moura in March 2022 to be yet another
politically motivated attempt to discredit Mali’s efforts
to combat extremism. It creates the impression that
instead of engaging directly with the Government
of Mali, objectively and impartially, to establish the
circumstances of what happened in Moura, the OHCHR
obediently followed the lead of a number of countries
that were demanding instant results. That undoubtedly
affected the conduct of the fact-finding investigation,
which relied on the testimony of unnamed witnesses and
the proverbial tradition of “beyond a reasonable doubt”.
Not to mention the fact that none of the experts who
prepared the report visited Moura in person. I ask my
colleagues to carefully read the official comments of the
Government of Mali on the report on the events in Moura.
I urge them to respect the Malian authorities and wait for
the results of their national investigation. Meanwhile, we
will continue to provide assistance to Bamako, and we
will never interfere in the internal affairs of Mali.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Switzerland.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and
Executive Secretary Tiaré for their briefings, as well as the
Peacebuilding Commission for its written contribution.
I also listened carefully to Ms. Diouf’s very informative
briefing and especially note her recommendation on the
involvement of local communities.
23-13745

16/05/2023

Peace and security in Africa

As we have just heard — and as we read in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/328) — the countries
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) are facing
multiple, interconnected and transnational challenges,
not least of which are armed conflict, growing insecurity
and the impacts of climate change. The response to the
insecurity in the region over the past 10 years has mainly
been security-focused, with a particular emphasis on
the military front. However, it is clear that has not been
enough to reduce or even contain the threat. We must
therefore improve stability by working on the political,
economic, social and environmental issues in the
countries of the region. That requires a coherent political
strategy that brings together three key measures.
First, conflict resolution and prevention must go hand
in hand. Experience on the ground shows that if we are to
end armed conflict, combat terrorism and prevent violent
extremism, we must address the root causes and drivers
of violence holistically. Young people must play a key
role in that regard. They are not merely targets vulnerable
to radicalization and recruitment by extremist groups,
but partners in preventing radicalization and countering
violent extremism. For example, young people build
resilience in communities and facilitate post-trauma
healing and reconciliation. They also play a key role in
raising awareness and mobilizing local capacities. That
numerically large and dynamic generation is ready to act
for positive change. We have to empower them and give
them opportunities to show leadership and make their
voices heard.
Secondly, we must address the environmental and
climate factors that affect stability in the Sahel. Climate
change and extreme weather events have a significant
impact on the quality and availability of natural
resources. That is in addition to the destructive effects of
conflict and the weak resilience and response capacity of
institutions that are often fragile. Many mechanisms for
conflict resolution, the management of natural resources

S/PV.9322

and the hosting of displaced persons exist at the local
level. Those local experiences should be complemented
by regional and international measures. Switzerland is
aware of that and is committed to contributing to the
resilience of the pastoral sector, including in Chad,
Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger. In Chad, Switzerland
supports a programme that is helping to delay movements
to the agricultural areas in the south of the country by
three months, thereby reducing tensions between farmers
and pastoralists in a sustainable way.
Thirdly, human rights and international humanitarian
law in armed conflict must be respected, including
during security operations, whether they are conducted
by internal security forces or the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
We recognize the progress made by members of the Joint
Force, in close collaboration with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on the implementation
of the human rights compliance framework and due
diligence policy.
We need a collective effort to decisively carve out
future responses to the security challenges in the Sahel.
We therefore look forward with great interest to the
strategic review of the Independent High-Level Panel on
Security and Development in the Sahel, led by President
Mahamadou Issoufou. The solution to these challenges
lies in cooperation, not isolation. The actors in the
region, including the members of the G-5 Sahel, must act
together, supported by the international community and
listening to local solutions, especially those proposed
by young Africans — the engine of development on
the continent.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-1374519/19
