A/59/666–S/2005/9

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

General Assembly
Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 18
Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991

Distr.: General
7 January 2005
English
Original: English and French

Security Council
Sixtieth year

Identical letters dated 6 January 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
I wish to bring to your attention two important matters that have a direct
impact on the ability of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to
implement its completion strategy. Both concern the ad litem judges of the Tribunal.
You may recall in this connection that the term of office of the members of the
current pool of ad litem judges of the Tribunal will come to an end on 11 June 2005.
You may also recall that, under the Tribunal’s statute, ad litem judges are not
eligible for re-election. All members of the current pool of ad litem judges will
therefore cease to be ad litem judges of the Tribunal on 11 June 2005.
The first matter that I wish to draw to your attention concerns a number of ad
litem judges whom I have already appointed to serve in the Tribunal for the trial of
particular cases.
President Meron has advised me that, of the nine ad litem judges who are
currently serving in the Tribunal, two are adjudicating in a case that is due to finish
within the next two weeks. The other seven, however, are adjudicating in cases
which he anticipates will continue beyond 11 June 2005.
Specifically, ad litem judges Brydensholt and Eser are currently adjudicating,
together with permanent judge Agius, in the Orić case. President Meron informs me
that it is anticipated that the hearings in this case, which commenced on 6 October
2004, will be completed and judgement handed down in November 2005.
Ad litem judges Rasoazanany and Swart are adjudicating, together with
permanent judge Antonetti, in the trial of the Hadžihasanović case. President Meron
informs me that it is anticipated that hearings in that case, which commenced on
2 December 2003, will be completed and judgement handed down in September
2005.

05-20290 (E) 130105

*0520290*

A/59/666
S/2005/9

Ad litem judges Thelin and Van den Wyngaert are adjudicating, together with
permanent Judge Parker, in the trial of the Limaj case. President Meron informs me
that it is anticipated that hearings in that case, which commenced on 15 November
2004, will be completed and judgement handed down in November 2005. In this
connection, it may be recalled that, in its decision 59/406 of 19 November 2004, the
General Assembly elected ad litem judge Van den Wyngaert as a permanent judge of
the International Tribunal. Her term of office as a permanent judge will not
commence however until 17 November 2005.
Ad litem judge Canivell is adjudicating, together with permanent judges Orie
and El-Mahdi, in the trial of the Krajišnik case. Hearings in that case commenced on
3 February 2003. President Meron has informed me that permanent judge El-Mahdi
will be stepping down from that case on 14 January 2005. It has nevertheless been
decided that proceedings may continue with a substitute judge sitting in Judge
El-Mahdi’s stead. Depending on the position that the Security Council and the
General Assembly may take with regard to the second matter addressed in the
present letter, it is envisaged that proceedings in that case may accordingly continue
as early as 14 February 2005. In that event, President Meron informs me that it is
anticipated that proceedings in the case should be completed and judgement handed
down in April 2006.
If the seven ad litem judges concerned were not allowed to continue to
adjudicate in those cases beyond 11 June 2005, it would be necessary to start each
trial anew with fresh panels of judges and to order the rehearing of witnesses and
the representation of arguments. That would obviously have a serious negative
impact on the ability of the Tribunal to achieve the target dates in its completion
strategy. It would also have substantial financial consequences.
The statute of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia does not
contain a provision similar to that contained in Article 13, paragraph 3, of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice whereby judges continue to discharge
their duties until they are replaced and, thereafter, until they finish any cases they
may have begun.
In the absence of any such provision, the approval of the Security Council, as
the parent organ of the Tribunal, and of the General Assembly, as the organ that
elects its judges, would be needed in order to permit the seven ad litem judges
concerned to continue to serve in the Tribunal beyond 11 June 2005 and to finish the
cases in which they are currently adjudicating, notwithstanding the expiry of their
terms of office. I would request that the Security Council and the General Assembly
grant such approval.
The second matter that I wish to draw to your attention concerns requests that I
have recently received from President Meron that I appoint two additional members
from the current pool of ad litem judges to serve in the Tribunal for trying cases. In
both cases, it is anticipated that the trials concerned will continue beyond 11 June
2005.
Specifically, President Meron has requested that I appoint ad litem judge
Szénási to serve in the Tribunal for the trial of the Halilović case. He informs me
that that trial is ready to commence on 24 January 2005 and is expected to last some
nine months. If that trial were to commence on 24 January 2005, judgement would
accordingly be handed down in October 2005.
President Meron has also requested that I appoint ad litem judge Hanoteau to
serve in the Tribunal for the trial of the Krajišnik case. As has been noted above,

2

A/59/666
S/2005/9

that trial is already under way. However, one of the judges who is currently
adjudicating in that trial will be stepping down from the case on 14 January 2005. It
has nevertheless been decided that proceedings may continue with a substitute
judge. President Meron informs me that, if appointed, Judge Hanoteau would be that
substitute judge. He also informs me that if Judge Hanoteau is appointed with effect
from 18 January 2005, he expects that the judge should be able to familiarize
himself with the record of the proceedings in time for hearings to be able to resume
as early as 14 February 2005. In that event, it is anticipated that proceedings in the
case would be completed and judgement handed down in April 2006.
Having reviewed those requests, it is my view that, except insofar as they
would involve the appointment of ad litem judges to trials that would continue
beyond their term of office, they comply with the relevant terms of the statute of the
Tribunal. Subject to the comments below, it would accordingly be my intention to
appoint those ad litem judges to serve in the Tribunal for the trial of the two cases
concerned.
However, before I proceed to do so, I would consider it highly desirable that
the Security Council and the General Assembly first agree that the judges
concerned, if appointed, may continue to serve in the Tribunal for the trials of the
cases in question and to finish those trials, notwithstanding the expiry of their term
of office. I would therefore request that the Security Council and the General
Assembly grant such approval.
President Meron has informed me that he does not anticipate making any
further requests that I appoint members of the current pool of ad litem judges to
serve in the Tribunal for the trial of cases.
President Meron also informs me that, were the Security Council and the
General Assembly to adopt the decisions sought in the present letter, both with
regard to the seven ad litem judges who are currently serving in the Tribunal and
with regard to the two additional ad litem judges whose appointments are being
sought, he does not anticipate that the cumulative period of service of any of the ad
litem judges concerned would amount to or exceed three years. The limit on the
cumulative length of appointments of ad litem judges laid down in the Tribunal’s
statute would therefore continue to be observed.
The statutory limit on the number of ad litem judges who may be appointed to
serve in the Tribunal at any one time would also continue to be observed.
Were the Security Council and the General Assembly to adopt the decisions
sought, no additional financial requirements would arise for the budget of the
Tribunal for the biennium 2004-2005. Requirements for the ad litem judges for
2006-2007 would be considered in the context of the Tribunal’s proposed budget for
the biennium 2006-2007.
I am sure that you will agree that it is highly desirable that every effort be
made to ensure that the Tribunal remains in the best possible position to achieve the
target dates in its completion strategy. I should accordingly be most grateful if you
would bring the present letter to the immediate attention of the members of the
General Assembly, under agenda item 18, and of the Security Council in order that
they might take appropriate action on the matters that I have raised as soon as
possible.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

3
