S/PV.9177

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9177th meeting

Monday, 31 October 2022, 1.50 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Figueiredo Sobral Torres
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Nyarku
Mr. Setia
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Heines
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. De Laurentis

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 26 September 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/716)
Letter dated 15 October 2022 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/766)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-66356 (E)
*2266356*

S/PV.9177

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 1.50 p.m.

Against:
None

Adoption of the agenda

Abstaining:
China

The agenda was adopted.

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 14 votes in favour, none against and
one abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted
as resolution 2657 (2022).

The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 26 September 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/716)

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

Letter dated 15 October 2022 from the
Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning
Somalia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/766)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/812, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/716, which contains the text of a letter
dated 26 September 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/766, which contains the text of
a letter dated 15 October 2022 from the Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
2/6

31/10/2022

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Today’s vote
sends a powerful message of Security Council support,
not just to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM), but also to President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud and all Somalis.
UNSOM has played an important role in Somalia
since its inception. The recent strategic review found
its mandate well aligned with Somalia’s national
priorities. Its recommendations will enable the Mission
to continue to support Somalia through a new era.
The successful conclusion of the electoral process
and the peaceful transition of power gives Somalia
an opportunity to make progress in achieving its
national objectives and in the fight against Al-Shabaab.
We encourage all Somalis to work together to seize
that opportunity.
The United Kingdom will continue to stand with
Somalia, and we commend President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud’s determination to defeat Al-Shabaab.
Finally, let me take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Swan
for his extraordinary leadership and commitment
during this critical transition phase. I also thank all of
my colleagues for their engagement on resolution 2657
(2022) and my team for their work.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to have voted in favour of
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM).
This is a crucial time for Somalia, and we believe
that mandate will further UNSOM’s efforts to support
Somalia’s Federal Government as it addresses serious
challenges, including responding to an unprecedented
drought, ensuring reconciliation among the national
Government and federal member states, completing
22-66356

31/10/2022

The situation in Somalia

the review of the federal Constitution and achieving
debt relief.
We are also encouraged by the fact that resolution
2657 (2022) incorporated recommendations from
UNSOM’s strategic review, including further
coordination between the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia, the United Nations country team and other
multilateral and bilateral partners.
The United States condemns in the strongest
possible terms the 29 October terrorist attack by
Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu and expresses its deepest
sympathy and condolences to the families of the
victims, the Federal Government of Somalia and the
people of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
Finally, the United States expresses its deep
appreciation to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral James Swan for his leadership and years
of service in Somalia. We are very grateful for his
dedicated service in UNSOM and Somalia during such
a challenging time.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya enthusiastically voted
in favour of resolution 2657 (2022). We thank the United
Kingdom and our fellow members of the Security
Council for the consultative negotiations that led to the
adoption. Kenya is confident that the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM), which is anchored in the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment report on the Mission (S/2022/716/
annex), will accelerate the ongoing stabilization efforts
and bolster the strong momentum to achieve security
and effective governance by the Federal Government
of Somalia under President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
in implementing the Somalia transition plan and the
national security architecture, among other initiatives.
Kenya condemns in the strongest terms the heinous
terrorist attacks by the Al-Qaida affiliate Al-Shabaab
in Mogadishu on 29 October. We express our heartfelt
condolences to the families of those who lost loved
ones, wish a full recovery to those injured and reaffirm
our full support for Somalia’s counter-terrorism
efforts. Al-Shabaab’s brutal terrorism is intentionally
undermining peacebuilding, State building, economic
development and humanitarian responses to the greatest
drought in decades. Standing against Al-Shabaab
means standing for the most vulnerable and for Somalia
and the region’s urgent need for security and stability.
Members of the Security Council must today ask

S/PV.9177

themselves, how much more brutality do we need to
witness without toughening our actions against that
group? How many more need to die before we act like
it is one of the world’s most atrocious terrorist groups
that deserves the toughest measures that the Council
can deploy?
We must be able to take several actions at the same
time. The first is to lend support to Somalia, as we have
done by adopting resolution 2657 (2022), which renews
the mandate of UNSOM. We must also lend every
measure of support to the Government of Somalia,
especially at the national level, but also to the federal
states. That includes enabling more arms purchases
and their effective storage and management in order to
enable the military and the police to exceed Al-Shabaab’s
level of armaments. We must also simultaneously apply
greater pressure on Al-Shabaab through sanctions
that frustrate its funding, access to weapons, travel,
organizational structure and recruitment.
Achieving the two latter actions within the sanctions
regime pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) will not be
easy, but it must be done. More openness to innovation
is needed if we are to undertake efforts commensurate
with our outrage over the latest terrorist attack against
the innocent. Kenya will continue to play its rightful
role as a neighbour and a troop-contributing country in
providing the necessary support to peacebuilding and
security efforts in Somalia.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
its establishment, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) has made great efforts
in promoting the political process and coordinating the
support of the international community. China supports
the extension of UNSOM’s mandate.
However, there is still need for improvement in
resolution 2657 (2022) on issues such as the protection
of civilians, humanitarian access, climate change and
the protection of children, and the future direction of
the relevant efforts must be clarified. China therefore
abstained in the voting. I would like to emphasize the
following points.
First, we hope that the Government of Somalia
will effectively assume the primary responsibility of
maintaining peace and security in the country. The
situation in Somalia is currently at a critical stage.
Security issues remain the biggest challenge facing
Somalia’s Government. On 29 October, Al-Shabaab
launched a terrorist attack in Mogadishu, which led to

22-663563/6

S/PV.9177

The situation in Somalia

heavy casualties. We strongly condemn such attacks.
That incident shows once again that terrorism poses a
serious threat to the security situation in Somalia and
the Horn of Africa, and that further intensified efforts
are needed to combat it.
China attaches great importance to the African
Union’s position on Somalia and greatly appreciates
the efforts and sacrifices of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) to improve the situation in
the country. AMISOM will remain indispensable for
Somalia for some time to come. China hopes that the
Somali Government and its security forces will continue
to actively cooperate with AMISOM and take concrete
measures to implement the security transition plan,
fight corruption, strengthen governance and improve
livelihoods in order to win the hearts and minds of the
population in the recovered areas.
Secondly, we hope that the Somali Government
will continue to make greater efforts to address
humanitarian issues. The current humanitarian
situation in the Horn of Africa, where Somalia is
situated, remains dire. According to a report by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
security issues, bureaucratic and administrative
restrictions and inadequate infrastructure are the
main obstacles that impede international humanitarian
action. We hope that the Somali Government will pay
more attention to humanitarian issues and that effective
measures will be taken to better ensure the safety
and security of vulnerable groups and humanitarian
workers, reduce bureaucratic restrictions and provide
humanitarian protection.
Thirdly, we hope that the Somali Government
will continue to strengthen its management of
weapons and ammunition. The Secretary-General
recently submitted a letter to the Security Council
containing recommendations on the sanctions regime
and requested that the Somali Government further
build its capacity for the management of weapons and
ammunition (S/2022/698). In relation to the adjustment
of the sanctions regime, the Somali Government must
continue to improve its weapons and ammunition
management capacities.
The Security Council will discuss a draft resolution
on the sanctions regime for Somalia next month. China’s
position on sanctions has remained clear and consistent.
We will actively participate in the discussions to ensure
that the relevant mechanisms are aligned with the
4/6

31/10/2022

efforts of Somalia and the international community.
I also wish to reiterate that China will continue to
support the work of UNSOM and AMISOM.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Permanent Representative of Somalia to
the United Nations, Mr. Abukar Dahir Osman.
At the outset, allow me to express our sincere
condolences to the Government and the people
of Somalia following the heinous act of terrorism
perpetrated in Mogadishu on 29 October, during which
100 people were killed. Russia resolutely condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
supports the efforts of Somalia to combat that threat.
My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2657
(2022), which was just adopted and for which the United
Kingdom was the penholder, extending the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) until 31 October 2023. However, we share the
view expressed by our Chinese colleagues concerning
the imbalanced nature of some of the wording of the
resolution, including with respect to humanitarian
issues, the protection of children in armed conflict and
human rights.
We also regret that the resolution does not
sufficiently reflect the recommendations of the
strategic review of UNSOM and its mandate conducted
by the Secretariat’s independent team. The UNSOM
mandate has become unbalanced in recent years, which
affects the flexibility and efficiency of the work of the
special political mission and its ability to respond to the
country’s priority issues.
We believe that UNSOM should be more closely
involved with the country’s priorities and that its work
should be clearly evaluated. Respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and unity of
Somalia must be at the centre of the Mission’s work.
We expect to see precisely those principles guiding
UNSOM through the new stage of its work.
As this is the last official meeting under the
Gabonese presidency in October, I would like to
congratulate the delegation of Gabon on the imminent
conclusion of its term as President of the Security
Council. We thank it for its leadership and the hard
work undertaken to ensure the continuation of Council
activities during a very busy month.
22-66356

31/10/2022

The situation in Somalia

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2657 (2022) and thanks the
United Kingdom, as penholder, for facilitating the
inclusive consultations that led to its adoption.
In the light of the terrorist attack in Mogadishu
on 29 October, during which dozens of innocent
people were killed, I would like to express our sincere
condolences and sympathy to the Government and the
people of Somalia, as well as the victims’ families.
We also wish a speedy recovery to all those injured. I
stress the United Arab Emirates continued rejection of
terrorism in all its forms, wherever it appears.
Such events highlight once again the important role
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), particularly its support for nation-building
efforts and strengthening security and Government
institutions with the aim of enabling Somalia to address
those complex challenges, foremost of which is the
fight against the terrorist group Al-Shabaab. Through
resolution 2657 (2022), the Council sends an important
message: it continues to support the Somali people and
it counts on the continuation of UNSOM for providing
vital support to Somalia and its efforts to achieve peace
and stability in the country.
During the negotiations on the mandate, the United
Arab Emirates proposed to delete the term “Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)” replaced it with
the term “Da’esh”. We reiterate that the purpose of that
proposed deletion and replacement is to ensure that
the Security Council is careful not to give credence to
the exploitation by Da’esh and other terrorist groups of
the religion of Islam to justify their violence and hate
through self-proclaimed Islamic appellations.
At this point, we stress once again that there is no
connection between Da’esh and Islam. Furthermore, we
recall that the Council has emphasized in many of its
resolutions that terrorism should not be linked to any
religion. Our proposal is also in line with the position
of the General Assembly, which has already moved
away from using the terms “ISIL” and “Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant” in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We need to reflect that in
the Security Council.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express our sincere appreciation to Special
Representative Swan for his tireless efforts in Somalia.
I also commend the efforts of UNSOM and reiterate the

S/PV.9177

United Arab Emirates commitment to supporting peace
and stability in Somalia.
Finally, I join others in congratulating you, Sir, and
the Government of Gabon on an outstanding presidency.
We wish your successor the best of luck.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on a successful presidency of
the Security Council this month.
I would also like to thank all those who sent
messages of condolence and outpourings of support
following the brutal terrorist attack in Mogadishu at the
weekend. We are grateful for the solidarity we received
from our international friends as we stand together in
strong opposition to terrorism everywhere and in all
its manifestations.
My delegation takes note of resolution 2657 (2022)
,just adopted, on renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). In
that regard, I would like to make the following points.
First, this is the moment for the United Nations
to renew its commitment to the Somali people and
at the same time to strengthen coordination and a
transparent consistency in the efforts of the different
entities and agencies of the United Nations and other
regional and international partners. It is essential to
create an environment that is conducive to advancing
the Government’s efforts to achieve political stability,
security and sustainable development in the country.
Secondly, the Security Council must strongly
uphold the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. The presence
of the United Nations in Somalia should be geared
towards safeguarding the country’s territorial integrity.
It is also crucial that all necessary efforts continue to be
undertaken in line with the shared commitment of the
United Nations for a strong and united Somalia.
Thirdly, despite the completion of the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic review of UNSOM, the transition
from a special political mission to a United Nations
country team is not yet well defined. Therefore,
UNSOM’s end state must be clear, encompassing a
common understanding and the Federal Government of
Somalia’s shared vision for an exit strategy.

22-663565/6

S/PV.9177

The situation in Somalia

Fourthly, Somali United Nations national
professional officers play a crucial role on the ground
by facilitating the delivery of the mandate of the
United Nations and the African Union in Somalia, in
coordination with the national authorities. We remain
concerned about the low level of recruitment of Somali
national professional officers, especially qualified
female candidates for UNSOM, which is less than 10 per
cent, surprisingly. The Somali Government recognizes
the importance of our women’s equal and meaningful
participation in peace processes, peacebuilding and
security. Last week’s significant debate on women
and peace and security (see S/PV.9158) addressed
ways to strengthen women’s leadership and resilience
as a path to peace in regions that are plagued by
armed groups. Nonetheless, the women and peace and
security agenda should be action-oriented and should
translate into actionable mechanisms on the ground.
I would like to remind the Council that the General
Assembly has asked the Secretary-General to consider
other options for the nationalization of functions in
United Nations operations and make further efforts in
national capacity-building, in line with resolution 2628
(2022). The Federal Government of Somalia stands
ready to assist UNSOM in the implementation of its
nationalization strategy at the Mission level. We look
forward to seeing the United Nations put more effort
into the nationalization of functions in its operations
in Somalia and into women’s contribution to peace
and security.
In conclusion, we have taken significant steps to
achieve peace and stability. While we are optimistic
about the significant progress that has been achieved
in security matters, we are aware that progress must
be consolidated on various fronts, especially in the
fight against Al-Shabaab. The Somali Government
is defeating Al-Shabaab on many battle fronts in its

6/6

31/10/2022

federal member states, with the strong support of our
local populations, and we remain united in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names on the list of speakers.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of October, I would like to take the
opportunity to express the sincere appreciation of the
Gabonese delegation to the members of the Council
and the Secretariat for all the support and assistance
they have given us. In a particularly busy month, we
are pleased to have been able to reach a consensus on
several important issues on our agenda. We could not
have done it alone. I am grateful for the support and
assistance of each delegation and each representative
of the Secretariat. I am also grateful to the technical
support team, the conference officers, the interpreters,
the translators, the verbatim reporters and the
security staff.
As Gabon ends its presidency, I know I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of Ghana
good luck in its presidency for the month of November,
starting tomorrow.
As I bang the gavel for the last time, I would like
to say that it has truly been an honour for us. October
has been a special time for my country. I want to
pay tribute to the leadership of the President of the
Gabonese Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo
Ondimba, and to commend the dynamism of the very
strong team that has supported me. I hope that our
presidency has made some members want to visit
Gabon. And if they do, they will hear our wonderful
people say “Thank you” in a variety of beautiful ways
in Gabon’s many languages — akiba, abora, levelewe,
diboti, akewa, mabweke, ekoba. And I myself thank all
of you very much.
The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m.

22-66356
