A/64/PV.121

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

121st plenary meeting
Monday, 13 September 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Agenda item 13
Prevention of armed conflict
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, held on
18 September 2009, the Assembly decided to include
this item in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-fifth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 13.
Agenda items 21 to 26
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti

Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September
2009, the Assembly decided to include agenda items 21
to 26 in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session, in
accordance with paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to its
resolution 58/316, of 1 July 2004. In that resolution,
the General Assembly decided that those items shall
remain on the agenda for consideration upon
notification by a Member State. Accordingly, those
items have been included in the draft agenda of the
sixty-fifth session.
The Assembly has thus concluded
consideration of agenda items 21 to 26.

its

Agenda item 48 and 114 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/64/L.72)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, under items 48 and 114, the General

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-53066 (E)

*1053066*

A/64/PV.121

Assembly adopted resolution 64/184 and decision
64/555 on the preparations for the organization of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the sixty-fifth session of
the General Assembly.
In connection with these two items, the General
Assembly now has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/64/L.72, referring the annexed draft
outcome document to the High-level Plenary Meeting
of the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.72. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/64/L.72?
Draft resolution A/64/L.72 was adopted (resolution
64/299).
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen): Since this is probably the
last meeting of this session, I want to pay tribute to
you, Sir, and to your presidency. It has been an
excellent and productive presidency. You produced a
great deal of work on behalf of all of us, and we thank
you very much. As we pay tribute to you, we in the
Group of 77 and China pledge our cooperation to the
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session.
I take the floor on this important issue, first, to
thank the co-facilitators, the Ambassador of Senegal
and the Ambassador of Denmark, and you for your
tireless work to produce this important outcome
document. We in the Group of 77 were looking for a
scaling-up of the resources that will be devoted to the
implementation and realization of the Millennium
Development Goals. But we were conscious of the
economic difficulties that the world is witnessing and
therefore we settled and went along with the
compromise on the proviso that the 0.7 per cent
commitment would be upheld and that the developed
world would step up to the plate and help developing
countries in their realization of the Millennium
Development Goals.
It was not very easy for us. Some members of the
Group of 77 and China had serious reservations on
such issues as human security, but they opted to join
the consensus. Here I want to single out the Bolivarian

2

Republic of Venezuela, which had difficulties with the
concept of human security. But Venezuela was gracious
enough to give prominence to our common interests
rather than to its own individual interests, and so it
joined the consensus. For that, we are grateful to them
and to everyone else, including our partners in the
negotiation.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to join in the
thanks expressed by the Chairman of the Group of 77
and China to you, Sir, for your excellent leadership of
the General Assembly. In that respect, we have
supported the ideas that you have proposed and are
working to ensure that they are fully accomplished.
Venezuela joined the consensus on resolution
64/299, but we should like to state for the record some
of our concerns, which were fully explained during the
negotiation process that was conducted over the course
of several months. The negotiation process surrounding
the outcome document of the High-level Meeting of
the United Nations General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals was arduous and
complicated. The Venezuelan delegation participated
actively in the negotiation process and firmly and
resolutely defended the positions of the G77 and
China. It has also contributed to building a platform
that reflects the positions of the developing countries.
During the negotiations, it became evident that
some countries refuse to recognize the dire
consequences of capitalism’s economic and financial
crisis and claim that developing countries should
continue to implement neo-liberal prescriptions, whose
disastrous effects are also felt by the most vulnerable
sectors in developed countries.
My delegation has reaffirmed that South-South
cooperation, and cooperation in general, should be free
of conditionalities and that countries should design and
implement their own development plans in an
autonomous and sovereign manner, regardless of the
dictates of the Bretton Woods institutions.
The draft document that has been adopted takes
note, for example, of non-existent progress on the
behaviour of the Bretton Woods institutions, which
have failed miserably and are primarily responsible for
the current crisis that is having such disruptive effects,
in particular in developing countries. It also ignores the
importance of implementing instruments such as special
drawing rights, which can leverage the development of

10-53066

A/64/PV.121

countries and contribute to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and to eliminating the
monopoly over credit held by the Bretton Woods
institutions, which have done such harm to peoples.
Another source of disappointment for our country
is the imbalanced and unambitious treatment given to
official development assistance (ODA) an issue that is
so sensitive for developing countries. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize that very important
paragraphs proposed by the Group of 77 and China
during the negotiations were not included in the draft
outcome document. It is important to underscore that
the efforts made by developed countries with regard to
official development assistance have not been
sustained, as large donors have failed to meet the
agreed target of allocating 0.7 per cent of their gross
domestic product to ODA. In addition, it is not clear what
the draft document means by quality of assistance,
especially as an assessment of the improvements in the
quality of assistance should be conditioned by the
“quantity” that those countries provide.
It is also important to point out that, for the sake
of preserving the principles of multilateralism, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has maintained that
worthwhile initiatives of the Secretary-General should
not be placed above those of Member States. Member
States are first and foremost responsible for
formulating national policies to attain the Millennium
Development Goals and for taking actions for the
achievement of the agreed common goals.
My country requests that the record of this
meeting reflect our hope that this process, initiated by
the Secretary-General along with a group of interested
States to ensure that the Global Strategy for Women’s
and Children’s Health, will result in a consensus
multilateral policy that is open, transparent and
inclusive of all Member States. Therefore, by way of
compromise, we have suggested that it be explicitly
reflected that that the Secretary-General’s report on the
Strategy be open to comments and feedback from all
Member States.
Venezuela, which is a resolute supporter of
multilateralism, would also like it reflected in the
record that our acceptance of the paragraph to which I
have referred should not be viewed as acceptance or
legitimization by our country of the practices promoted
through the so-called coalition of the willing, which we

10-53066

think can blur the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Finally, I would like once again to emphasize the
importance that our country attaches to the unity of the
Group of 77 and China as a platform for the countries
of the South. We are therefore grateful for the efforts
made by His Excellency Ambassador Abdullah Alsaidi,
Permanent Representative of Yemen, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Group. We would also like to
acknowledge your efforts, Mr. President, in reaching
consensus on the resolution that has been adopted.
Mr. Salsabili (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus of resolution 64/299 in
the hope that the summit outcome will send a message
of hope to all those suffering from poverty, hunger,
external shocks and foreign intervention. We sincerely
view the summit as the last opportunity to accelerate
progress towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015, taking into account
the progress made with regard to the internationally
agreed development goals through a comprehensive
review of successes, best practices and lessons learned,
as well as obstacles, gaps, challenges and
opportunities, leading to concrete strategies for action.
However, the tendency of developed partners,
from the very beginning, to divert the focus of the
conference to so-called cross-cutting issues and to
insist on artificial red lines against the scaling up of the
global partnership made the negotiation process
cumbersome and seriously harmed the final draft
outcome as an agenda for action. Due to that same
approach taken by developed partners, the draft
outcome almost totally fails to address systemic
shortcomings.
The Group of 77 and China took a practical yet
flexible path. Unfortunately, that was not properly
reciprocated. Some may have been successful in
avoiding any new commitments. However, it is clear
that realities do not wait to be decided on or altered
just by decisions we make here. The bitter fact is that
increasing poverty, hunger and inequality at all levels
are preventing Governments from putting in place
effective policies to attain all the MDGs at the same
time. For developing countries, the current external
environment is not conducive to attaining the MDGs.
Another clear example of that approach was
evident during the negotiations on the situation of
peoples living under foreign occupation. While the

3

A/64/PV.121

Group of 77 and China took a totally developmental
approach to the subject, a few countries from the other
side politicized the issue and brought the whole
process close to deadlock. As a result, the final draft
outcome’s reflection of the situation of peoples living
under foreign occupation is quite unfair, as compared
to the situation of other peoples in need of special and
urgent attention.
Let me conclude by expressing my appreciation
for the efforts made by the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Senegal and Denmark, to
lead the process in an open, transparent and inclusive
manner and finalize the negotiations and a consensual
draft outcome.
Mrs. Salazar-Mejía (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation, Mr. President, associates
itself with the words of gratitude that have been
expressed with regard to your efforts.
I would also like to express our satisfaction with
the agreements that have been reached in the General
Assembly in connection with resolution 64/299. My
country believes that these agreements have made it
possible to adopt a balanced overall document that
identifies priorities and reiterates the commitment of
Member States towards attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).
That said, my delegation would like to clarify its
position on two specific issues referred to in the draft
document that the Assembly is submitting to the
summit.
First, we would like to mention the inclusion of
the reference to the notion of human security in
paragraph 25. Since the agreed wording on that theme
acknowledges that there is not yet a consensus
definition of the notion of human security, it is
necessary to be aware that neither is there clarity on
the areas in which its application may or may not be
appropriate. Thus, my delegation interprets the
reference to human security merely as a reference to
wording agreed in resolution 64/291 and that it in no
way indicates agreement on the relevance of the
concept in the context of the Millennium Development
Goals and of development.
Secondly, we would like to mention the list of
situations indiscriminately included in paragraph 49 of
the document under discussion without any specific
conceptual criteria. My delegation believes that how

4

we address each situation listed in that paragraph
should be understood in the light of the relevant
agreements of this Assembly as well as national policies
and legislation. It is up to each State to define whether
particular situations that affect it have a bearing on
development and whether to coordinate cooperation and
assistance activities with the international community.
With those comments, my delegation would like
once again to express its appreciation for the spirit of
cooperation shown by all countries during the
negotiations on the draft document and for the
commitment to a successful summit that achieves
concrete results.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, the Cuban delegation would like to
express its full support for the statement made by the
Ambassador of Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77.
We would also like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of the facilitators of this process, the Permanent
Representatives of Senegal and Denmark, as well as
for your efforts, Mr. President.
Cuba joined the consensus on resolution 64/299,
bearing in mind the positive elements it contains. At
the same time, we believe that the draft document
which today the General Assembly is proposing for
adoption at the upcoming meeting on the Millennium
Development Goals does not meet the expectations of
developing countries on several important issues.
Despite the efforts made by the Group of 77 to
substantially contribute to the draft document initially
drawn up as a basis for negotiations, most of the Group’s
proposals are not adequately reflected in the final version,
in particular those relating to Goal 8. In the course of the
analysis and review of Goal 8, the developing countries
hoped that the document would factually reflect the
repeated lack of implementation by developed
countries of the various elements set out in that Goal.
That was not possible. The most powerful nations
not only prevented it, but also took it upon themselves
during the negotiations to block any language that
pointed to the need to grant new and additional
resources to the underdeveloped world to help achieve
the modest Millennium Development Goals. Thus, the
document lacks sufficiently frank and critical analysis
of the current situation, even though it has been clearly
demonstrated that the lack of financial resources,
together with the restrictions imposed by the current
world order, are the real reasons for the serious danger of

10-53066

A/64/PV.121

the modest Goals agreed upon in 2000 not being reached.
Nonetheless, the document itself acknowledges the huge
efforts that the South has been making to achieve the
MDGs and our countries’ various initiatives in many
areas in that regard.
We are certain that the debate during the Highlevel Meeting will be much richer than its final
document. The event will serve once again as a forum
for our countries to again express their wishes and
legitimate aspirations. The Cuban delegation will
continue to work with the other nations of the South
towards the attainment of those wishes and aspirations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position.
Members will recall that pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006, the
Assembly decided to dedicate a specific meeting
focused on development, including an assessment of
progress over the previous year, at each session of the
General Assembly during the debate on the follow-up
to the Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World
Summit Outcome.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly will
continue to dedicate a specific meeting focused on
development, including an assessment of progress over
the previous year, at each session of the General
Assembly during the debate on the follow-up to the
Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome? There appears to be no objection.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
express my sincere thanks to Ambassador Carsten
Staur of Denmark and Ambassador Paul Badji of
Senegal, who have so ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations, and to all Member States for their
valuable contributions to the successful completion of
the draft outcome document. In the light of the difficult
negotiations and the great effort put into this outcome,
I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to
all participants.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda items 48 and 114?
It was so decided.

10-53066

Agenda item 52 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference
Progress report of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group of the General Assembly to
follow up on the issues contained in the
Outcome of the Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact
on Development (A/64/884)
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that the Assembly takes note of the report of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General
Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the
Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
express my sincere thanks to Ambassador Morten
Wetland of Norway and Ambassador Lazarous
Kapambwe of Zambia, who have so ably conducted the
discussions of the Working Group. I am certain that
members of the Assembly join me in extending our
sincere appreciation to them.
I should like to note that I have been informed by
the Group of 77 and China that it is their wish to
continue with the work of the Working Group at the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 52?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 53 (continued)
Sustainable development
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States
Draft resolution (A/64/L.68)
Draft decision (A/64/L.71)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution, issued as document
A/64/L.68, referring the annexed draft outcome

5

A/64/PV.121

document to the High-level Review Meeting on the
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States and a draft decision issued as
document A/64/L.71.
(spoke in English)
Having just received a note on the draft decision
contained in document A/64/L.71, I wish to make the
following technical correction to the text. In operative
paragraph (b), the text referring to the observer of the
Commonwealth should now read,
“the observer of the Commonwealth Secretariat
and, time permitting, other heads of State and
Government indicating their wish to speak to the
President of the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly”.
(spoke in Arabic)
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/64/L.68, entitled “Draft outcome document
of the High-level Review Meeting on the implementation
of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.68?
The draft resolution A/64/L.68 was adopted
(resolution 64/300).
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take action on draft decision A/64/L.71,
entitled “Modalities for the High-level Review Meeting
on the implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States”, as orally corrected.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/64/L.71, as orally corrected?
Draft decision A/64/L.71, as orally corrected,
was adopted.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
express my sincere thanks to Ambassador Sylvie Lucas
of Luxembourg and Ambassador Vanu Gopala Menon
of Singapore, who so ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations, and to all Member States for their

6

valuable contributions to the successful completion of
the draft outcome document.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Grenada, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position on the texts just adopted.
Ms. Williams (Grenada): I speak on behalf of the
States members of the Alliance of Small Island States
(AOSIS). We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your leadership throughout the sixty-fourth session,
especially on the items related to the Mauritius
Strategy of Implementation five-year review process.
In addition, through you, Sir, we wish to extend our
gratitude to the co-facilitators of the negotiating
process on the concise draft political declaration.
Please extend our gratitude to the delegations of
Lithuania and Singapore.
We believe that arriving at consensus on the text set
out in the annex to resolution 64/300, although it was
very difficult and required a lot of compromise by
AOSIS, sends a positive message — a positive signal —
that the international community remains committed to
addressing the unique and particular vulnerability of
small island developing States (SIDS) through the full
and effective implementation of the Barbados
Programme of Action and its Mauritius Strategy.
It is now time to translate these words into action.
While the text does not fully address all the concerns
of the Group, particularly as it relates to provision of the
means of implementation, we nevertheless welcome the
fact that consensus was reached. We look forward to
active participation now of all United Nations Member
States, at the highest level, in the two-day High-level
Meeting to be held on 24 and 25 September.
It is our expectation that that review will result in
concrete and tangible action for the advancement of the
sustainable development of SIDS. Just as you have orally
corrected the decision on modalities, Mr. President —
even at the ninety-ninth hour — we note that we too
would like to come back with one or two suggestions on
the actual structure of the second day of the meeting.
Once again, Mr. President, AOSIS thanks all
Member States and you in particular for this effort.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.

10-53066

A/64/PV.121

Agenda item 53 (continued)
Sustainable development
(f) Convention on Biological Diversity
Draft decision (A/64/L.70)

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 118?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 119 (continued)

The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, at its 82nd plenary meeting, on 15 April
2010, the Assembly adopted decision 64/555.

Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters

The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/64/L.70, entitled “Modalities for the highlevel meeting as a contribution to the International
Year of Biodiversity”.

The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held a joint debate on
agenda items 9 and 119 at its 43rd to 46th plenary
meetings, on 12 and 13 November 2009.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/64/L.70?

Members will also recall that, pursuant to
General Assembly decision 63/565 B of 14 September
2009, the Assembly continued its intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform in informal
plenary meetings during the current session.

Draft decision A/64/L.70 was adopted.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 53?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly
(A/64/903)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution, entitled
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”,
contained in paragraph 64 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/301).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
express my sincere thanks to Ambassador Jorge
Argüello of Argentina and Ambassador Sanja Štiglic of
Slovenia, the two Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group, who so ably conducted the Working Group’s
discussions and complex negotiations. I am sure
members of the Assembly join me in extending our
sincere appreciation to them.

10-53066

May I therefore take it, that the General
Assembly decides, first, to immediately continue
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform in informal plenary of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fifth session, as mandated by General
Assembly decisions 62/557 of 15 September 2008 and
63/565 of 14 September 2009, building on the progress
achieved during its sixty-fourth session, as well as the
positions of and proposals made by Member States,
while noting with appreciation the initiatives and
efforts of the President of the General Assembly and
the Chair, including the preparation of the text
reflecting the positions of and proposals submitted by
Member States, with a view to an early comprehensive
reform of the Security Council; secondly, to convene
the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters
related to the Security Council during the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly if Member States so
decide; and thirdly, to include in the agenda of the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly an item
entitled “Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Security Council”?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan for
chairing these negotiations on my behalf and for doing
so in an impartial manner while facilitating progress.

7

A/64/PV.121

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 119?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 122
Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the
Independent Inquiry Committee into the United
Nations Oil-for-Food Programme
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September
2009, the General Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable to
defer consideration of this item and to include it in the
draft agenda of the sixty-fifth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to defer consideration of this item and to include it in the
draft agenda of its sixty-fifth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 122.
Agenda item 151
Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting on 18 September
2009, the Assembly decided to include this item in the
agenda of the sixty-fourth session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer
consideration of this item and to include it in the draft
agenda of its sixty-fifth session?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of agenda item 151.
Agenda items remaining for consideration during the
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
remind delegations that the following agenda items, on
which action has been taken at previous meetings, have

8

remained open for consideration during the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly: items 9, 10, 15, 16, 20,
49, 53 (d), 64, 70 (a), 96, 106 to 108, 111 (a) and (e),
112 (f) and (i), 121, 123, 127 to 150, 152 to 163 and 172.
As members are aware, these items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly with the exception of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 111, entitled “Election of
twenty-nine members of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme”; sub-item (i)
of agenda item 112, entitled “Appointment of the
Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight
Services”; agenda item 121, entitled “United Nations
reform: measures and proposals”; agenda item 131,
entitled “Programme budget for the biennium 20082009”; agenda item 132, entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011”;
agenda item 141, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions
48/218 B, 54/244 and 59/272”; agenda item 145,
entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of United Nations peacekeeping
operations”; and agenda item 147, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Operation in Burundi”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of items 9, 10,
15, 16, 20, 49, 53 (d), 64, 70 (a), 96, 106 to 108, 111 (a)
and (e), 112 (f) and (i), 121, 123, 127 to 150, 152 to
163 and 172 at the present session and to include them
in the draft agenda of the sixty-fifth session?
It was so decided.
The meeting was suspended at 4.35 p.m. and
resumed at 5.15 p.m.
The President: I would like to draw the attention
of Members to the date of closure of the current
session. Members will recall that, at the 2nd plenary
meeting, on 18 September 2009, the General Assembly
decided that the sixty-fourth session would be closed
on Monday, 13 September 2010. However, in view
ofthe ongoing consultations on the draft resolution
contained in document A/64/L.67, I would like to
propose to the Assembly that it postpone the date of the
closure of the current session until tomorrow, Tuesday,
14 September 2010. Unless there is any objection, I
will take it that the Assembly agrees to this proposal.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

10-53066
