S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6722nd meeting
Thursday, 23 February 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Miss He Fen
Mr. Quintana
Mr. Cabouat
Mrs. Fries-Gaier
Ms. Taracena Secaira
Mr. Amit Kumar
Mr. El Mkhantar
Mr. Tarar
Ms. Vaz Patto
Mr. Repkov
Mr. Crowley
Mrs. Stevens
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-23937 (E)

*1223937*

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than four minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset, allow me
to express our sincere appreciation for your initiative,
Mr. President, in convening the meeting today. Our
appreciation also goes to Ms. Margot Wallström,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for their comprehensive presentations today.
The report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2012/33) that has been
introduced today by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
highlights progress achieved in monitoring, analysis
and reporting activities aimed at addressing sexual
violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations, including the important role of women’s
protection advisers in that context, and provides
information on parties to conflict credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for acts of sexual
violence, in relation to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1960 (2010) on sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.
In that regard, Egypt would like to express its
appreciation for the efforts exerted by Ms. Wallström
and her team in preparing the report in consultation
with concerned Member States. However, Egypt
believes that the inclusion of section IV.B, entitled
“Sexual violence in the context of elections, political
strife and civil unrest”, to the report of the SecretaryGeneral falls far beyond the mandate of the Special
Representative to implement resolution 1960 (2010)
which, in paragraph 8,
“Requests the Secretary General to establish
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
on conflict-related sexual violence, including
rape in situations of armed conflict and
post-conflict and other situations relevant to the
implementation of resolution 1888 (2009), as
appropriate, and taking into account the
specificity of each country”.

2

As resolution 1888 (2009) focuses mainly on
situations of particular concern with respect to sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict, the inclusion
of section IV.B in the report, in our view, constitutes an
unjustified widening of the scope of activities of the
Special Representative without a proper mandate from
the Security Council.
Despite the spirit of openness and transparency
that characterized Egyptian foreign policy after the
revolution of 25 January 2011, Egypt does not see any
reason whatsoever for its inclusion for the first time in
the new and innovative section IV.B of the report,
which mixes conflict-related with non-conflict-related
sexual violence.
Notwithstanding the extensive consultations
between my delegation and the Special Representative
on paragraphs 80 to 82 of the report, it is important to
stress once again that our engagement in those
negotiations cannot be construed as acceptance of the
addition of the new section, and to stress yet again that
the current situation in Egypt cannot in any way be
characterized as armed conflict. Thus, Egypt cannot be
dealt with on equal footing with other States mentioned
in the innovative section IV.B of the report, where a
conflict exists and widespread systematic documented
sexual violence has been committed against women.
What is more shocking is the major discrepancy
in section IV.B, comparing a peaceful revolution in
Egypt — where a single isolated incident is under
court-martial consideration — with the grave situation
in Syria, which has witnessed and is still witnessing an
armed conflict in which military forces are involved in
a conflict situation with opposition armed groups,
according to the Syrian Government itself. Nor can this
single, isolated incident in Egypt be equated with
events in other countries mentioned in the same section
of the report, such as that referred to in paragraph 84,
where “two years after the violence, not a single
perpetrator has been convicted”, and another referred
to in paragraph 85, where “a total of 1,500 cases were
documented, although the exact number was estimated
to have been higher”.
While
reiterating
our
appreciation
to
Ms. Wallström for the openness and flexibility shown
during the consultations with the mission of Egypt on
this issue, which resulted in the inclusion of some of
our views in the report — particularly those related to
the decision of the Supreme Council of Armed Forces

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

to tighten the penalty for crimes of sexual harassment,
abduction and rape — other Egyptian proposals have
not found their way into the report. The allegations of
virginity tests in paragraph 81 have been extensively
investigated by the Egyptian military authorities and
the suspected doctor is being tried before the supreme
military court, reflecting Egypt’s strong belief in the
rule of law and zero tolerance towards any violation,
foremost among which is any sexual-related violation.
This in itself should have provided the justification for
not mentioning Egypt at all in the report, particularly
as this incident and the way it has been handled
represent no systematic practice in this regard.
Egypt is cruising on a smooth democratic
transition towards the fulfilment of the Egyptian
people’s aspirations to the rule of law, justice and
human rights in a context of full accountability and
non-impunity. Moreover, most of the other incidents
cited in paragraph 81 of the report occurred during the
troubled last days of the former regime. All of them
have been investigated and the perpetrators are
currently on trial, starting with the former President
himself down to any perpetrator of any violation of the
rights of the men and women of our country. Therefore,
I assert once again that there is no ground to
substantiate the inclusion of Egypt in the current report
or in any future report of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on this matter.
Due regard should be given to the influential role
played by Egyptian women in the 25 January
revolution, which in itself was a clear manifestation of
their active participation in the transformation process
within Egyptian society. In the same vein, Egypt
reiterates its full commitment to all international legal
instruments and protocols on the rights of women, and
to furthering Egyptian women’s contribution in all
public domains and preserving the gains they have
made over decades.

Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. We very much
appreciate your initiative, as well as the briefings we
received this morning. In the two and a half years since
the Council committed to taking more effective action
to prevent and address sexual violence in conflict, we
have witnessed a significant number of United Nations
actions designed to turn rhetoric into action. The work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict has been integral to this
effort. The landmark adoption of resolution 1960
(2010) 12 months ago demonstrated the Council’s
willingness to take measures to end the scourge of
sexual violence in conflict. It is critical that the
Council and Member States implement resolution 1960
(2010) fully.
Australia strongly supports the work of the
Special Representative, particularly the increasing use
of field visits and direct engagement with parties to
conflict. We encourage the Council to receive regular
briefings from the Special Representative when she
considers issues related to sexual violence to be
relevant to its deliberations. That would help the
Council to undertake its preventive role.
We know that conflict situations are usually
characterized by the breakdown of law and order. The
impunity that can prevail in such situations has a
particularly devastating impact on the victims of sexual
violence. Accountability for crimes of sexual violence
is critical to changing behaviours. The increased
engagement of the Council with the parties listed in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/33) is an important
element in developing such cultures of accountability,
as is the consideration by sanctions committees of
targeted and graduated measures against persistent
perpetrators of violence.

I conclude by reiterating Egypt’s strong
commitment to the promotion and protection of all
women’s rights, and by urging all United Nations
mandate holders — in this, case the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict — to
perform their functions in strict observance of their
mandates, upholding the principles of impartiality,
objectivity and non-selectivity.

We encourage the Council to remain seized of the
need to deploy women protection advisers to
peacekeeping and special political missions. The
inclusion of relevant information in country-specific
reports and in mission mandates must also be
considered. We also join South Africa in encouraging
the inclusion of more women as uniformed personnel
in peacekeeping operations, and welcome India’s
statement today that it is willing to increase its own
contribution in this regard.

The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Australia.

We welcome the recent deployments of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in

12-23937

3

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

Conflict. South Sudan’s use of this expertise to guide
the planning of its justice system should be particularly
welcomed. Integrating the voices of women into design
will better ensure gender-responsive justice systems.
Over the past two and a half years, we have
witnessed a renewed dedication by the United Nations,
as well as troop- and police-contributing countries, to
developing and implementing tools to prevent and
address sexual violence, consistent with their mandate
to protect civilians. The rollout through scenario-based
training for peacekeepers of the United Nations toolkit
to address conflict-related sexual violence was an
important development, and Australia was pleased to
fund it. We encourage troop- and police-contributing
countries to integrate this tool into predeployment
training.
Security sector reform must address conflictrelated sexual violence. The development of human
rights training tools for security officials will help to
extend these efforts to detention and interrogation
facilities, which are often beyond the reach of
peacekeeping missions. Australia is also pleased to be
working with the Department of Political Affairs and
UN-Women to support women’s engagement in
decision-making on security sector reform.
Separately, we have supported the development
of a victim management programme for Pacific police,
and developed police manuals on gender-based
violence in Timor-Leste. The Australian Federal Police
is also formulating a police development strategy and
toolkit that include a focus on gender and conflictrelated issues, which will assist our police who are
working with international partners to address conflictrelated sexual violence.
Australia continues to build on its work to
implement Resolution 1325 (2000). We are consulting
closely with civil society to develop the first Australian
national action plan on women, which includes work to
protect the human rights of women and girls affected
by conflict, particularly in relation to sexual violence.
Last year, we appointed a global ambassador for
women and girls, and the protection of women and
girls in conflict zones is a core component of the
ambassador’s mandate.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s next
report outlining recommendations for advocacy and
action to be made by the United Nations joint

4

consultation forum. The momentum of the past two
years must be harnessed for further action and results.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Let me start by
expressing our appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on women and peace and security. I
would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive report (S/2012/33),
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, for briefing us on this
important issue.
War has always impacted men and women
differently, but probably never more so than in modern
armed conflicts. In recent armed conflicts, women and
girls have been disproportionately targeted and
constituted the majority of victims. They are also more
vulnerable to all forms of violence, in particular sexual
violence and exploitation. The report of the SecretaryGeneral has shown the dire plight of many women and
girls and what can be done to alleviate some of these
injustices. Viet Nam supports many of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report, as well as many views expressed during this
debate. As a country that has experience in dealing
with the consequences of wars and as the main sponsor
of resolution 1889 (2009), on women, peace and
security, Viet Nam would like to underline the
following.
First, although the international efforts in
promoting the implementation of the women, peace
and security resolutions 1325 (2000) 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) have achieved
meaningful progress, challenges still remain. Viet Nam
is of the view that the diverse nature of violence
against women and girls requires a comprehensive
approach. The United Nations therefore plays an
important role in coordinating with Member States,
relevant United Nations bodies, especially UN-Women,
civil society and other stakeholders, in promoting the
recognition and integration of women in the area of
peace and security and in intensifying international
efforts to end sexual violence against women and girls
in a coherent manner and with gender sensitivity.
Secondly, stopping sexual violence against
women in armed conflict is closely linked with
women’s empowerment and gender equality. Only
when women can play a full and equal part in peace,

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

conflict resolution and post-conflict processes can we
build the foundation for international peace and
security. Measures to protect women and girls from
sexual violence in conflict situations should be designed
as part of a broader comprehensive framework that
covers social, economic and development issues. It is
important that gender equality should be incorporated
into all levels and stages of policymaking,
reconciliation, negotiation, the management of
humanitarian
aid
and
post-conflict
planning.
Responding to the needs of women and girls with
regard to physical security, health services, ways to
ensure their livelihoods, land and property rights and
employment will create favourable preconditions for
the coherent and long-term implementation of
necessary measures.

and Ms. Amina Megheirbi, as the civil society
representative, for their statements.

Thirdly, we believe that United Nations bodies
and donors should work in a coordinated and coherent
manner to assist national Governments in building
gender-related capacity in addressing the security,
recovery and development needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations. The international community
should also enhance its assistance to poor countries and
countries affected by conflicts to accelerate economic
and social development and improve people’s
livelihoods, which can help to prevent conflicts at the
source and lay the foundation for enduring peace and
security.

The establishment of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence has made an important contribution towards
more systematic and detailed information flow to the
Council. We especially appreciate the information
provided on parties to armed conflict credibly
suspected of committing, or being responsible for, acts
of rape or other forms of sexual violence, as well as the
list of parties annexed to the report. The systematic
collection of accurate, reliable and objective
information is a crucial basis for timely action to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.

On this occasion, View Nam would like to
reaffirm our strong commitment to working with the
international community to effectively end sexual
violence and promote the rights of women and girls.

We commend the coordination and cooperation
envisioned in the implementation of those
arrangements with the relevant parts of the United
Nations system, including the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict, the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
human rights components of the United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We welcome the finalization of
the terms of reference of the women’s protection
advisers and call for their swift designation within the
United Nations missions’ human rights and gender
components. Preventing sexual violence should be our
utmost priority. We therefore welcome the development
of early warning indicators specific to conflict-related
sexual violence and the scenario based predeployment
training modules by the United Nations system, which
we hope will enhance the capacity of the peacekeepers
to respond. A holistic approach that includes women’s
full participation in decision-making in peace and
security is key to effectively preventing and responding
to sexual violence.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia, the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align
themselves with this declaration.
I first wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Margot Wallström, as well as Mr. Hervé Ladsous

12-23937

Sexual violence in armed conflict remains
alarmingly widespread. It includes instances of
systematic targeting of civilians by armed forces and
groups, with the aim to destroy and humiliate. It is a
crime and a serious violation of human rights that
remains underreported — due to stigmatization, the
possibility of reprisal and the perception that justice
and aid would be hard or unlikely to come by.
We therefore welcome the report (S/2012/33) of
the Secretary-General and the work of Special
Representative Wallström on the implementation of the
Security Council resolutions on women, peace and
security.

5

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

It is crucial to sustained peace and development
that we address impunity for sexual violence. It is the
duty of all States to investigate and prosecute those
crimes. We commend the efforts of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law, including their support to
countries in ending impunity — for example, through
assistance to prosecution support cells established by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
deployment of female magistrates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also encourage the Council
to use all means at its disposal to end impunity for
sexual violence in conflict, including through referrals
to
International
Criminal
Court,
mandating
commissions of inquiry and by explicitly condemning
such violations.
We call on the Council to continue to make use of
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence, including by using the
list contained in the report, as a basis for more focused
United Nations engagement with the parties listed,
including, as appropriate, measures in accordance with
the procedures of the relevant sanctions committees.
We hope that the Secretary-General’s report will also
encourage the inclusion of additional information in
relevant country-specific reports and consistent
reporting across different country situations.
Finally, the European Union continues to
implement its dedicated policy on women, peace and
security, adopted in 2008, making use of tools as
diverse as development cooperation, the Common
Security and Defence Policy and political dialogue.
The varied EU support to initiatives related to women,
peace and security amounts to approximately €200
million per year.
The European Union now has gender advisers or
focal points in each of its crisis management missions
around the world. We continue our work on specific
training modules on human rights and gender in crisismanagement, ensuring a focus on sexual violence in
armed conflicts.
The EU continues to work closely with the
United Nations — for example, through its support to
UN-Women in carrying out the project “Women
Connect across Conflicts”, which is aimed at building
accountability for the implementation of the Council’s
relevant resolutions.

6

The European Union and its member States
highly appreciate the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as that of the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We will continue
to engage with the Office of the Special Representative
and welcome its contribution to strengthening the
efforts of the United Nations, Member States and all
actors involved in preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Mr. President, I
congratulate you on having convened this important
debate. I am also grateful to Ms. Wallström for her
presentation. Her invaluable work on the issue has
been crucial in helping the Council to address the
scourge of sexual violence. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Hervé Ladsous for his remarks.
We have come a long way since the adoption of
resolution 1820 (2008). The development of an
important body of norms and tools has enhanced the
international community’s capacity to resolutely
respond to sexual violence in armed conflict.
We welcome the progress made on the
development of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements. For those arrangements to be effective,
it is essential that they have the support of the broader
United Nations membership and not only of the
Security Council. To that end, Brazil encourages
Ms. Wallström to engage in a dialogue with Member
States and regional groups, with a view to both
clarifying how the arrangements will work and
exchanging views on how they can best operate.
The presence of women’s protection advisers in
peacekeeping operations will constitute a very helpful
tool in the efforts to make the fight against sexual
violence a mission-wide endeavour. However,
prevention will be effective only if peacekeeping
operations have the resources they need to implement
their mandate. In that regard, we commend the
improvements made in predeployment training, which
are of crucial importance to preparing peacekeepers to
carry out this critical task.
The signing last December of a letter of intent
between the Brazilian Ministry of Defence and
UN-Women, aimed at consolidating their existing

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

partnership, will contribute to ensuring more
comprehensive training for our peacekeepers, including
in preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence.
Making real progress in our efforts against sexual
violence in armed conflict requires greater emphasis on
prevention and capacity-building. The only way to
ensure that the progress achieved during the presence
of a peacekeeping mission is sustainable is by working
with national Governments to address their needs in
the areas of institution-building, the training of
personnel, supporting victims and strengthening the
rule of law.
We very much appreciate the work that has been
done by the Team of Experts on Sexual Violence and
the support it has been providing to Member States in
strengthening their institutions. It is somewhat
surprising that such crucial work is financed
exclusively by voluntary contributions.
Real change requires an integrated approach that
combines prevention, the fight against impunity and
support for victims. The United Nations needs to be
prepared to support capacity-building and institutional
strengthening as a system-wide priority if we want
prevention to be effective and the scourge of sexual
violence in armed conflict to be eliminated.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Human Security Network,
namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Switzerland.
We would like to thank the Togolese presidency
for having convened this important open debate on
women, peace and security, an issue that is at the core
of the Human Security Network.
Let us further thank the Secretary-General for his
report and his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, for her
outstanding work and commitment to this sensitive and
complex issue. The Human Security Network shares
the views expressed by the Secretary-General in his
recommendations to the Security Council, Member
States, donors and regional organizations.

12-23937

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), we have witnessed significant advances
in this field, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1960 (2010), the creation of the post of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, which contribute
significantly to strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations system and Member States in order
to prevent crimes against women and girls. In addition,
they help to improve the efficiency of the national
judicial systems in ensuring the rule of law and
bringing perpetrators to justice, including to the
International Criminal Court.
However, it is deeply disturbing that today we
continue to witness rapes of women, girls and children
in general, in countries in armed conflict but also in
other situations, including post-conflict situations. We
recognize the efforts made by some Governments to
put an end to these crimes, to strengthen judicial
systems and to bring those responsible to justice.
However, as the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/33)
shows, progress remains slow, and in practice the
perpetrators of crimes against women and girls often
go unpunished.
The Human Security Network therefore urges
Member States to increase their efforts to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence by undertaking all
necessary efforts to implement all applicable legal
provisions in the matter. The primary responsibility is
theirs. But, at the same time, this constitutes a
challenge for the international community as a whole,
especially for regional and subregional organizations.
Their role in supporting the efforts of those countries is
crucial. The message must be clear; there shall be no
impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes, and the
countries affected and the international community will
not rest until there is accountability and justice is done.
The provision of genuine support, protection and
the relevant services to the victims and their families is
equally as important as rendering justice. In that
context, the support given at the community level is
vital. Projects that directly assist victims and their
families to help them overcome the trauma inflicted
upon them are of particularly great value.
One of the key issues in a post-conflict country is
security sector reform. Security is not a “men’s issue”;
it is a gender issue, and women must be involved in all

7

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

relevant discussions and negotiations from their
inception, and they must also be part of the higher
military ranks, which is where security-related issues
are usually discussed. The gender perspective must be
part of the reform and training of all security forces.
The Human Security Network emphasizes the
importance of the full and equal participation of
women in political processes, including in
peacemaking and peacebuilding. Their involvement
ensures the success of those processes. At the same
time, conflict-related sexual violence and the specific
needs of women and girls have to be addressed
adequately, both in ceasefire agreements and in peace
agreements.
Preventing crimes is as crucial as delivering
justice and supporting the victims. To that end, we
have to be able to improve the early warning systems
and monitoring mechanisms already in place and to
build upon them where needed. They must be capable
of detecting signs of possible crimes and must mobilize
the political and judicial authorities in order to prevent
them. They must involve all relevant levels, from the
community level to the provincial and national levels.
Regional organizations can also play an important role
in the creation of an efficient early warning system.
Finally, we appreciate the information provided
on the progress made in implementing the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements. The collection of
timely, accurate, reliable and objective information on
conflict-related sexual violence is crucial to tailoring
the Council’s responses, as well as to enhancing action
to prevent sexual violence. We also wish to encourage
the deployment of women protection advisers to United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions in
order to strengthen the response of the relevant mission
components to conflict-related sexual violence.
We strongly hope that the Council will be able to
reach an agreement on the presidential statement later
today.
(spoke in French)
I will now make a statement in my national
capacity. A more detailed version of my statement can
be found in the distributed text.
Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) on
women and peace and security constitute a robust
machinery, which demonstrates that the Security
Council and United Nations members are firmly

8

resolved to move from advocacy to the effective
implementation of their commitment to combat
conflict-related sexual violence. The establishment of
new mandates always raises the crucial issue of
coordination and the efficient use of existing
structures.
We welcome the fact that it is intended to
preserve the full flexibility of the monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements in order to adapt them to
the country-specific needs and circumstances. In that
regard, we would like to underscore the importance of
the continued and transparent communication of the
Office of the Special Representative with United
Nations country teams so as to foster ownership and
results-oriented implementation of the new structures
and processes in the field.
We note with great satisfaction that several
activities have been launched with UN-Women. We
hope that such productive cooperation will continue.
Switzerland recently contributed 3 million Swiss francs
to the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence
against Women, which is administered by UN-Women.
The Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related
sexual violence contains useful recommendations to
the Security Council, Member States and regional
organizations. I would like to recall three of those, in
particular.
First, prevention is a priority as it is an essential
part of our efforts to protect, in which many
stakeholders have a role to play. Specific and timebound commitments to put an end to all acts of sexual
violence and to bring their perpetrators to justice can
help to break the cycle of violence.
We strongly support more systematic measures to
enhance protection against sexual violence and
prevention of its recurrence through transitional justice
mechanisms. Such measures should link the fight
against impunity and recognition of victims’ rights, for
example through appropriate reparations, but also
include strengthening the national capacity to combat
the causes of violence and, at the same time, to prevent
new cases.
Secondly, in resolution 1820 (2008), the Security
Council resolved to take acts of sexual violence into
consideration when establishing or renewing Statespecific sanctions regimes. That opportunity should not
be forgotten. It thus provides the means to take

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

targeted measures against, for example, the parties and
individuals mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
on sexual violence in conflict.

therefore imperative that the Council continue to
receive information on sexual violence, including on
situations of concern that are not on its agenda.

Finally, in his report, the Secretary-General calls
on the parties to include training on conflict-related
sexual violence in training programmes for
peacekeeping troops. In that regard, I would like to
draw the Council’s attention to the handbook prepared
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
entitled “Standardized Best Practices Toolkit on
Gender and Policing in Peacekeeping Operations”. The
handbook was co-financed by Switzerland.

Sexual violence not only attacks the dignity and
the body of the victim, but also tears at the
fundamental social fabric of the community. To build
sustainable peace, sexual violence must be addressed
throughout all stages of conflict resolution processes,
starting with ceasefire agreements and the presence of
adequate gender expertise at the peace table. When
provisions on sexual violence are not part of ceasefire
agreements, such violence can be used, in effect, to
continue acts of war, thereby undermining efforts to
reduce violence and leading to a cycle of vengeance.

The structures set up by resolutions 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) are still in a testing
phase, and only proof of the reality will make it
possible to assess their effectiveness. The path is steep
and rocky. However, we should move forward
prudently and resolutely in strengthening the protection
architecture. The establishment of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict is a significant part of that
course.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let
me join others in welcoming the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2012/33). For the first time, it informs us of the dire
situation regarding the use of sexual violence as a
method of warfare in country-specific situations. Let
me also welcome the dedication with which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström, and her
team have operationalized and implemented important
obligations deriving from resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). We are pleased to see
that the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence are
now included in the mandates of various United
Nations missions and that the terms of reference of
women protection advisers have been agreed upon.
Sexual violence is used not only as a method of
warfare during armed conflict, but also as a means to
surreptitiously continue conflict after the guns have
fallen silent. Sexual violence can be an important
indicator in determining when conflicts might turn
violent or when a conflict relapses into violence. To
fulfil its mandate towards conflict prevention, it is

12-23937

Moreover, research shows that when sexual
violence is not addressed in the early stages of
mediation efforts, the issue is likely to be ignored
throughout later efforts to create and maintain peace.
Hence, we welcome the work of the Department of
Political Affairs to produce guidance for mediators on
addressing conflict-related sexual violence in
mediation processes and throughout conflict resolution
efforts. In that context, it is worthwhile recalling that
United Nations-endorsed peace agreements can never
promise amnesties for genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity or gross violations of human rights.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has significantly advanced international
law by including sexual violence in the definition of
crimes, in particular, as a crime against humanity. The
ICC therefore represents an important mechanism in
the fight against conflict-related sexual violence. We
call on the Council to use all means at its disposal to
strengthen the fight against impunity for those
violations by making better use of targeted measures,
including sanctions and referrals to the ICC. In
addition to collecting information on trends and
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence, we
must simultaneously ensure that support services for
victims are sufficiently funded.
My delegation has therefore pledged to continue
its financial support for the ICC Trust Fund for
Victims, which adopts a gender-based perspective
across all programmes and specifically aims to assist
victims of all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence. The Trust Fund provides direct assistance to
victims, and thus has an immediate impact on the
ground.

9

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

As a member of the group of five small States,
my delegation is a long-standing supporter of the
consistent mainstreaming of the Council’s thematic
agenda into its country-specific work. To support the
Council’s efforts in mainstreaming its thematic agenda
on women, peace and security, my delegation
organized a workshop, from 28 to 30 January in
Schaan, Liechtenstein, hosted by Foreign Minister
Aurelia Frick, on the implementation of the women,
peace and security agenda in Afghanistan. The
workshop was organized in close partnership with the
Liechtenstein Institute on Self-Determination at
Princeton University, and was supported by the
delegations of Afghanistan and Germany.
Since the findings and recommendations are
related to today’s consideration, allow me to remind
the Council of the outcome report of the workshop. We
believe that the inclusion of some of the
recommendations within the renewed mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
would lead to an increased participation of women in
peace processes, as well as more reliable information
with regard to the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Mr. President, let me begin
by thanking you personally for your stewardship of the
Security Council this month and for holding this very
important debate.
Today’s discussion is about our collective
responsibility to give voice to the voiceless. An
increasing number of conflicts around the world are
made even more horrific by the use of sexual violence.
These are often the most disturbing and the most
hidden elements of conflict. Yet, the number of victims
is staggering, and it continues to grow every day. Each
one of these people has a name and has a family.
The victims are women like Honorata, a young
mother from the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who was held for nearly a year by armed
militias and raped daily in captivity. After Honorata
escaped, the stigma of her rape caused her family to
reject her, leaving her alone and impoverished.
The victims are women like Layla, a teenager
from Iran who was detained for two months during the

10

country’s protests in 2009. In a report last year on the
PBS television channel, Layla described her treatment
by the Iranian authorities. She said, “When they were
raping and torturing me, and putting out cigarettes on
my body, nobody knew… Death was a desire for me. I
wanted to die”.
Testimonies like Layla’s remind us that the
systematic use of sexual violence is often the calling
card of the most brutal regimes and militias in the
world. State-sponsored rape has served as a primary
tool of dictators from Al-Qadhafi in Libya, Al-Assad
in Syria to the ayatollahs of Iran. Armed groups in
Africa — from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to Somalia — are using sexual violence to spread
terror, instil fear and shatter lives. These tyrants, those
warlords and criminals know that they leave scars not
just on individual victims, but on families and
communities.
Major General Patrick Cammaert, the former
Commander of United Nations peacekeeping forces in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo said:
“Rape is an extremely cheap weapon, but
has vast and far-reaching effects. With the single
weapon of rape, soldiers and militants can disrupt
and destroy the fabric of society. Rape sows fear;
it spreads sexually transmitted disease. It
excludes women from participation in civic life.”
In the year since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1960 (2010), the instances of sexual
violence have only increased. We must act with
common purpose in the face of these atrocities. We
must have zero tolerance for the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war. Israel was a proud to sponsor of
resolution 1960 (2010) and the previous resolutions on
women and peace and security. It is time for the
international community to breathe life into the words
contained in these resolutions with concrete actions on
the ground.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/33) offers
clear guidance on important steps that the international
community must take. For instance, operationally,
those listed in the annex of these reports should face
additional measures from the Security Council
sanctions committees. Israel also strongly supports the
recommendation to include provisions for conflictrelated sexual violence in ceasefire and peace
agreements.

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

Women have a vital role to play in preventing
sexual violence, which is why we must increase their
roles in peacekeeping forces, negotiation teams and
other relevant bodies. Israel shares the serious concern
of many others about the allegations of sexual violence
by peacekeepers in Haiti over the past year. Such
allegations highlight the important role that women
protection advisers play in such contingents.
Today, I would like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallström, and her whole
team, sitting here, for the valuable work that they
continue to carry out, such as developing early warning
indicators for sexual violence in conflicts. It is clear
that such work advances the international community’s
ability to understand the threat of sexual violence and
to respond more effectively.
Every fall, during our holiest of days, the Jewish
people pray, “May all humankind become one single
family”. It is in that spirit that we must pursue this
pressing issue. The imperative to prevent sexual
violence extends beyond politics, religion or
geography. It stands at the core of our common
humanity and the guiding mission of this Council.
Together, we must do our utmost to heal the victims,
protect the innocent and punish those who carry out
this evil. As a family of nations, we must stand
shoulder to shoulder to defend each person from sexual
violence, as if he or she were members of our own
family.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to extend my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on women and peace and security. The
focus of this debate on the implementation of
resolution 1960 (2010) is both necessary and
important. It is also a clear demonstration of the
general commitment to protecting women from sexual
violence in armed conflict. I also would like to join
others in thanking all the speakers today for their
respective briefings. We appreciate the information
provided
by
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2012/33), which has been helpful in indicating to us
the extent of the problem. That information will help to
guide and enhance the fruitfulness of our debate.
Indonesia strongly deplores all forms of violence,
including sexual violence in armed conflict, committed

12-23937

against women. Women must be free to live their lives
without having to face the threat of violence, sexual or
otherwise. We note with deep concern the fact that
while the Security Council resolutions related to
women and peace and security have served to highlight
the problem and force action aimed at its elimination,
the violations persist. We have every reason to speedily
implement resolution 1960 (2010). But this must be
done in keeping within the spirit of resolution 1325
(2000), which addresses all aspects of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations in a more
comprehensive manner.
We are informed by the Secretary-General’s
report that over the past year, there have been several
new and ongoing armed conflicts in which sexual
violence has been widespread, with civilian
populations being systematically targeted. What is even
more disturbing is the fact that most perpetrators
remain at large. Indonesia finds this unfortunate
situation unacceptable. All action must therefore be
directed at eliminating the conditions that give rise to
and sustain such behaviour.
The need for determined action is clear. It would
be to our benefit if we were to deal not only with the
consequences of this violence, but — as recommended,
inter alia, by the Beijing Platform for Action — also
with its causes. Certainly, that would take us off the
field of battle and into the wider society. Those
attitudes, values and traditions that sanction such
behaviour must be consistently confronted and
discouraged.
Activities specific to combating sexual violence
in armed conflict are taking place on two fronts —
international and national. At the international level,
the emergence of a universal working definition to
facilitate data collection should advocate timely,
reliable and verified information and proper analysis of
data on the occurrence of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict. Such a definition will help
stakeholders in delivering survivor and victim-focused
responses. Overcoming the trauma they have had to
endure is an important factor in helping women to
become active peacebuilding actors in the future. In
addition, such a definition will also considerably refine
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
recommended by resolution 1960 (2010).
Apart from greater clarity about the problem, we
also take note that technical infrastructure to combat

11

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

sexual violence in armed conflict has been under
careful construction, inter alia, through the
establishment of a technical-level working group as
part of the United Nations response and placing a
women’s protection adviser in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations for their briefings. I would like express
great appreciation for the work of the Office of the
Special Representative, as well as that of the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The responsibility to implement relevant Security
Council resolutions with a view to enhancing women’s
participation in peace processes, including the
protection of women from all forms of sexual violence,
rests primarily with their respective Governments. At
the national level, stress has been placed on national
ownership of the peacebuilding process. Indonesia
fully agrees with this. In effect, this means that any
external support provided for the process must be
demand-driven.

While Italy aligns itself with the statement that
has been delivered by the observer of the European
Union, we wish to make some additional remarks in
our national capacity.

It is also important that the role of women not be
minimized in any way at this level. Their inputs are
integral to enhancing civilian capacity, especially in the
most affected developing countries. Indonesia believes
that dialogue, partnership and cooperation within the
framework of the global South are of critical
importance to the peacebuilding capacities of
developing countries.
We also appreciate the work done by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support on the guidelines for
integrating a gender perspective into the work of the
United Nations military in peacekeeping operations.
Predeployment
gender-related
training
for
peacekeepers is also significant in contributing to a
more enhanced understanding of the protection of
women and children by United Nations peacekeepers.
The gender training workshop for peacekeepers that
will be held in Indonesia next April is part of such
efforts.
Equally important is the enhancement of the
capacity of national institutions dealing with security
and judicial matters so that they can be safeguarded
against impunity. Every effort must be made to stamp
out sexual violence as a method or tactic of warfare.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I congratulate you, Sir, on
organizing this open debate of the Security Council. I
wish to thank the Special Representative of the

12

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33). The
report provides us with a comprehensive picture of
what clearly remains a daunting challenge for the
international community. It shows that the past year
has seen several new and ongoing armed conflicts in
which sexual violence has been widespread and, in
some instances, used by armed forces and armed
groups in order to punish, humiliate and destroy
civilian populations. The report also reveals worrisome
emerging trends, such us the use of sexual violence in
the context of political struggle, and in this context we
hope that the Security Council will be able to agree on
a presidential statement today.
Against this background, I would like to focus on
some key messages. The first concerns the fight against
impunity. As we have stated on previous occasions
before this body, we cannot expect to eradicate sexual
violence if we do not ensure that those who are
responsible are systematically brought to justice. The
message must be clear — sexual violence is not costfree. We welcome therefore the inclusion in the report
of a list of parties credibly suspected of committing or
being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms
of sexual violence. The list must become a basis for a
more active engagement of the Council towards
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence,
including taking measures through the relevant
sanctions committees, referring them to the
International
Criminal
Court
and
mandating
international commissions of inquiry.
Secondly, as committed as we are to targeting the
perpetrators of sexual violence, we must give full
priority to the health, safety and dignity of survivors.
National and international programmes for postconflict reconstruction must ensure that their needs are
met and voices heard. Adequate and timely resources

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

are required to sustain processes that are meant to be
lengthy and complex.

for a better future. Let us not forget that they count
on us.

Thirdly, prevention is always key. The SecretaryGeneral’s report also serves this purpose, as it provides
the information needed not only to react, but first and
foremost to prevent. We look forward to the
progressive strengthening of the monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements mandated by resolution
1960 (2010). We also encourage the adoption of
national and regional early warning systems that could
draw upon the United Nations Matrix of Early-Warning
Indicators of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.

Fourthly, there is a need to systematically include
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence in the work
of the Council, especially when authorizing and
renewing the mandates of peacekeeping and special
political missions. The progressive deployment of
women’s protection advisers to United Nations
missions is also critical.
Finally, it is necessary to include women and
women’s rights in peace talks. Women are formidable
negotiators, mediators and peacebuilders. Their
participation in preventive diplomacy is insurance
against any attempt to minimize or neglect the
consequences of the use of sexual violence.
Italy contributed to the drafting of resolution
1820 (2008), which first recognized the link between
the systematic use of sexual violence and the
maintenance of peace and security. We continue to
keep this commitment high in our human rights
policies. In December 2010, we adopted a three-year
action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, which places the
protection of women and girls against any form of
violence among its main priorities and objectives.
Let me also recall that next week the United
Nations Commission on the Status of Women will open
its annual session. This will be an opportunity for all
delegations to confirm their commitment to promoting
and protecting the rights of women and girls in all
circumstances, including in conflict-related situations.
As a member of the Commission, Italy will not miss
this opportunity.
I wish to conclude by reminding all of us of the
issue at stake. The report in front of us is not just about
information and numbers. It is actually about
individuals, their often tragic stories and their hopes

12-23937

Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate on women
and peace and security.
Resolution 1820 (2008) and the subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security
emphasize, inter alia, the importance of working
concertedly for the elimination of all forms of violence
against women and girls, particularly sexual violence
during and after conflict. Some progress has been
recorded in various aspects by Member States, the
United Nations system and civil society organizations
in the implementation of the Council’s resolutions on
women and peace and security.
Yet, there is a long way to go to realize the noble
goals laid down in the resolutions. It is unacceptable
that, even in the twenty-first century, women and girls
are abused sexually as a tactic of war to humiliate,
dominate and instil fear in civilian members of a
community. There is a need for a comprehensive,
coordinated and sustained effort to end sexual violence
and to protect and promote women’s rights during and
after conflict, as it requires several immediate
measures as well as longer-term reforms in policing,
judicial systems and entire socio-cultural belief
systems to ensure a dignified place for women in
society.
The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2012/33 gives the impression that no
action has been taken against perpetrators of sexual
violence in Nepal. That is not corroborated by facts on
the ground. Perpetrators of sexual violence have been
punished by the judiciary. Although there are some
individual cases, let me also make it clear that sexual
violence was never used as a policy of coercion by
either of the parties during the conflict in Nepal.
Allow me to address the issue of women in
promoting peace and security and what we have been
trying to do to enhance the empowerment of women in
general in the post-conflict situation. Nepal has come a
long way after the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Accord in 2006 in terms of ensuring women’s
participation at the decision-making level. The election

13

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

of women to one-third of the seats in Parliament has
sent a very strong signal about the unprecedented
equality and empowerment of women, with deep
reverberations of change in Nepalese society.
Nepal has accorded high priority to the
implementation of the many Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security as we
move from conflict to durable peace, stability and
economic development. In that context, Nepal is proud
to stand with its distinctive five-year national action
plan for the effective implementation of the Council’s
resolutions on women and peace and security. We have
already started the implementation of our national
action plan through a multi-pronged approach whereby
Parliament, Government ministries, judiciaries,
political parties and civil society are involved in their
respective areas. That will ensure the meaningful
participation by women at all levels of the decisionmaking process of governance, including in conflict
transformation and peacebuilding processes. We have
also put in place mechanisms at the local level,
together with some strong monitoring mechanisms, to
follow up on implementation. We welcome the genuine
partnership and collaboration of the international
community in our endeavour. In that regard, we
reiterate our conviction that partnership and
cooperation must be forged for building and promoting
national capacity.
Nepal has taken a number of initiatives to take
care of the special needs of women and bring them
forward. It is mandatory that women participate at a
rate of at least 33 per cent in the constitution of local
peace committees at the district level, which are
empowered to address post-conflict-related issues at
the local level. Nepal has been implementing genderbased budgeting for some years, through which gender
mainstreaming has been getting special attention in all
development activities. Nepal has introduced a policy
of affirmative action in various areas, including in the
civil service, with a view to ensuring that women
participate at the decision-making level in the public
sector.
We have adopted various measures to fight
against sexual and gender-based violence, notably by
establishing of a follow-up office in the Office of the
Prime Minister, a gender violence prevention fund, and
gender violence control committees in all 75 districts
of the country. We are committed to expanding women
and children service centres in police stations across

14

the country to ensure the expeditious investigation and
the prosecution of cases of sexual and gender-based
violence.
Furthermore, we are committed not only to
increasing the number of women in our army and
police force, but also to contributing an increasing
number of them to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have integrated the essential portion of
courses on the protection of women and girls from
sexual violence during and after conflict in our
peacekeeping training package. Nepal is fully aware of
the Secretary-General’s zero tolerance policy and has
expressed its commitment to fully supporting the
endeavour.
While moving from conflict to durable peace and
stability, Nepal is taking this transformative phase as
an opportunity for creating and inculcating new values
into Nepali society, where all women and men
participate in the nation-building processes in an equal
footing.
In conclusion, we all have to enhance our efforts
in a coordinated way to end sexual violence and to
ensure the empowerment of women in all spheres of
life. An enhanced level of support, collaboration and
cooperation from the international community would
go a long way towards ensuring the early realization of
our common objectives, as expressed in the Council’s
resolutions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, Mr. President, let me express my sincere
appreciation to you for convening this open debate. My
appreciation also goes to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Margot Wallström; Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous; and
Ms. Amina Megheirbi of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for her insightful
presentation.
Over the past three years, the Security Council
has made significant progress in highlighting the
egregious phenomenon of conflict-related sexual
violence, including through its adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). A series of
mechanisms established by those resolutions has
contributed to identifying and preventing conflict-

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

related sexual violence. However, it is deeply
disturbing that we are still witnessing widespread and
systematic sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/33). It provides us
with useful information for today’s debate, including
incidents of sexual violence in many conflict areas and
progress on United Nations initiatives. In particular, we
commend the tireless efforts of the Special
Representative to address the issue effectively.
Noting with appreciation the series of
recommendations in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, my delegation would like to highlight the
following points.
First, my delegation would like to underline the
significance of ensuring accountability by eliminating
impunity for sexual violence. That is key to fighting
conflict-related sexual violence by showing the
perpetrators that their acts are not cost-free. We
welcome the fact that the United Nations Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, established under resolution 1888 (2009), has
been fully operational since May 2011. We would like
to encourage the Team, in close collaboration with
other United Nations entities, to further enhance its
assistance to Governments in strengthening the
capacity of their civilian and military justice systems
and institutional safeguards against impunity.
Secondly, we need to pay greater attention to
sexual violence in post-conflict settings. While many
incidents of sexual violence have been reported after
the end of conflict, it is regrettable that few ceasefire
or peace agreements include provisions for conflictrelated sexual violence. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral rightly points out, the inclusion of such
provisions can increase the durability of peace by
mitigating security fears, as well as addressing the
sexual violence itself. In that regard, we welcome the
publication by the Department of Political Affairs of
the United Nations Guidance for Mediators on
Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in
Ceasefire and Peace Agreement. We encourage United
Nations envoys and mediators to ensure that conflictrelated sexual violence is properly addressed in
preventive diplomacy efforts, mediation and peace
processes, based upon the Guidance.

12-23937

Thirdly, more attention needs to be given to the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. Sexual
violence is not a corollary of conflict, but it can be
prevented. In that regard, we note with appreciation a
series of recent United Nations initiatives to that end,
including the development of scenario-based
predeployment training modules on preventing and
addressing conflict-related sexual violence in
peacekeeping operations. In addition, we welcome the
development of a framework of early warning signs
that are specific to conflict-related sexual violence. We
believe that Member States, donors and regional
organizations, for their part, need to enhance their
efforts to strengthen national and regional prevention
mechanisms, drawing upon, as appropriate, the United
Nations early-warning system and training courses.
As a member of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Republic of Korea has
actively engaged in the international cooperation for
the prevention of sexual violence against women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. In the firm
belief that proper training for peacekeepers is
indispensable to preventing and responding to sexual
violence in conflict situations, the Korean Government
has been bolstering its predeployment gender training
for military and police personnel deploying to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The Korean
Government has also strengthened its efforts to enable
those personnel to have a better understanding of
gender and cultural differences in the traditional and
historical context of the host communities by carrying
out cultural-awareness and sensitivity training.
In conclusion, the momentum generated over the
past three years by the adoption of a series of
resolutions to address conflict-related sexual violence
should not be lost. We need to ensure that the
implementation of mechanisms shows tangible results
on the ground. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its
commitment to implementing all the resolutions to
eradicate
conflict-related
sexual
violence,
in
cooperation with the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): First of all, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
important open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual

15

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallström; the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Ladsous; and the Libyan representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their insightful briefings.
Japan welcomes the Secretary-General’s recent
report (S/2012/33), which contains broad information
on parties committing or responsible for acts of rape
and other forms of sexual violence, including in postconflict situations and other situations of concern. We
expect that the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements will be made fully functional in all
situations
experiencing
conflict-related
sexual
violence, and that they will contribute to providing
more specific and detailed information on conflictrelated sexual violence both in the country-specific
reports and in the thematic reports of the SecretaryGeneral in the future.
We also appreciate that, for the first time, the
report lists parties that are credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
and other forms of sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict, as per the Security Council agenda.
Japan strongly condemns the parties listed and calls on
them to make specific, time-bound commitments to
ceasing acts of sexual violence and bringing
perpetrators to justice. If they fail to do so, the Security
Council must respond with appropriate measures,
including targeted measures, to hold those parties
accountable.
In that regard, we commend the fact that the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo decided last December to add Ntabo Ntaberi
Cheka, a militia leader responsible for mass rape, to
the sanctions list. We are also encouraged to hear that
earlier this month the Guinean court filed charges
against Lieutenant Colonel Moussa Tiegboro Camara
for the mass rape committed in Conakry in 2009.
Japan reiterates its full support for the mandate of
Special Representative Wallström and commends her
vigorous advocacy efforts towards ending conflictrelated sexual violence. We welcome the fact that the
Team of Experts has become fully operational and that
it has so far visited four countries. Japan encourages
those countries to continue cooperating with the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and hopes that they will use the Team’s

16

expertise to strengthen the rule of law, improve their
justice systems and reform their security sectors to
combat sexual violence.
As the Special Representative has pointed out on
many occasions, sexual violence is never a by-product
of conflict, and it can be prevented. We should focus
more on the prevention side of the issue. Japan
welcomes the framework of early warning signs
specific to conflict-related sexual violence that has
been developed based on collective analysis by the
broader membership of the United Nations system. We
encourage all stakeholders to incorporate the
framework of early warning indicators into their
immediate responses to conflict. We also expect that
the Secretary-General’s next report will include more
analysis on the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence from the perspective of prevention.
Finally, I would like to underline the important
role played by United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, a network of 13 United Nations
entities chaired by Special Representative Wallström.
United Nations Action is the key to a comprehensive
and coordinated approach to preventing and responding
to conflict-related sexual violence. Japan welcomes
United Nations Action’s strategic framework for 201112, which specifies the leading entities for each action.
We expect that United Nations Action will further
strengthen its network and activities on the ground,
particularly by making tangible the positive changes
for the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Intelmann (Estonia): Allow me to begin by
aligning myself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union and by thanking you,
Sir, for convening this debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/33)
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict for her
statement. We strongly support the mandate of the
Special Representative, including the requirement to
provide periodic statements as important updates on
the state of sexual violence in conflicts around the
world. Special Representative Wallström has been an
important advocate for the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence, and we especially appreciate her focus
on the accountability dimension.

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

Sexual violence can be a crime of international
concern, especially if it is part of a widespread or
systematic campaign and can therefore constitute a war
crime, a crime against humanity or even an act of
genocide. The need to ensure accountability for such
crimes is self-evident.
International tribunals have long been at the
forefront of the fight against impunity for such crimes.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, for
example, recognized rape as an act of genocide for the
first time in history in 1998. The Rome Statute,
adopted earlier that very year, represented a
tremendous step forward by incorporating, for the first
time and explicitly in an international legal framework,
sexual violence such as rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution and forced pregnancy. It did so in a way
that makes their prosecution a practical possibility. The
importance of implementing those provisions is further
illustrated by the obligation of the Prosecutor to take
into account the nature of a crime, in particular where
it involves sexual violence, gender violence or violence
against children.
In the brief history of the Court, the Office of the
Prosecutor has brought charges for sexual violence
against 13 of the 27 individuals for whom he has
requested warrants of arrest or summonses to appear,
charging sexual violence as a war crime, a crime
against humanity and an act of genocide. Indeed, as
International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor-Elect
Fatou Bensouda has stated, the most striking quality of
the pursuit of gender crimes by the Court to date has
been their centrality to every prosecution so far. While
the Court cannot deal with all instances of sexual
violence, it has nevertheless proven itself to be a
powerful tool for bringing those responsible for the
gravest such crimes to justice.
The nexus between the United Nations and the
ICC in the fight against sexual violence is very clear.
The Court is active in six of the situations highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report, whether through
preliminary
examinations,
investigations
or
prosecutions. However, the Rome Statute limits the
Court’s reach to its States parties, and to crimes
committed after 1 July 2002. Crimes falling outside
those two criteria are the specific responsibility of the
States concerned and, where necessary, of the Security
Council, for, as the preamble to the Rome Statute
reminds us, grave crimes threaten the peace, security
and well-being of the world. The Council has also

12-23937

recognized conflict-related sexual violence as a threat
to international peace and security, condemning its use
as a tactic of war.
It is incumbent on the Council to react effectively
to acts of sexual violence when it is likely that they
amount to the most serious crimes under international
law. Council action should be based on credible
reports, including those of the Secretary-General. The
use of accountability mechanisms, including referrals
to the International Criminal Court and the use of
targeted sanctions against those responsible for rape
and other forms of sexual violence, in accordance with
resolution 1960 (2010), are but two of the tools
available. It would be remiss of the Council not to
make use of such tools if the circumstances so demand.
When discussing sexual violence, let us not forget
the burden borne by victims. Under the Rome Statue,
victims of crime have the opportunity to participate in
proceedings before the Court. Victims of sexual
violence also require targeted assistance of the sort
rendered by the Trust Fund for Victims established by
the Statute. To name but one example, a project in the
Ituri region of the Democratic Republic of Congo
provides education, day care and basic health-care
services to 67 girls who had been abducted by the
armed forces and had borne children while in captivity.
Whether through multilateral or bilateral development
cooperation, it is important that donors remember the
special needs of the victims of sexual violence.
Women are the largest group of victims of sexual
violence, which is why the fight against impunity must
be complemented by efforts to empower women to
become actors in peace and security. For this reason,
Estonia attaches great importance to implementing and
further developing resolution 1325 (2000) and its
follow-on resolutions in order to strengthen the role of
women in conflict prevention, settlement and
peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I thank the Togolese
presidency for convening today’s open debate on
conflict-related sexual violence.
Canada welcomes the Secretary-General’s recent
report
(S/2012/33)
and
thanks
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual

17

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

Violence in Conflict for her presentation today and her
efforts to strengthen United Nations mechanisms to
prevent and respond to such crimes, including rape and
trafficking of women and girls. Canada encourages the
Security Council to receive regular briefings by the
Special Representative following her visits to countries
on the Council’s agenda.
(spoke in French)
Canada strongly supports the Security Council’s
recognition of the need to take effective measures to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence,
including rape as a weapon of war. In this regard,
Canada calls on the Council to ensure the
implementation of increased accountability measures
for these crimes, including monitoring and reporting
arrangements and holding those responsible for sexual
violence to account. It is also important to give
consideration to the health, safety and dignity of
survivors.
Canada welcomes the inclusion of the list of
perpetrators of acts of sexual violence in the annex to
the Secretary-General’s report. My country calls on the
Security Council to increase pressure on States to hold
perpetrators of sexual violence to account. Canada also
calls on the Security Council to ensure that its
sanctions committees adopt criteria pertaining to acts
of sexual violence such as rape as a weapon of war,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilization or other forms of sexual violence
of comparable gravity.
(spoke in English)
Canada urges the Council to consistently address
conflict-related sexual violence in its work, including
by ensuring that preventing and responding to sexual
violence is part of the mandated tasks of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In the upcoming
mandate renewals of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan next month, mandate elements
addressing sexual violence should be strengthened.
Canada supports the efforts of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the use of the early warning indicators
that are being piloted for use in select projects,
including operations in South Sudan and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

18

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Mr. President, at the
outset I would like to express my appreciation to you
for organizing this important meeting. I also thank
Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
her comprehensive presentation of the report on sexual
violence in armed conflict (S/2012/33).
In the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), the
Security Council recognized the important role of
women in maintaining peace and security. It also
highlighted specific needs and concerns of women
during and in the aftermath of armed conflicts. We feel
proud that Bangladesh, as a member of the Council at
the time of the resolution’s adoption and one of its
main sponsors, was closely associated with the
adoption of that historic document. Periodic meetings
of this sort offer us an opportunity to take stock of the
progress achieved and the challenges remaining in
fulfilling the objectives of the resolution, as well as
subsequent resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2000).
Some initiatives of the global community in the
first decade of its adoption have been praiseworthy.
The establishment of a new body, UN-Women, and the
appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict have
been two significant developments that have placed
women at the top of the global agenda. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has also undertaken
commendable steps for the better protection and
enhanced participation of women.
The situation is far from satisfactory, however.
We are disappointed to note that violence against
women and girls is still prevalent in many parts of the
world suffering from armed conflict. Women and girls,
we all know, suffer most as victims of such conflicts.
Their suffering is compounded when they are ignored
or marginalized in peace processes. Women are too
often excluded from both the negotiations that make
peace and the institutions that maintain it. We
underscore the need to do more to ensure the safety and
security of women and girls, particularly during
conflict situations and in their aftermath.
The participation of women should be ensured at
all stages of peace processes, including conflict
prevention, peace negotiations and post-conflict

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

reconstruction. We also believe that poverty and socioeconomic deprivation are the breeding grounds for
conflict, including sexual violence against women and
girls. We therefore emphasize the importance of
fulfilling the economic needs of women and of
engaging women at all levels and in all forms of
decision-making processes. Women’s economic needs
may be served by ensuring their access to and
participation in income-generating and entrepreneurial
activities in such areas as microcredit, vocational
training and public health. Women’s engagement at all
levels of decision-making may be promoted through
the recruitment of women to senior-level positions.
In Bangladesh, based on our experience with
nation-building and women’s empowerment, we have
embraced this view and developed a model that our
Prime Minister, Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina calls a
“peace model”. She believes that if peace is attained
and maintained, development and prosperity will
follow. The central message conveyed in the model
emphasizes the empowerment of people, including
women and other vulnerable groups. I am happy to
note here that the General Assembly recently adopted
resolution 66/224, entitled “People’s empowerment and
development”.
Women occupy many top leadership positions in
my country. The Constitution of Bangladesh guarantees
the equality of men and women within the broad
framework of non-discrimination on grounds of
religion, race or gender. The 345-member National
Parliament of Bangladesh has 45 seats reserved for
women. We also have a significant number of elected
women representatives in local bodies.
The Government has adopted a national policy
for women’s advancement and a national plan of
action. A women’s development implementation
committee, headed by the Minister for Women and
Children Affairs, monitors the implementation of
policies for women’s empowerment. It has also created
a gender-based budget. We are benefiting greatly from
all of those initiatives. To cite just one example, the
enrolment of girls at primary and secondary level
schools exceeds that of boys, and girls in secondary
level schools are helped by tuition waivers and the
provision of stipends.
We are pleased to make our modest contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Our troops and police are doing excellent work in

12-23937

various United Nations peacekeeping missions. In line
with our pro-women policy, we have been recruiting
women in our regular forces, including police and the
military. While they contribute to our national security,
they are also sent to respond to international calls. For
example, we deployed an all-female contingent serving
as a female formed police unit in Haiti following the
devastating earthquake there.
Finally, let me emphasis that we have a solemn
responsibility to protect women and girls against all
forms of violence and to ensure their rightful place in
line with the letter and spirit of resolution 1325 (2000).
On its part, my country stands ready to make its
humble contribution to global efforts in promoting the
status and role of women both nationally and
internationally.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
fully associate myself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union. I thank you sincerely,
Mr. President, for providing the opportunity to review
the progress achieved and the challenges ahead in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions, in particular the provisions on
conflict-related sexual violence.
We welcome the start of implementation in the
field, of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements and hope that the difficulties remaining
in collecting and verifying information and in
establishing shared databases will soon be resolved.
We fully support the new United Nations
initiatives in the fight against conflict-related sexual
violence, in particular the development of early
warning indicators to assist United Nations personnel
on the ground in identifying early warning signs
specific to acts of sexual violence and to better prevent
such violence, as well as the importance attached to the
inclusion in ceasefire and peace agreements of
provisions on conflict-related sexual violence aimed at
achieving durable peace.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/33)
illustrates in a most alarming way how impunity linked
to human rights abuses of the past, in particular acts of
sexual violence perpetrated in armed conflict, is a
major factor undermining early recovery and peace
consolidation, and frequently allows sexual violence to

19

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

persist. In that context, it is particularly disturbing, as
the report indicates and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
also noted today, that in many countries the alleged
perpetrators of sexual violence are not prosecuted for
their acts, but are often promoted or appointed to
senior Government positions in national institutions.
The impunity of such high-ranking officers is
unacceptable and prevents communities emerging from
conflict to recover sustainably.
I echo the Secretary-General’s call on the
Security Council to employ all means at its disposal to
fight conflict-related sexual violence, including the use
of referrals to the International Criminal Court, and to
increase pressure on the perpetrators of sexual violence
through the adoption of targeted and graduated
measures by relevant sanctions committees. The fight
against impunity is also of major importance to the
prevention of sexual violence.
In that context, allow me to highlight a positive
development that has taken place since the publication
of the Secretary-General’s report. It was referred to
today by the Special Representative, and I particularly
value it in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea countryspecific
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission. I am referring to the indictment under
Guinean justice of Lieutenant Colonel Moussa
Tiegboro Camara, who is suspected of being one of the
main persons responsible for the violence that
occurred, including mass rape, in the Conakry stadium
on 28 September 2009. This is an important step in the
right direction.
Since the most recent public debate of the
Council on the issue at hand (S/PV.6642) on
28 October 2011, Luxembourg has further intensified
its commitment to supporting women in armed
conflict, including through its support of the work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
This is our response to the Secretary-General’s call on
Member States, reiterated in this year’s report, to
provide the resources necessary to enable the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
subregional workshop was organized in November
2011 in Goma, with the support of Luxembourg, by the

20

Office of Gender Affairs of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to promote exchanges of
experiences among women’s organizations in the Great
Lakes region in the areas of peace, security and
prevention of election-related violence. The workshop
sought to help reduce the risk of the outbreak of
conflict before, during and after elections. Training
was also offered to improve conditions in order to
promote women’s participation in provincial and local
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With the support of Luxembourg, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has been able to
implement similar initiatives in Timor-Leste and in
Haiti. This year, again with our support, a national
workshop in the Republic of South Sudan and a
workshop for West Africa in Liberia will be held with
the shared objective of strengthening the contributions
of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
increasing women’s representation at all levels within
national, regional and international institutions and to
reinforcing
mechanisms
for
the
prevention,
management and resolution of conflict.
The fight against conflict-related sexual violence
is a moral obligation that we must fulfil together.
Luxembourg can be counted on to continue its
contribution to that collective effort.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by Togo in holding this debate during
its presidency. The United Nations is commemorating
the twelfth year since the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) and two years since the
adoption of resolution 1960 (2010). My delegation
notes with satisfaction the commitment shown by
Member States, the United Nations system, civil
society and other actors in implementing those and
related resolutions. Those resolutions, together with
other international instruments constitute the bedrock
for women’s work on peace and security and also the
basis for cooperation among all actors involved in this
field.
Violence against women in all its manifestations
must be dealt with firmly and decisively. In that regard,
my delegation reiterates Kenya’s commitment to the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
follow-up resolutions.

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

Sexual abuse is perhaps the most dehumanizing
crime known to humankind. The international
community currently has the framework to bring about
more action and visibility to address this heinous crime
in times of conflict. Prevention is the cornerstone of
any strategy to address the challenges that society
faces. We therefore must address the underlying causes
of conflict that provide the springboard for redressing
sexual abuse cases.
Preventive diplomacy as an intervention must be
undertaken expediently to protect potential victims and
to nip any kind of possible impunity in the bud. The
Council has previously recognized a critical link
between security issues and socio-economic concerns
such as poverty, disease and environmental
degradation. We believe that countries must
systematically integrate and mainstream womenspecific issues in all action plans in order to tackle the
growing problem of sexual and gender-based violence
during conflict and even in peacetime. The need to
mainstream a gender perspective into peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding
initiatives
cannot
be
overemphasized.
Following the post-election violence in Kenya in
2007, the Government set out an ambitious plan to put
in place a new Constitution and build and strengthen
institutions of governance that would be accountable to
and responsive to the needs of its citizens. In clear
recognition that all human development and human
rights issues, including peace and security, have gender
dimensions, Kenya has made great advances in
mainstreaming gender in its institutions of governance.
Indeed, arguably, such advances have not been made
by any country in such a short period of time and
during peacetime.
The judiciary is now fiercely independent; the
investigation and prosecution branches have been
revamped. A new Independent Electoral and
Boundaries Commission has been established to better
manage elections. Other institutions, such as the
National Cohesion and Integration Commission and the
Commission for the Implementation of the
Constitution, have also been established and are
currently monitoring the pace and quality of reforms,
including the enactment of necessary legislation to
avert any recurrence of events similar to those of 2007.
The Kenyan Constitution has entrenched
women’s participation in all aspects of Kenya’s

12-23937

governance structures and societal life in general. By
promoting full and effective participation and granting
the Kenyan woman her rightful place at the decisionmaking table, Kenya has ensured that there shall be
nothing about society without women’s involvement
and genuine participation. But ever since the African
Union/United Nations-sponsored mediation process
that led to the formation of the coalition Government,
Kenya has remained true to its promises and strived,
against great odds, to carry out its obligations
responsibly. No single, simple metric conveys better
the contrast between the situation as it then was and is
now. Kenya’s cooperation with the International
Criminal Court and the putting in place of key
legislation, such as the International Crimes Act and
the Witness Protection Act, provide necessary legal
safeguards for the effective prosecution of the
perpetrators of post-election violence. Kenya is
grateful to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for its continued support in this regard.
The main thrust of resolution 1960 (2010) is the
creation of an accountability system listing those
parties credibly suspected of committing or responsible
for patterns of sexual violence. Needless to say, there
are no ongoing patterns of sexual violence in Kenya
today, and none of the activities reported concerning
Kenya took place during the current reporting period of
2010-2011. The post-election violence of January 2008
is therefore way outside the mandated reporting period.
Additionally, Kenya’s report has been lumped together
with another situation with which there is no
correlation. This is not to say that Kenya has not taken
any action to redress the situation described in the
report. Indeed, the Attorney General and the Chief
Justice, both newly appointed, have been holding
consultations on how best to deal with these cases.
In conclusion, I wish to note that all over the
world, many women are denied their social, economic,
political and civil rights. They are systematically
discriminated against because of their gender. While I
reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1960 (2010), there is a
nexus between violence against women and the
economic and power structure. We must therefore
emphasize on greater coherence and coordination in
addressing women’s issues in a fair and holistic
manner in all situations. It is therefore imperative that
consideration be given to how best to incorporate the
activities of the Office of the Special Representative of

21

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
with the work of UN-Women.
Finally, we reiterate that Kenya condemns all
forms of violence against women, including sexual
violence, and has always urged compliance with both
humanitarian and human rights law during times of
conflict. We believe that we have a duty, individually
and collectively, to protect women from violence and
other atrocities during times of war. Women also must
participate in reconstruction efforts, free from threats,
intimidation and discrimination during recovery or
post-conflict periods. It is pertinent, therefore, that in
all situations the special needs of women be respected
and their concerns addressed. Women’s perceptions,
concerns and opinions must form an integral part of all
decision-making
processes.
Indeed,
traditional
stereotypes that have ostensibly kept women away
from decision-making forums must be broken.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): We appreciate very
much that this debate on conflict-related sexual
violence is taking place during Togo’s presidency of
the Security Council. We commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2012/33). It is compelling in
its range, clarity and detail. The litany of crimes to
which it bears witness is shameful.
The challenge is to ensure that our outrage
translates into determined and purposeful action,
yielding early and measurable results. Before
commenting further on the Secretary-General’s report,
I would wish to note actions undertaken by my
Government in the past few months.
Our Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
addressed the Security Council two weeks ago (see
S/PV.6715) in his capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). In his statement, he made clear that
the issue of women and peace and security will receive
strong emphasis throughout Ireland’s chairing of the
Organization. A new Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office on Gender Issues,
Ms. June Zeitlin, has been appointed. Ireland is also
providing a dedicated military officer, based at our
Permanent Mission to the OSCE in Vienna, to examine
ways in which the OSCE can support the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions.

22

Ireland has also wished to demonstrate at the
national level its strong continuing support for the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. As a concrete
demonstration of that support, we have made a
financial contribution to the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Aware
that the Team of Experts relies upon extrabudgetary
resources, we were pleased to be able to contribute
$135,000 at the end of last year.
The report before us is testament to the need for a
dedicated Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, with the strong mandate which the Special
Representative holds. These are crimes surrounded by
taboos and silence, consistently underreported and,
even when they are reported, unlikely to be followed
up. If there is to be any chance of penetrating the
darkness, we need a strong and unwavering
searchlight. The independent voice and exclusive focus
of the Special Representative helps to shine that steady
light. The latest report from the Secretary-General
validates both the appointment of a dedicated Special
Representative and the clarity and scope of her
mandate.
The report addresses a range of specific situations
spanning four continents, all of them deserving our
attention. In some of these situations, conflict still
rages; others are post-conflict but still dealing with a
poisonous legacy. Côte d’Ivoire, Libya and South
Sudan are among the more recent ugly chapters. The
sexual violence being unleashed in Syria, with male
detainees as particular targets, deserves our
unequivocal condemnation.
Given the time constraints and the breadth of
coverage in earlier interventions, I will limit myself to
commenting on three points, illustrated by three case
studies.
The first is a case study on ending impunity. We
all recognize the simple equation: impunity for
perpetrators of sexual violence guarantees that the
virus will spread; conversely, ending impunity and
making the perpetrators pay will act as a deterrent.
The first step in ending impunity is the systematic
gathering of credible evidence. The SecretaryGeneral’s report gives a sense of the progress being
made in that regard. For the first time in a report of this
nature, the Secretary-General has named individuals on
the basis of credible reports of culpability.

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

In the commentary on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for example, one finds the names of 10
or so individuals. That specificity of data will enable us
to measure outcomes. When we next come back to this
issue, it will be important to focus on precisely what
has happened in those cases. What steps have the
national authorities taken? What have we at the United
Nations been able, or willing, to do?
The possibility of measuring outcomes will apply
not just in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but also in relation to the list of parties set out
in annex 1 to the Secretary-General’s report.
The report includes clear recommendations to the
Security Council on increasing pressure on perpetrators
of conflict-related sexual violence. We look to the
Council to show determination in its response. Too
many recent headlines from the Security Council have
been ones of disunity. On the issue of sexual violence
in conflict, the Council has the opportunity to assert
itself, to demonstrate that disunity does not define it,
and to act decisively to sanction perpetrators, to refer
cases to the International Criminal Court, to mandate
commissions of inquiry and to condemn violations
explicitly in resolutions and statements.
My second point is that women are not a
footnote; and Somalia is a case study in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s report sets out the scale of
sexual violence in Somalia: the crimes of Al-Shabaab;
the groups of men in military uniform who prey on
women and girls in internally displaced camps in
Mogadishu; the rapes and gang-rapes in camps in
Kenya; and the chronic and largely unaddressed sexual
violence in Puntland.

the Ethiopian border region. The statement from the
women ambassadors, produced yesterday, is intended
as an input to the London Conference. It outlines issues
of concern and concludes with the urging of Somali
women that the international community raise issues of
gender, including with Somali leaders.
Amid the range and gravity of the problems
facing Somalia, and the imperative to advance on the
political and security fronts, it is easy to see how
specific issues predominantly affecting women may
not be prioritized, or may be seen as symptomatic of
deeper problems that, if addressed, will help to
alleviate the situation of women. But the phenomenon
of women as a footnote has been with us far too long.
When the international community comes together in a
high-profile conference, one would hope to see from
the outset a strong consciousness of the gender
dimension of the conflict. The time has well passed
when sexual violence could be viewed as in some sense
collateral damage — a regrettable but inevitable byproduct of larger forces at work.
My third point pertains to the responsibilities of
United Nations peacekeepers, and Chad is the case
study. The Secretary-General’s report sets out steps
being taken to improve the training of peacekeepers
with regard to conflict-related sexual violence. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women collaboration in that regard is particularly
welcome. The standards for United Nations
peacekeepers must be the highest. The Blue Helmet is
designed to inspire confidence and trust; it is
unthinkable that in any circumstance it should instil
fear of rape or sexual violence.

The Conference on Somalia is meeting in London
today, and we look forward to a substantive outcome. It
is worthwhile, however, to mention an initiative of
women ambassadors accredited to the African Union.
The cross-regional group of women ambassadors — I
might mention that the Ambassadors of Togo and
Ireland were part of that group — were concerned that
initial preparatory papers for the London Conference
lacked any focus on the situation of women in Somalia,
despite the gravity of their situation and the shared
principles of resolution 1325 (2000).

Recognizing that progress is being made, it is still
salutary to hear directly from those with first-hand
experience. In Ireland’s case, we had an instructive
recent experience of peacekeeping in Chad. Ireland had
overall command of the European Union military
operation in the Republic of Chad and in the Central
African Republic (EUFOR), and deployed more than
400 Irish troops. Subsequently, when EUFOR was
replaced by United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), our troops
continued to serve in the same numbers with the
Mission until 2010.

With African Union (AU) and United Nations
support, the group undertook meetings with Somali
women both in Nairobi and in camps of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in

The transition from EUFOR to MINURCAT
afforded us the opportunity to witness differences in
approach between the two peacekeeping models. One

12-23937

23

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

of the areas where there was a measurable difference
was in relation to the gender focus. Mission
requirements relating to resolution 1325 (2000) were
more specific and detailed during the EUFOR
deployment than during the subsequent MINURCAT
deployment.

with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
provide the international community with the legal
framework to address the needs and rights of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

That was a specific experience at a specific time,
and may not be fully representative of today’s
circumstances. Yet the Chad experience left a strong
imprint on our peacekeepers and an awareness of the
challenge confronting the United Nations in that
regard. Seeing the practical outcomes of gender work
with EUFOR also further strengthened the commitment
to training Irish peacekeepers on gender issues. A
number of steps have been taken. I might mention that,
as of May, our defence forces will deploy a gender
adviser and gender focal points in the unit deploying to
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

Women are clearly decisive actors at every stage
of the peacebuilding process in the long term. It is
therefore necessary to promote their full participation
as an integral part of efforts to establish, maintain and
strengthen peace. We therefore welcome the trend to
systematically incorporate the gender perspective in
the Security Council’s work, especially in mission
mandates, as well as the involvement of women in
conflict resolution processes.

The report before us makes for difficult reading,
but it also lays down a challenge. We can no longer
claim ignorance of what is happening, or the scale of
what is happening; nor can we claim a lack of credible
evidence as a rationale for inaction.
The Special Representative, fully backed by the
Secretary-General, is pursuing her mandate in her
characteristic vigorous and clear-sighted way. It is for
all of us — in the Security Council, in the General
Assembly and across the United Nations system — to
take on our share of responsibility.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful for the initiative to hold an open debate in
the Security Council on the role of women with regard
to peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a fundamental
milestone in international law. Since it was adopted,
the issue of women’s role with regard to peace and
security has had an important place on the Council’s
agenda, and therefore has a significant and crucial role
in achieving the Council’s goals.
The resolution was a starting point for subsequent
developments on the issue in the Security Council
aimed at ensuring women’s participation in
maintaining and strengthening peace and in combating
all forms of violence against women and girls,
especially sexual and gender-based violence. Along

24

My country has a long history of sending women
military observers to various peacekeeping operations.
I am pleased to announce that, last November, Peru
deployed its first female personnel to peacekeeping
operations. Their numbers will continue to increase in
future operations.
We must in no way allow violence against women
and sexual violence to be seen as an inevitable part of
armed conflicts. In that regard, we are pleased that the
Secretary-General has implemented a zero-tolerance
policy in peacekeeping operations for all forms of
violence against women, gender violence and in
particular violence and sexual abuse. We also welcome
his recent report on the issue that recognizes the
important work that has been done jointly by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women
and various actors of the United Nations system with
regard to the development and implementation of a
comprehensive strategy to combat this scourge, which
is essential in order to respond in a timely and adequate
manner to situations of sexual violence.
My country also supports the work of
UN-Women, and we encourage it to continue to
contribute decisively to the implementation of
resolutions relating to peace and security. Peru also
welcomes the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict on aspects linked to
women, peace and security, especially relating to the
prevention of sexual violence.
The fight against impunity for all forms of gender
violence is essential to peacebuilding processes. It is

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

therefore necessary that States strengthen their judicial
systems so that such cases can be duly and promptly
brought to trial, including, whenever possible, women
in those systems. It will also be important in that
respect to continue to promote the ratification of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
We agree with the Secretary-General that women
are decisive players in the context of the three pillars
required for lasting peace: economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy. In that context, in
post-conflict stages it is vital that stress be put on
strengthening the rule of law as well as the social,
economic and political empowerment of women,
without any discrimination, ensuring their full
integration into the community and their full political
participation.
Peru believes that the high-level consideration of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) proposed
for 2015 would be an opportunity to consider, in a
comprehensive manner, the progress made by the
United Nations system and the measures promoted and
adopted by Member States in priority prevention areas,
which are participation, protection, assistance and
recovery, and to consider the establishment of a
working group charged with following up that
resolution.
Since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, we
have made progress in recognizing the importance of
women’s participation in peace and security. However,
many challenges remain to which we must respond,
and we must work jointly to ensure that women and
girls can fully and without discrimination exercise their
personal, employment, economic and social rights,
which are recognized in international instruments,
including their right to live without fear, without
violence, with respect and with equal opportunities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Syria stresses the importance of the item
under consideration and condemns all forms of sexual
violence, particularly in armed conflict. It stresses also
the need to put an end to such acts and to bring their
perpetrators to justice while avoiding selectivity.
My country has read the report (S/2012/33) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.
It has also read the information provided by the Special

12-23937

Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Syria supports all efforts to end
conflict-related sexual violence and to punish
perpetrators and end impunity. However, we reject the
allegations and claims made in the report with respect
to my country, Syria. We request that caution and
objectivity be exercised in addressing these important
humanitarian issues.
We would have hoped that the authors of the
report would have based the contents of the report on
proof, evidence and facts instead of relying on
allegations that could be traced to reports by media that
are hostile to Syria and to its people. The Syrian
Government is ready to address any case in that respect
so that it can investigate it and punish anyone who has
been proved to have committed a crime under Syrian
laws.
The Special Representative mentioned my
country in the report before us in the context of what
she called sexual violence and in the context of
elections, political strife an civil unrest, thereby
exceeding the mandate entrusted to her by resolutions
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). Under those resolutions,
she has the right to express concern and to draw the
attention of the Security Council to forms of sexual
violence committed only in the context of armed
conflict or post-conflict situations.
Recent developments in Syria have shown that
there is an unprecedented fierce and misleading
political and media campaign against Syria that is
aimed at undermining its stability and security. That
campaign uses the lives of Syrians and their legitimate
demands for reform as a means of implementing
special foreign agendas that would not serve the Syrian
people or promote their human rights. The campaign
seeks to undermine centuries-old coexistence among
Syrians and the Syrian State in favour of fomenting
violence and promoting chaos and terror.
Western and Arab States have, unfortunately,
provided generous financial contributions to arm the
terrorist groups that are committing acts of violence of
all kinds, including killings, against civilians, members
of the military and public and private institutions. The
Syrian Arab Republic would like to reiterate that the
Syrian State, under the Charter, has exclusive
responsibility for the protection of its people and for
ensuring respect for human rights and guaranteeing
those rights for all individuals residing on its territory

25

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

and under its jurisdiction, as provided for in the
provisions of international law, free from any foreign
intervention.
My delegation addressed many official letters to
the Special Representative, including documented
information on the responsibility of armed terrorist
groups for acts of rape and sexual abuse as well as the
killing of Syrian women and girls. We also sent the
Representative a DVD including the documented
confessions of members of those groups, proving their
responsibility for those crimes. Regrettably, the Special
Representative ignored our attempt to provide her with
that document and made only a passing reference to the
documented crimes perpetrated by terrorist groups. The
Special Representative chose to depend on reports that
lack credibility and professionalism, so that she can
hold the Syrian authorities responsible for the
commission of acts of sexual violence without any
credible evidence. That is supported by the SecretaryGeneral, who states, at the end of paragraph 87 of his
report, that the international commission of inquiry had
not received sufficient testimony in connection with
allegations of acts of rape or other forms of sexual
violence.
The
Secretary-General
and
his
Special
Representative adopted those allegations, while
ignoring the responses of the Syrian Government and
information
already
corroborated
by
public
confessions. Such positions can be seen as indirect
participation in misleading public opinion and
disregard for the Syrian Government’s position
regarding events on its own territory. It is an
irresponsible incitement of all sorts of acts of violence,
providing international cover for international terrorist
acts undertaken by terrorist groups against Syria, its
interests and its people. We would have hoped that the
Special Representative would try to be objective,
neutral and non-political, and that she would not
undertake work contrary to her mandate or take
advantage of her post to cater to the interests of certain
influential States Members of the Organization.
In conclusion, it is truly strange that the
representative of the Israeli occupying Power — whose
country has for decades committed all kinds of
violations and crimes, including violence against girls
and women in the occupied Arab territories in Palestine
and in the occupied Syrian Golan — should accuse or
lecture us even as Israel continues to commit all kinds
of violence against women and girls who are still under

26

the yoke of the Israeli occupation. They are killed,
raped and abused. In the occupied Palestinian
territories, a Palestinian woman gives birth or has a
miscarriage at an Israeli checkpoint and can barely
reach a hospital. That is all I have to say.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. I also welcome the report
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence, which informs our discussion today
(S/2012/33), and the insightful briefing of
Ms. Wallström, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
report and the meeting are timely and necessary.
Central to today’s debate is the relationship between
conflict and sexual violence. In order to better
understand that connection, I wish to address three
main elements.
The first aspect is the importance of the focus of
the international community. With the end of the
Second World War in 1945, humanity was saved from
another world war, but was not spared the effects of
war and atrocities. Over 20 million people were killed
in the 265 wars and conflicts between 1945 and 1990
and in the 186 wars and conflicts that erupted from
1990 to the present.
In the 1990s, after the Cold War, we increasingly
faced a new form of war, with a decrease in the number
of inter-State conflicts and an increase in the
prevalence of intra-State tension and violent non-State
actors. That brought new waves of atrocious horrors,
including in my country, Afghanistan. The atrocities
emerging from the conflicts of the 1990s, including
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
raised a tenacious challenge for the international
community and, subsequently, fuelled the prompt
application of international laws and norms in
response.
The second element is the interconnectedness of
sexual violence and other atrocities. While sexual
violence is embedded within the definition of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, the international
community should take a holistic approach to those
atrocities, as they cannot be separated from one
another. Furthermore, every atrocity is spawned from

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

the all-encompassing destruction of society caused by
war. We cannot truly stop atrocities such as sexual
violence without ending the violence, war and conflict
that breed them.
The third aspect is the breakdown of cultural
values. War is pervasive. It destroys the common
understanding of decency and respect for human rights.
It kills morals. It breaks down social contracts. It
erodes solidarity and trust. As I saw in my own
country, war and conflict resulted in the corrupting
prevalence of a militant culture, countering society’s
values, based on tolerance and respect.
What emerged was, in fact, a militant
anti-culture, caused by war. Crimes against Afghan
people were committed and human rights violations
were extensive, especially violence against women. We
saw what had never before been seen in the history of
Afghan women — a sequence of killing, maiming and
violence.
However, in the past 10 years, after the fall of the
Taliban, the Government of Afghanistan, with the
support of the international community, has worked to
put an end to violence in the country. That is essential
to security and to protecting the rights of women, men
and children.
Afghanistan adopted a law on the elimination of
violence against women, which has provided the
Government with stronger judicial means through
which we can combat sexual violence more effectively.
That is real progress towards breaking the silence with
regard to violence and sexual violence. We are
confident that, in the years to come, our efforts will
yield more results and that women will be safer and
more respected and will receive the justice that they
deserve.
The President of Afghanistan also established a
commission on the elimination of sexual abuse of
children and women. The commission advises relevant
organizations on how to fight against the sexual abuse
of women and children and encourages relevant
reporting to it.
Afghanistan
acknowledges
that
the
accomplishments that we have outlined are only the
first steps towards achieving gender equality and the
improvement of the position of women. The Afghan
Government will therefore continue its effort to
eliminate sexual violence and to advance women’s

12-23937

rights and empowerment. In that regard, the
Government of Afghanistan welcomes resolutions 1325
(2000), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), which identify
combating sexual violence as a matter of peace and
security.
The international community has an essential role
to play in supporting the ongoing efforts in conflictaffected and post-conflict countries in order to end
sexual violence and violence against women, combat
impunity and offer assistance to victims of sexual
violence. However, we need not only the support of the
international community, but its awareness not to
forget the violence that affected the lives of women,
men and children. We must work together to ensure
that such atrocities will never happen again.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mr. García Gonzalez (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador welcomes your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene this open debate of the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
That resolution constitutes a cornerstone in the
efforts to achieve full participation — on an equal
basis — of women in all initiatives for peace and
security, together with the integration of the gender
perspective in the context of seeking a resolution of
armed conflicts, in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and in post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.
Resolutions 1325 (2000), 1888 (2009) and 1889
(2009) constitute important policy instruments, since
they make it possible to consider, in a broad,
comprehensive fashion, the increasing complexities of
conflict and post-conflict transitions to development
situations from a gender perspective.
El Salvador recognizes that, 11 years after its
adoption, progress has been achieved in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as pointed
out by the second report (S/2012/33) of the SecretaryGeneral. The report clearly indicates the importance of
making the women’s peace and security component
universal and cross-cutting, and not only from the
perspective of the Security Council, but also from that
of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and its subsidiary bodies, and in particular, the
Peacebuilding Commission, as appropriate.

27

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

The Secretariat has increased and given greater
weight to reports covering women’s issues. But, in our
judgment, a consistent lack of information still exists
regarding countries and specific situations of women in
respect to this issue.
It is important to note that communication and
information between field missions and Headquarters
should be open and immediate in order to make it
possible to update data. Furthermore, to the degree that
the gender perspective is entrenched in the context of
armed conflicts, associated problems come to light,
such as the lack of prevention and protection against
abuse and all kinds of violence against women and
girls, including sexual violence, as was eloquently
indicated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at this meeting.
In that regard, El Salvador agrees with other
delegations and civil society organizations that the
Secretary-General should be asked to include more
systematically in all his reports on conflict situations
broad information on acts of sexual violence and other
gender-based acts against women and girls.
El Salvador recognizes the progress that has been
made with regard to the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, as many of them now include an express
mandate on women, peace and security, as is the case
of Libya, South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone,
Darfur, Burundi, Haiti and Afghanistan.
El Salvador also recognizes and encourages the
important role that can continue to be played in the
future by United Nations Women, which has a special
mandate to deal with this issue in a broad,
comprehensive fashion.
To conclude, allow me to reiterate the
Government of El Salvador’s political will to continue
making progress in promoting and implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as in strengthening the
political participation of women in decision-making
processes and in all areas affecting their lives.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
way in which you are conducting the work of the
Security Council this month. We are grateful for the

28

convening of this important meeting and for the
briefing given by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Margot Wallström. We commend the
committed way in which she has undertaken her
mandate. We would also like to thank Mr. Harvé
Ladsous and Ms. Amina Megheirbi for their
statements.
One of the main challenges confronting the
international community with regard to sexual violence
in armed conflicts is to bring those responsible to
justice in order to put an end to the culture of impunity.
To that end, the Security Council must take robust
measures against all those who are involved in
committing those deplorable acts, in a manner
consistent with international law. Given the scope and
the impact of this type of crime, the Security Council
must use every measure available to it, such as the
adoption of sanctions targeting those who are
responsible.
Likewise, as mentioned by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2012/33), the Security Council has the
capacity to refer cases to the International Criminal
Court and to mandate international investigation
commissions.
We support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that sexual violence be included in the
definition of acts that are prohibited under ceasefire
agreements and peace and reconciliation processes. To
date, only a few such agreements address this issue. If
it is not addressed in an integrated way, there is a risk
that sexual violence will continue to be used as a
weapon of war.
At the national level, we must have effective
national legislative frameworks that prevent sexual
violence, eradicate impunity and provide for
educational and awareness-raising programmes to
prevent the stigmatization of victims. As we all know,
this is one of the root causes of impunity. My
delegation would like to reiterate the importance that
access be provided to health care, to psychosocial
support, to legal assistance and to socio-economic
reintegration services for victims.
My delegation would like to stress that although
peacekeeping operations can help avoid this scourge,
what is most important is that national institutional
capacities be developed, under the principle of national
ownership, in order to prevent this crime in the
medium and long term.

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

We are encouraged that the Group of Experts,
with a mandate designed to reinforce the rule of law
and the capacity of national systems, has already
undertaken some working visits. My delegation appeals
for the Group to continue to establish synergies
between existing United Nations agencies and
mechanisms that have experience in this matter.
It is important to recognize that other
mechanisms and mandates exist that also deal with the
question of sexual violence, something which
unfortunately arises in varied contexts. In order to
achieve tangible results, there must be no duplication.
The Security Council and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General must focus on those cases within
their mandates. That does not imply that they cannot
enhance cooperation with other human-rights
mechanisms that exist.
We are concerned that the report recognizes the
fact that the Security Council still has to appeal for the
deployment of advisers on the protection of women as
a part of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. When resolution 1888 (2009), which was
adopted by consensus in 2009, already includes the
appointment of such advisers under mission mandates.
We welcome the development of training
modules for staff, and we reiterate the need to increase
the number of women on the ground. Such a measure
would foster greater confidence among women in the
host population and also provide more reliable
information.
Combating sexual violence in armed conflicts is a
long road, and it requires considerable stamina. The
international community now has an institutional
toolbox that can deal with the worst situations of
sexual violence that are under consideration on the
agenda of the Security Council.
We must ensure the continuous strengthening of
this framework, being careful that each one of its parts
is in accordance with its responsibilities and mandates.
That includes peacekeeping operations, special
political missions, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other agencies of the United
Nations involved in the matter, according to their
respective competencies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.

12-23937

Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country,
Sweden. The Nordic countries thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report to the Council (S/2012/33), and
his Special Representative Margot Wallström for so
ably leading the United Nations work in this difficult
area. We also thank her, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the representative of the NGO Working
Group, Amina Megheirbi, for their important
statements here today.
The report of the Secretary-General constitutes a
baseline and sets a standard for the Council to obtain
more systematic, detailed and analytical information on
conflict-related sexual violence. That was our hope
when, in December 2010, we welcomed the creation of
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements.
Now as we see progress in reporting, it is also time to
improve our response, as Special Representative
Wallström stated in her remarks earlier today.
We
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to the Council to increase pressure on
perpetrators through measures by the relevant
sanctions committees. We welcome the further
development of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
mechanism and underline the need to avoid duplication
and to ensure coordination with the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict
and regular human rights reporting. In that context, we
acknowledge the important work undertaken by both
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict.
We are pleased that Special Representative
Wallström has been able to address the Council in
country-specific meetings throughout her mandate
when new information emerged. That type of
interaction can allow preventive action to be taken in
reasonable time. Timely, analytical and verified
information allows a better response at all levels.
National Governments and local civil society
organizations can more accurately plan and establish
effective early warning tools, response and protection
mechanisms, as well as services for survivors. United
Nations actors and international non-governmental
organizations that support them can respond quicker
and better.

29

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council can take targeted and
consistent action against perpetrators to fight impunity,
increase compliance with international law and,
ultimately, prevent such crimes from happening in the
first place. We encourage the Council to explore ways
by which it could enhance and systematize the
consideration of information on serious violations
being brought to it, as well as to use all possible tools
at its disposal to respond.
The Nordic countries have always advocated a
broad approach based on equal rights and the
participation of both women and men as the best
possible prevention tool in the long term. I would like
to draw attention to two sectors where institutional
reforms are particularly important in combating sexual
violence and other serious human rights violations,
namely, the security and justice sectors.
It is essential that every process aimed at security
sector reform include a focus on sexual violence, as
well as the broader security needs of women and girls.
Training and capacity-building of national security
actors should aim at a real shift in attitudes from a
conflict management posture to the provision of
security for citizens and communities, placing the
person in the centre. When assessing security in the
aftermath of a conflict, indicators such as women’s
movement between villages and children’s school
attendance should be used alongside the more
traditional ones. Proper vetting procedures should be
used to exclude perpetrators of sexual violence or other
human rights violations from all branches of the
security services. More women should be recruited and
trained to serve in the security sector, including in
leading positions. Specialized units for the reporting of
sexual and gender-based violence should be set up, and
the security sector should be placed under democratic
control and supplied with accountability mechanisms,
including accountability to local communities.
In order to incorporate those important aspects in
the preparations for peacekeeping missions, all Nordic
military and police personnel receive training on
resolution 1325 (2000). A joint Nordic Centre for
Gender in Military Operations was established last
month in Stockholm. The aim of the Centre is to raise
the countries’ competence in gender issues within
planning, execution and evaluation in military
operations. The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations will act as a hub for information,
knowledge and experiences. The Centre will

30

continuously support and cooperate with the United
Nations, the European Union, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other relevant actors. On this note, we particularly
welcome the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
continuing work on training, as addressed by UnderSecretary-General Ladsous earlier today.
There should never be impunity for sexual
violence. We are pleased that the Council has
demonstrated
increasing
willingness
to
use
commissions of inquiry and referrals to the
International Criminal Court. International inquiries
and high-profile trials serve an important function but,
as I mentioned a moment ago, national-level legal and
justice sector reforms are at least as important to
combat impunity and prevent and deter sexual violence
in the long term.
The Nordic countries commend the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law for having in a short time
developed a focused way to support Governments in
this area. Elsewhere innovative practices such as
mobile courts are being used to bring justice closer to
the survivors and communities, serving a doublefunction of justice and confidence building. Enhanced
access to justice should also be accompanied by
enhanced reparations for victims. Innovative measures
such as community reparations and the creation of
economic and educational opportunities should be
explored more widely.
Finally, the Nordic countries commend the
Council and the broader United Nations system for
continuing to address conflict-related sexual violence
and to use available means to counter those threats
against international peace and security. We strongly
welcome the soon to be launched guidelines to address
sexual violence in ceasefires and peace agreements.
There can be no real peace unless there is peace and
justice for survivors of sexual violence.
We express again our full support for the work
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wallström.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting
under your leadership.

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

The adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009) were seminal steps towards enhancing the
protection of women and girls from sexual violence in
conflict situations. The widespread abuse of women
and children in conflict situations has caused much
revulsion in civilized minds. Humankind had to take
action to deal with this appalling reality. Sri Lanka is
particularly thankful that the Security Council has
adopted those proactive measures. Even though the
devastation accompanying armed conflict does not
discriminate along gender lines, it has been our
common experience that certain conflict situations
subject women and girls to a disproportionate share of
violence,
degradation
and
deprivation. Their
vulnerability has been ruthlessly exploited by armies
and armed groups consisting mainly of men.
In post-conflict environments also, the challenges
faced by women remain formidable. Often they are
forced to contend with family dislocation, shattered
livelihoods and being the sole breadwinners. Many
face the everyday reality of being single mothers and,
in some contexts, that increases their vulnerability to
sexual harassment, exploitation and violence. Gender
parity and equity continue to elude women in many
parts of the world in post-conflict contexts.
Sensitive to the vulnerabilities of women in postconflict situations, the protection of war-affected
women and children is a priority for the Government of
Sri Lanka. Every effort is being made to ensure that
their lives are returned to normalcy, as far as possible
and as speedily as possible. Although resourceconstrained, Sri Lanka has set up special women’s
protection units with female police officers and
women’s centres in the camps for internally displaced
persons, and is continuing to provide psychosocial
counselling services in the formerly conflict-affected
north and east. Many women in those areas were
psychologically devastated by the conflict and the
attendant terrorism that lasted over 27 years.
With the end of the 30-year struggle against
terrorism in May 2009, Sri Lanka has now entered a
post-conflict phase that is challenged by many issues.
They include resettlement, rebuilding livelihoods, the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of dilapidated
infrastructure, and bringing normalcy to the conflictaffected areas. Many of the economic rehabilitation
activities implemented in the north and the east have
women at the centre.

12-23937

In addition, as an incremental step to enhance the
mechanisms to safeguard the rights of women that are
already in place in Sri Lanka, the Government has
developed a national action plan for the promotion and
protection of human rights, which has been approved
by the Cabinet of Ministers. The national action plan
contains a specific section dedicated to the rights of
women, covering a plethora of issues. The priority area
on women in this new mechanism focuses on
enhancing and strengthening the rights of women
through proactive measures. Currently, the national
action plan is at the implementation stage. It
characterizes the Government’s commitment to
promoting and protecting human rights, especially
those relating to women.
In addition, His Excellency President Mahinda
Rajapaksa appointed the Commission of Inquiry on
Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation in May 2011, which
heard testimony in many parts of the island, especially
in the former conflict-affected areas. The Commission
submitted its report in November 2011 and,
subsequently, it was introduced in Parliament on
16 December 2011. It is now a public document. The
report offers detailed observations and recommendations
on international humanitarian law issues and on
grievances, in particular those of women, relating to
the final phase of the conflict.
While the Government will continue to adopt
social, economic and security measures relating to
women and children, which also have relevance to the
Commission’s findings, courses of action will also be
taken
in
response
to
the
Commission’s
recommendations. The Government finds the
Commission’s suggestions regarding institutional
mechanisms to deal with land documentation and userright issues to be valuable, as the resolution of
competing equities of land titles in the former conflictaffected areas is strikingly complex.
Sri Lanka has had a very constructive
engagement with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We appreciate the open and
transparent manner that has been adopted by the
Special Representative’s Office in working with Sri
Lanka on this important issue. In this area, too,
reporting from the field must contain verifiable
information that would enable Governments that are
committed to sincerely addressing issues of sexual
violence in post-conflict situations to investigate and

31

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

provide redress to the affected. It is equally important
that monitoring missions do not confuse common
criminal activity with such gender-based violence.
Such a distortion would smack of politically motivated
targeting of Member States.
Sri Lanka stands ready to extend its support to
achieving gender parity in United Nations
peacekeeping activities and in carrying our genderrelated mandates of the peacekeeping missions.
Necessary predeployment training has been completed
to deploy an all-female battalion comprising
855 personnel and 28 female officers, at any time.
Sri Lanka is happy to note that the issue of
women and peace and security continues to receive the
attention it deserves in the Security Council and in
the Secretary-General’s reports. We congratulate
Ms. Margot Wallström and her staff on the effective
work that they are doing to assist women and children
in conflict situations. It is unquestionably our
collective responsibility as Member States to ensure a
world free, safe and fair for all women and girls.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes today’s thematic debate on women
and peace and security, and specifically on sexual
violence in conflict, which is a priority issue for my
Government. We appreciate the presidency of Togo’s
initiative in holding this debate, and we hope that the
Council will continue addressing the issue regularly.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on Conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33)
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallström,
for her briefing. We endorse the recommendations in
the report and we fully support the work and mandate
of the Special Representative, as established in
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), as well as
that of the Group of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Spain associates itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I will only make
some brief observations in my national capacity.
In recent months, in application of Spain’s
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and
other associated resolutions, we have engaged in
several activities, especially in the area of training, that

32

I wish to highlight. We are firmly convinced that
training is an essential aspect of our efforts to prevent
sexual violence in conflict.
First, last November the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation and the Ministry of Defence
organized, together with the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs and Defence of the Netherlands, the second
offering of the international pilot course on the gender
perspective in peacekeeping operations, which took
place in The Hague. The purpose of the seminars is to
promote the inclusion of the gender perspective in all
peacebuilding activities and to ensure specific training
of personnel participating in those missions. We plan to
continue to offer the courses every six months,
alternating between the Netherlands and Spain.
Moreover, in order to raise the profile of gender
advisers and ensure the inclusion of the gender
perspective in peacekeeping missions, the Ministry of
Defence of Spain organized a course in late October
2011 on the gender perspective in operations, with
conferences for members of the armed forces on equal
opportunity, setting norms on gender issues, and the
fight against rape and sexual violence in conflict.
The next course for high officials in
peacekeeping operations, to be organized in
coordination with the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and held in May in Kigali,
Rwanda, will deal specifically with the issue before us
today, with particular emphasis on the fight against
sexual violence in conflict.
My Government is currently conducting its third
review of the national action plan on women and peace
and security, incorporating the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s reports and in the
resolutions, statements and decisions of the Security
Council, especially those relating to sexual violence in
conflict. My delegation welcomes the fact that the
members of the Security Council have also been able
to reach agreement on this important issue.
Finally, I again thank the Special Representative
for her words and for her work. We hope that her work
and the work of her Team of Experts, together with
UN-Women, in cooperation with all other actors, will
help to cement the commitments needed to finally put
an end to sexual violence in conflict. We hope that the
Council will continue to regularly invite the Special
Representative to provide updated information on the
progress of her important mandate.

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I would like to
extend the gratitude of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
women, peace and security. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his very incisive report
(S/2012/33) submitted in accordance with resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).
Today’s deliberations reaffirm the great
importance that we individually and collectively attach
to the need to address sexual violence in the context of
armed conflict, as well as its impact on women and
children. Our deliberations also provide an opportunity
for us to take stock of what has been achieved and to
identify gaps and challenges that still remain in
addressing this scourge.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
we note with satisfaction that reasonable progress has
been made to date in the implementation of resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), as demonstrated by the
notable efforts made by the United Nations system,
Member States, civil society and other actors,
including
the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict
and the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence.
However, we remain deeply concerned about the
persistence and rising levels of sexual violence that
still persist in some countries. Women and girls
continue to be targeted, while rape and violence,
including sexual violence, continue to be used as
weapons of war. According to the Secretary-General’s
report on conflict-related sexual violence, the past year
has seen several new and ongoing armed conflicts
where sexual violence was widespread and, in some
instances, may have been systematically aimed at
civilians. Mass rapes of women and girls were also
witnessed. That is despite repeated condemnation of
those inhuman acts by the Council’s resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009), and 1960 (2010), which became
beacons of hope for millions of women and girl victims
worldwide.
While recognizing that national justice systems
may be significantly weakened in conflict and postconflict situations, we realize that inaction could send a
wrong message, namely, that sexual violence is
tolerated. We therefore call upon all concerned to
refrain from such human rights abuses, and instead to

12-23937

promote respect for international humanitarian law and
non-violent forms of conflict resolution, and to
cultivate a culture of peace.
The
importance
of
demonstrating
our
commitment and political will to prevent sexual
violence, combat impunity and enforce accountability
by prosecuting those responsible for perpetrating such
crimes against civilians cannot be overemphasized. In
addition, we wish to stress the importance for States,
with the support of the international community, of
strengthening efforts to implement the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual violence, and to increase access to
health care, psychological support, legal assistance and
socio-economic reintegration services for victims of
sexual violence, in particular in rural areas, taking into
account the specific needs of women and children,
including those with disabilities.
Botswana sincerely commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General to address the underrepresentation
of women in formal peace processes. To that end, my
delegation welcomes the inclusion of women in
peacekeeping missions in civil, military and police
functions. We also recognize that their presence may
encourage women from local communities to report
acts of sexual violence and other human rights abuses.
In addition, efforts by national and international actors
to engage women and to address gender issues in the
context of combating conflict-related sexual violence
must be accelerated. More concrete action should be
taken to ensure that that is done. We believe that
effective steps to prevent and respond to acts of sexual
violence can significantly contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Botswana attaches great importance to the
protection and promotion of the rights and
advancement of the status of women. The Government
has made considerable achievements in protecting
women from all forms of violence and in ensuring a
safe and secure environment where their rights are
protected. In addition, it has undertaken several
initiatives to address violence against women and
children. Ending violations of women’s human rights is
therefore a moral imperative, and one which we must
collectively combat. In that regard, Botswana strongly
condemns all forms of violence against women and
children and supports all efforts aimed at preventing
and eliminating violence, including sexual violence
against women and children.

33

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, we remain optimistic that, given
our collective will as Member States, especially in the
Security Council, we can bring an end to those
despicable crimes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me first to
express my thanks to you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate. Armenia fully supports the Security
Council’s recognition of the need to take effective
measures to address conflict-related sexual violence.
We welcome the recent report (S/2012/33) of the
Secretary-General. My delegation also welcomes the
presentation of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Margot Wallström, and we
commend her tireless efforts and leadership. We are
also grateful for the informative statements made by
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations and by Ms. Megheirbi.
Today’s debate addresses an urgent matter. More
and more, we are witnessing a disturbing trend in the
use of sexual violence as a political and military tool,
the effects of which are grave and long-lasting, often
alienating entire communities. Although conflictrelated sexual violence is not a women’s issue, it is a
known fact that a disproportionate number of victims
of such violence are women and girls. Sexual violence
affects all aspects of women’s lives, compromising
their well-being, security and basic human rights. It
further exacerbates the inequities that women face and,
in so doing, it threatens peace, security, development
and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. As such,
addressing sexual violence demands a multilayered
approach and requires involvement on the
international, regional and national levels. We must
identify the crime and bring those responsible to
justice.
During the past decade, particular attention has
been paid to addressing some of the specific crimes
experienced by women and girls during armed
conflicts,
namely,
rape,
trafficking,
enforced
prostitution and enslavement. It is critical to ensure
accountability for past and present crimes, and to not
grant immunity to perpetrators. Otherwise, we would
be providing amnesty for future crimes. In that regard,
Armenia is encouraged by the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which for the first time includes an annex that
lists the parties credibly suspected of committing or

34

being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms
of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict on
the Council’s agenda. Such reporting and systematic
data collection are critical, because crimes of sexual
violence remain underreported due to stigmatization
and fear of reprisals. We hope that such measures will
promote accountability and that they will provide
timely and reliable analyses based on which the
Security Council can carry out its responsibility to
protect civilians from conflict-related sexual violence.
We cannot address sexual violence, however, by simply
naming and punishing offenders. More fundamental
changes are needed on institutional and societal levels
as well.
This week we will commemorate the tragic
events that took place in Sumgait, where civilians were
killed and horrendously sexually violated just because
they were Armenian. However, the focus of today’s
debate is conflict-related sexual violence in situations
on the Council’s agenda. It is our firm belief that the
effectiveness of the work of the Council and its
members arises in large part from its ability to focus on
the agenda. It is unfortunate, then, that one
representative used this debate, as inappropriate as this
may be, as a forum to voice accusatory grievances with
regard to the killing of civilians in Khojaly. As we
tackle the important issue of conflict-related sexual
violence, we must remain accurate, reliable and, most
importantly, focused on the objective at hand in order
to enhance protection and achieve effective results.
In conclusion, although important steps have
been taken towards our common goal of preventing and
effectively responding to conflict-related sexual
violence, much remains to be done. Armenia remains
committed to working closely with the Council, the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the other relevant United Nations bodies
toward this noble end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the subject of women and peace and
security. Twelve years have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on this issue. A global
plan of action has been adopted in connection with the
resolution, along with normative indicators to gauge

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

progress and a timeframe for achieving objectives at
the regional and international levels.
The Sudan began taking steps to enhance the
status of women as far back as 1954. Sudanese women
participated in the first Sudanese Parliament in 1954.
That early achievement was carried forward, with
women serving as full-fledged members of the next
Sudanese Parliament in 1964 as well. Building on that
trend, the Sudan has applied the principle of equal pay
for equal work since 1967.
Yet more gender-related legislation has been
enacted since then. For example, the principle of
gender equality in pension age was established in 2003.
The status of women took a qualitative leap forward in
the domain of political participation in 2008, when an
election law was enacted stipulating that women must
hold at least 25 per cent of the seats not only in the
Sudanese federal Parliament but also in all 10 state
Parliaments. In the Sudan, there is a federal Parliament
in the capital city of Khartoum and there are 10 state
Parliaments, one in each of the 10 federal states.
Twenty-five per cent of the membership of all these
parliaments is held by women through direct, free
elections.
We cherish and take pride in that progress in the
Sudan. It indicates the importance we attach to
promoting the status of women in our country. The
Vice-President of the federal Parliament of the Sudan
is a woman, and a full 66 per cent of our civil service
is composed of women, making men a minority in the
service. In the judiciary, there are 80 female
magistrates, some of whom have become Supreme
Court justices. In the field of diplomacy, many women
have taken on the title of Ambassador and represent the
Sudan in many of our diplomatic missions.
On the basis of these examples and this short
introduction to the progress we have made in
enhancing the role of women in the Sudan, let me now
move on to the main focus of our discussion here
today. We reject and stand firm against all practices of
injustice and violence against women. In 2007, we
adopted a national strategy that was developed in
consultation with all relevant official and civic bodies,
including governmental entities and representatives of
civil society, including the civil society representative
who sits on my right side here today. We appreciate her
role in this regard.

12-23937

The national strategy adopted in the Sudan
encompassed six areas of focus for measures to
enhance and upgrade the status women, including
peacebuilding and the preservation of rights,
participation
in
decision-making,
economic
development, education, health, the environment, and
dispute settlement. The strategy has been applied at all
federal and state levels. The Government of the Sudan
has established numerous specialized centres at all
levels to coordinate the efforts of women in the fields
of peace and development and to provide opportunities
for consultation on promoting gender equity and the
principles of equality.
I would also like to note that specialized national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement programmes in the Sudan give special
priority to the situation of women, in coordination with
the relevant United Nations agencies. We take this
opportunity to acknowledge in particular the valuable
collaboration we have had with UN-Women and that
agency’s role in translating the contents of the
aforementioned plan of action into reality.
Today’s debate on the subject of women and
peace and security has included a presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report on sexual violence in
conflict (S/2012/33). Among the 20 States it mentions,
the report also refers to my country. I wish to say the
following in response.
We welcome the reference contained in the report
to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, describing
it as a step forward in the comprehensive peace process
in Darfur.
As is well-known, Darfur is one of the regions of
the Sudan that is affected by conflict. The report
includes a call on the non-signatory movements to
cease hostilities and join the forward march towards
peace. I mention this for the benefit of those who are
unaware that violence against women in Darfur is
fundamentally and actively caused by the armed
movements that are intent on preventing the
establishment of peace and security in Darfur. To
camouflage those facts, they sometimes dress in
military uniforms in order to convey the erroneous
perception that the official military is responsible for
perpetrating such violence.
We had expected the report to reflect the calm
security situation and the decrease in violence,
although that reality had been previously reflected in

35

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

reports of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
presented at various meetings of the Security Council.
Paragraph 54 of the report contains a reference
indicating that some of those who perpetrate violence
against women, as I mentioned, have been dressed in
military uniforms. That reflects an inaccurate
perception that can only be dispelled by
unambiguously confirming that the perpetrators
belonged to armed rebel movements.
Last year, the President of the Republic of the
Sudan, Omer Hassan A. Al-Bashir, invited a number of
heads of State and Government, senior national
officials and officials of international organizations to
celebrate the inauguration of the Transitional Authority
in Darfur — the successful result of the peace accords
signed in Doha. Clearly, that development has
contributed to the calm situation. The Security Council
must now send strong signals urging the movements to
join the promise, and punish those that refuse to join
the march towards peace in the Darfur area.
Last month, there was another positive
development with the Sudan’s establishment of its
national human rights commission. A woman with
more than 30 years of judicial experience was
appointed commissioner. A special court was also
established in Darfur. A prosecutor general was
appointed to examine all alleged violations perpetrated
in Darfur since 2003, including violence against
women. That is also an concrete, positive development.
All of the perpetrators of violence against women will
be brought to justice in fair trials, and will be punished
accordingly.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the
situation of women in armed conflict is inextricably
connected with the coordinated and integrated tackling
of the root causes of conflict. We therefore reiterate the
need to address the root causes of conflict. The
Security Council, as custodian for the concept and
maintenance of international peace and security, must
address the root causes of conflict, and not only the
obvious manifestations. War is war — whether it erupts
due to economic reasons or natural disasters — and it
affects the most vulnerable and the poorest members of
society, including women.
In that connection, we appeal to the Council to
bring further pressure to bear on the armed rebel
movements in Darfur, Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states to accept the principle of negotiation

36

with a view to achieving a permanent solution through
peaceful means, as the Government of the Sudan has
agreed to do as it endeavours to achieve a solution.
We hope that the measures to be taken by the
Council will rely on the country reports presented by
States, as well as accurate information contained in the
periodic reports of the Secretary-General, and not on
reports produced by certain mass media sources or by
non-governmental organizations. In that regard, we
encourage the United Nations and its missions to
organize workshops and direct consultations with
officials of conflict-affected States, with a view to
exchanging expertise on matters relating to the
situation of women in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this important open debate on
women and peace and security. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for their excellent
statements.
My delegation appreciates the opportunity to
participate in this debate. We reiterate Tunisia’s
longstanding commitment to promoting gender
equality and women’s empowerment, especially in
relation to conflict situations, as well as our
determination to properly implement the goals of
resolution 1325 (2000), of which my country was one
of the authors. Tunisia continues to be profoundly
convinced that peace, development and democracy will
not be achieved without women’s participation as
powerful actors of change.
We particularly wish to highlight the importance
of replacing the image of women in conflict situations
as humiliated, marginalized victims — with an image
of active partners in the process of conflict prevention,
mediation and resolution.
It must be recognized that there has been growing
awareness of the many forms of violence against
women in conflict situations and of the threats that
such violence poses to their security, their health and
their ability to actively participate in peace processes.
It is important to give women, who are the first victims
of violence in all its manifestations, a primary role in

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and it is even more
important and urgent to do so in the process of conflict
prevention.
It is also clear that Security Council debates have
led to significant normative innovations, in particular
the appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
deployment of women’s protection advisers within
peacekeeping missions, and the operationalization of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict. They must receive the financial
assistance necessary to enable them to help countries
develop comprehensive national strategies to combat
violence against women.
Tunisia, for its part, has begun to implement a
plan of action for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which, inter alia, encourages the training
of women in the area of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in order to be able to deploy qualified
personnel to United Nations missions in the field. It is
intended in particular to improve predeployment
training, with particular stress on special measures to
protect women against all forms of violence.
It is clear, however, that despite the progress
achieved, violence against women in armed conflict
persists, as is reflected in the most recent report
(S/2012/33) of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence. This is a reminder that a great
deal remains to be done in order to achieve all of the
objectives set out in resolution 1325 (2000), and that it
is very important that the Security Council remain
seized of this issue and take additional, vigorous
measures aimed at strengthening the protection of
women in armed conflicts.
National ownership of the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council remains the best way to ensure
their effective implementation. In that context, it is up
to States, first and foremost, to take the coercive and
awareness-raising measures necessary to resolve the
problem. Civil society organizations should also
contribute significantly to strengthening the protection
of women in that context, with a view to making it
possible to amplify the voices of women victims of
violence, break the silence on their suffering, and
support the awareness-raising initiatives taken on their
behalf.
Convinced of the urgent need to put an end to
impunity for such heinous acts, Tunisia, which acceded

12-23937

to the Rome Statute recently, a few months after the
revolution, believes that it is crucial to further promote
international cooperation and assistance so as to
strengthen, inter alia, the capacities of Governments to
develop national early-warning systems aimed at
preventing an escalation of violence against women. It
is also imperative that they investigate and prosecute
the perpetrators of such acts, in accordance with the
responsibilities incumbent upon them by virtue of their
accession to international human rights and
humanitarian law instruments.
Dealing with this issue is a reminder to us of the
tragic situations facing women in many conflicts and
crises around the world. Women are the first to be
caught up in the turmoil of flight and internal
displacement and confined, usually with their children,
to refugee camps, where their situation is most
precarious.
In Africa — a continent that, unfortunately, is
afflicted by many crises and conflicts — many
thousands of women are affected by the ravages of war
and crises of all kinds. The debate on this issue also
brings to mind the situation of Palestinian women, who
are systematically oppressed as a result of the Israeli
practices in the occupied Palestinian territories and the
occupied Syrian Golan. A Palestinian woman aged 60
today would have since birth known only the abuses of
the occupation, spending her entire life crossing
checkpoints, fleeing bombings and burying and
mourning the dead. Such women and many others must
serve as an impetus for the Council to take urgent
action so that they can live in dignity and simply
realize their rights as human beings.
To conclude, I wish to reiterate that my country
remains at the disposal of the United Nations in the
context of any action relating to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and of other international
instruments aimed at strengthening the full
participation of women in the decision-making process
and at ensuring a deep-rooted culture of human rights,
as a fundamental guarantee of the elimination of all
forms of violence against women.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to take the floor at this late hour.

37

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

It was not the intention of my delegation to
deliver a statement on this agenda item. But since the
representative of the Israeli regime, in his statement
this afternoon, once again digressed from the main
discussion in the Council and levelled some allegations
about my country, I ask your indulgence, Mr. President,
so that I might say a few words in that regard.
The representative of the Israeli regime referred
to the case of a woman in Iran. While my delegation
strongly refutes the allegations concerning that young
lady, I would like to mention that it would have been
better for the Israeli representative to talk about the
thousands and thousands of Palestinian women and
girls who have fallen victim to the atrocities committed
by his regime in Gaza and other occupied lands of
Palestine.
I am sure that the members of the Council are
aware of the case of a Palestinian woman who
delivered a baby while being kept waiting for hours at
a checkpoint by the occupying forces. I can cite many,
many other cases of violations of human rights
committed by that regime.
However, my delegation is of the belief that, in
addressing the agenda item under consideration here,
we should stick to the main issues at hand. The Council
is not the proper platform for the representative of a
regime whose occupying forces have violated the basic
human rights of millions of people, including women
and girls, to preach to us about human rights.
I know that the hour is late, but I deemed it
necessary to reply to the childish allegation that was
made.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan to make a
further statement.

would convince the representative of Armenia next
time to refrain from taking the floor and making
irrelevant comments.
The arguments of the Armenian side are
particularly astonishing as they are made in the
Security Council, which, in 1993, adopted a series of
four resolutions condemning the use of force against
Azerbaijan and the occupation of its territories and
demanding the immediate, full and unconditional
withdrawal of Armenian occupying forces from all
occupied territories of Azerbaijan (resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993)).
Another aspect of the problem that the
representative of Armenia prefers not to mention at all
is the determination of the Security Council with
respect to the impact of Armenia’s aggression on the
civilian population.
Lastly, the aforementioned resolutions made
specific reference to violations of international
humanitarian law, attacks on civilians and
bombardments of inhabited areas. It is beyond dispute
that such acts, together with violence against women
and girls, amount to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and racial discrimination. It is also
indisputable that, as an occupying Power, Armenia
bears direct responsibility for the commission of those
offences.
Accordingly, what the Armenian representative
attempted to describe in his statement has been
unequivocally qualified by the Security Council, the
General Assembly and other international organizations
as the illegal use of force and the commitment of other
crimes of serious concern to the international
community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel to make a further
statement.

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to apologize for asking for the floor again. We
thought that it would be inappropriate and
counterproductive to pass over the comments made by
the representative of Armenia and his attempt to
mislead the Security Council in silence.

Mrs. Furman (Israel): The accusation about
Israel that the representative of Iran made today
insulted the intelligence of everyone in the Chamber.
That regime has zero credibility.

It seems that that Member State was the only one
among today’s speakers that overtly tried to justify, in
the course of our deliberations, acts of systematic and
widespread violence committed against civilians,
including women and girls. I am confident that a
careful reading of the relevant international documents

Iran represses its own people, as it helps other
tyrannies to slaughter theirs. As we have seen recently
in Georgia, India and Thailand, Iran is the world’s
central banker, chief trainer and primary sponsor of
terror. The Security Council clearly denounced those
attacks today in its press statement (see SC/10556).

38

12-23937

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

Iran provides sophisticated weapons to Hamas,
Hezbollah and other terrorist groups in the region and
around the world. In Iran, the Ayatollah regime
represses its own people, as it helps other tyrannies to
butcher theirs. In his last briefing before the General
Assembly, United Nations Special Rapporteur Shaheed
offered a chilling picture of how daily life in Iran
looks. His report highlighted:
“a pattern of systemic violations of …
fundamental human rights … includ[ing]
multifarious deficits in relation to the
administration of justice … practices that amount
to torture … the imposition of the death penalty
in the absence of proper judicial safeguards …
the persecution of religious and ethnic minorities,
and the erosion of civil and political rights”.
(A/66/374, para. 18)
I could go on but, due to the late hour, I will
leave it at that.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia to make a further
statement.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Having followed the
discussions that evolved in a very constructive manner,
which is to be particularly appreciated given the
participation of countries that are not often in
agreement with each other, one cannot but regret the
continuation of the policy of repeating an unchanged
rhetoric by the delegation of Azerbaijan.
The reference to the so-called military aggression
of Armenia is totally misleading. The resulting
situation is a reaction of the people of Nagorny
Karabakh to Azerbaijan’s own decision to use military
force to suppress the legitimate, just and peaceful quest
of the people of Nagorny Karabakh to exercise the
right to self-determination, guaranteed by international
law and the United Nations Charter.
Also, the references to the four resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) on the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict are a clear attempt by
Azerbaijan to read those resolutions and apply them
selectively in a partial and self-serving manner. Indeed,
Azerbaijan is itself in violation of those resolutions,
which urge the parties concerned to pursue
negotiations within the framework of the Minsk Group
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), as well as through different contacts

12-23937

between them. Azerbaijan’s refusal to engage in direct
negotiations with the elected representatives of
Nagorny Karabakh is one of the main impediments to
the resolution of the conflict referred to by the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Meanwhile, what the Azerbaijani representative
failed to acknowledge is that Armenia has done exactly
what the Security Council resolutions called on
Armenia to do some 18 years ago, that is, to use its
good offices with the leadership of Nagorny Karabakh
to help find a peaceful solution to the conflict.
I would like to stop at this stage. I think that my
comments are more than enough for the representative
of Azerbaijan to understand that the Council is
respected for its serious exchanges. A meaningful
exchange on the Nagorny Karabakh issue is within the
format of the OSCE Minsk Group.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Azerbaijan to make a further
statement.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Again, I apologize
for asking for the floor. It is curious, to say the least,
that the representative of Armenia, the country that
bears the primary responsibility for unleashing the war
against Azerbaijan and committing other serious
international crimes during the conflict, takes the floor
in the Security Council and tries to lecture the victim
of aggression.
The Government of Armenia, which has purged
both the territory of its own country and the occupied
areas of Azerbaijan of all non-Armenians, and thus
succeeded in creating mono-ethnic cultures there,
should be, in our view, the last one to speak on such
notions as peace, human rights and the selfdetermination of peoples.
As far as the reference to the Nagorny Karabakh
region of Azerbaijan is concerned, I should recall that
the Security Council has recognized that Nagorny
Karabakh is part of Azerbaijan and reaffirmed respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
inviolability of the international borders of Azerbaijan.
We consider the stance of Armenia as an open
challenge to the conflict settlement process and a
serious threat to international and regional peace and
security.

39

S/PV.6722 (Resumption 1)

The earlier the officials of that country
understand the lack of any perspective in their
unconstructive and dangerous political agenda, the
sooner our people will be able to benefit from peace,
stability and cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Armenia for a further statement.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I apologize for keeping
the Council at work at this late hour, but I have asked
for the floor again to exercise my right to make a
further statement after hearing the brazen attempt by
the representative of Azerbaijan to distract the
Council’s attention from the reality on the ground by
shifting the responsibility for its own militaristic
actions and ceasefire violations on others, whom it
spares no effort in portraying as aggressors.
It is deeply disappointing that, even after its
election to membership of this responsible organ of the
United Nations, Azerbaijan continues its irresponsible
practice of putting the blame on others in order to hide
its own crimes and provocations. Unfortunately, this
has become a regular exercise for Azerbaijan. It is
unethical to deliver such defamatory statements in the
Council, which serve no other purpose than to shatter
the hope for peaceful coexistence between peoples.
Rather than deliver such an appalling statement
as a propaganda tool, Azerbaijan should focus, as I said
earlier, on cooperating with the co-Chairs and missions
of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, and do its part in
conducting the investigation pursuant to the statement
issued by the Armenian, Russian and Azerbaijani
Presidents at their Sochi meeting in March 2011.
The Azerbaijani side should realize that such
cheap shots and statements are not only unconvincing,
but are shameful and will not be tolerated by this body.
The President (spoke in French): The Council
has before it the text of a statement by the President on
behalf of the Council on the subject of today’s meeting.
I thank the Council members for their valuable

Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2012/3.
It is so decided.
I call on Special Representative Wallström to
make a further statement.
Ms. Wallström: I wish simply to make two short
remarks. First, I thank the presidency for steering this
meeting, and all members of the Security Council for
what I think has been a very serious, constructive and
principled debate. If any issue should unite us, it is this
one.
I have also heard one word used by every speaker
throughout this discussion. It is the word “prevention”.
We cannot prevent armed conflict when it is already
ongoing, or widespread or systematic sexual violence
that has already begun. If we are to deliver on the
promise of prevention, we cannot fail to monitor,
undermine or delay our response. The best impact that
the Council can have is to give united political support
to our efforts to prevent conflict-related sexual
violence. I am not here to expand my mandate. I am
here to do a good, effective job that brings added value
to the Council’s deliberations.
I thank the Council for the presidential statement
that it has just adopted. I can promise that I will
continue to cooperate with all members, and I hope for
their continued support. Finally, I want to say that we
have taken a principled approach in reporting
systematic patterns, as distinct from isolated incidents
of individual criminality. We have been disciplined in
our focus on sexual violence that is linked to the
maintenance and restoration of international peace and
security. We will continue to do so.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

contributions to this statement. In accordance with the
understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security

40

12-23937
