S/2021/495

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 24 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Mr.
Volker Perthes, Special Representative for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya
(on behalf of the A3+1: Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia, as well as Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines), Mexico, Norway, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in
connection with the video-teleconference on “Reports of the Secretary-General on
the Sudan and South Sudan” convened on Thursday, 20 May 2021. A statement was
also delivered by the representative of the Sudan.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-06846 (E) 250521 020721

*2106846*

S/2021/495

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, Volker Perthes
I thank you for this opportunity to brief the Council today on the situation in
the Sudan.
I have just returned from the Paris Conference, which clearly demonstrated
the continued international support for the Sudan’s return to the international
community. I want to thank the Government of France for having organized that
conference, at which Member States announced bilateral debt forgiveness, helping
the Sudan to clear its arrears with the international financial institutions and paving
the way for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative decision point.
I also want to thank the Sudanese — women and men, civil society and
businesspeople — who articulated their vision of a new Sudan: one of freedom, justice
and economic opportunity. Prime Minister Hamdok reiterated his commitment to
peace and to creating an environment for business investments, while Lieutenant
General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan affirmed his pledge to a democratic transition and
to the Sudan’s good-neighbourly relations.
I encourage all the Sudan’s international and domestic partners to continue
supporting the country as it implements key economic and political reforms. The
economic and political dimensions of the Sudan’s transition are interdependent
and inseparable.
Let me sketch out some of the recent developments in the Sudan —
achievements as well as challenges — during the reporting period. That begins with
the peace process.
On 28 March the Chairman of the Sudan’s Sovereign Council, Lieutenant
General Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan, and the Chairman of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement — North (SPLM/N), Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction, signed a declaration
of principles that will form the basis of the scheduled peace talks between the
Government of the Sudan and the SPLM/N Al-Hilu in Juba next week. I commend
both parties’ courage in making important compromises to reach that stage.
I have met with Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, along with the Government and the South
Sudanese mediation team, to discuss preparations for the upcoming peace talks. The
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS)
will act as a facilitator, supporting South Sudan’s mediation efforts and the parties
when required. We are also working to ensure the meaningful participation of
women in the process.
In Juba, I also discussed with Sudan Liberation Army leader Abdul Wahid
Al-Nur the need to engage politically for a comprehensive peace in the Sudan that
addresses the root causes of the conflict.
Let me also note the Government of the Sudan’s continued efforts to advance the
political transition. The adoption of legislation establishing the Peace Commission,
the Anti-Corruption Commission and the Transitional Justice Commission is an
important step. I urge the authorities to proceed rapidly in operationalizing those
entities while ensuring that they reflect the diversity of the Sudan.
There are also delays. Most important, the formation of an inclusive and
representative Transitional Legislative Council with at least 40 per cent representation
of women has yet to be realized.
2/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Moreover, the recent commemoration of the violent suppression of anti-regime
protests in 2019 and the tragic deaths of two young men underscored the growing
frustration with the unfulfilled expectations of the political transition, including the
quest for justice and accountability.
While there is growing concern at the limited progress made in implementing
the Juba Peace Agreement, there has been progress in some areas, such as the launch
of the technical preparations for the governance conference and preparations for the
establishment of the monitoring and evaluation mechanism. Other critical aspects
remain unfulfilled, notably security arrangements and the establishment of the
ceasefire and security committees.
Delays in establishing a joint protection force and the absence of integrated
and united security forces have a direct bearing on stability and the protection of
civilians.
Members will recall my most recent briefing here, in April, after the latest
resurgence of intercommunal clashes in Darfur which left 144 dead, 232 injured and
an estimated 65,000 newly displaced.
In response, the Government decided to implement eight critical securityenhancement measures, some derived from the Juba Peace Agreement, which include
the establishment and deployment of the joint security forces; operationalizing
transitional security arrangements and the related ceasefire committees; weapons
management; and humanitarian relief.
Armed movements have named their representatives to the ceasefire
committees and identified personnel for joint security forces, but deployments have
yet to commence. Some delays are reportedly due to lack of resources; material
international support for those joint forces, including housing and equipment, is
certainly welcome.
I fear that without the speedy establishment of those joint forces and the
implementation of the Sudan’s National Plan for the Protection of Civilians, we
could see incidents similar to the ones that took place in El Geneina repeated.
In my meetings with Government and security officials, I welcomed their
commitment to implementing security-sector reforms. UNITAMS is ready to
assist in that undertaking. I also continue to urge the establishment of the ceasefire
committees and related mechanisms that the peace agreement foresees. UNITAMS
is prepared to support those measures, not least so as a United Nations role in those
mechanisms has been agreed upon in the agreement.
UNITAMS and the United Nations country team are supporting the
Government’s National Plan for the Protection of Civilians, focusing on three
main outcomes: supporting prevention, providing support for physical protection
and creating an enabling protective environment. That includes strengthening the
judiciary, a United Nations priority. UNITAMS deployed three multifunctional teams
to Darfur to support the Sudanese police in community policing, investigations and
addressing gender-based violence and the protection of civilians. United Nations
efforts towards the protection of civilians will continue to grow as the United Nations
increases its capacity.
Sudanese women continue to demand the full realization of their rights, in
line with the aspirations of the revolution and the Constitutional Declaration. A
women’s march on 8 April brought attention to disparities in women’s safety, basic
needs, legal rights and political participation.
I was deeply disturbed by continued reports of human rights violations against
women and girls, including social media campaigns instigating violence. Women’s
21-068463/29

S/2021/495

rights activists point to the fact that such gender crimes were unacceptable during
the revolution and should be unacceptable now. I could not agree more.
The decision of the Government to ratify the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Protocol to the African Charter
on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa was an important
step forward, despite the reservations on core provisions, which Sudanese women’s
rights groups have criticized.
UNITAMS will continue to support women’s rights groups and the Government
in order to create an enabling environment for women to live free of fear for their
safety and to exercise their full rights.
On regional matters, I continue to urge dialogue to address the differences and
tensions between the Sudan and Ethiopia to preserve the Sudan’s stability. Dialogue
and cooperation are the only way to amicably resolve those differences.
With regard to international cooperation, I am pleased to report agreement
on the establishment of what we call the Sudan National Development Forum as a
donor assistance coordination mechanism. The Government intends to launch that
forum in the coming month. The United Nations has also made significant progress
in the development of benchmarks and indicators, which are annexed to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2021/470). The benchmarks will measure progress
against strategic priorities across the four pillars of our mandate. We have had a
first discussion with the Government and will launch a “roadshow” to discuss those
benchmarks with civil-society actors in various parts of the country next month.
I also thank the Government for its diligent work, which has led to the
successful completion of discussions on the status-of-mission agreement, which is
now ready to be signed.
The Sudan’s fragile transition can succeed in realizing the aspirations of the
Sudanese people, men and women, only if there is a continuation of the same spirt
of unity, partnership and collaboration that started the revolution. I have continued
my outreach with diverse stakeholders: the Government, political parties, armed
movements, civil society and others across the Sudan to address the scepticism that
we have encountered among parts of the political and societal spectrum at the outset
and to build confidence that UNITAMS works for all of the Sudan.

4/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes for
the briefing and welcome the representative of the Sudan to this meeting.
The situation in the Sudan has been making positive progress for some time.
The international community must continue to lend targeted support to help the
Sudan become a leader in Africa when it comes to silencing the guns and postpandemic recovery.
I wish to make the following points.
First, we must maintain the current momentum and push forward the political
process. Recently the Sudanese Government increased the number of members of
the Sovereign Council, completed the restructuring of the transitional Government,
established the National High Committee for Monitoring the Implementation of
the Juba Peace Agreement and signed a declaration of principles with the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement — North Al-Hilu faction, demonstrating its political
will by taking concrete action to advance the political process. China encourages
the Sudanese parties to press ahead with such important transitional tasks as setting
up the Transitional Legislative Council and preparing for the general election, and
it calls on those factions that have not signed the peace agreement to join the peace
process as soon as possible so as to keep the Sudanese political process moving in
the right direction.
Secondly, it is key to strengthen capacity-building and maintain peace and
stability. Since the initiation of the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), intercommunal conflicts have taken place
from time to time in Darfur, causing heavy casualties and displacing civilians. In
response, the Sudanese Government has taken some proactive measures, which
China appreciates. The international community should step up its support for
the capacity-building of the Sudanese Government and in particular enhance its
capacity to protect civilians. The Council should carefully study the impact of the
arms embargo on the efforts of the Sudanese Government to protect civilians and
take effective measures to eliminate it.
The intercommunal conflict in Darfur, a persistent problem, requires a
combination of good offices, reconciliation and the rule of law to tackle the root
causes by developing the economy and improving people’s livelihoods.
Thirdly, we must promote development cooperation and stabilize the Sudanese
economy. Affected by armed conflict, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), natural
disasters and other factors, the Sudanese economy is facing severe difficulties, and
tens of millions of people are in need of humanitarian assistance. China calls on
Member States to scale up inputs in the Sudan’s post-conflict peacebuilding and
increase aid and investment. China welcomes the assistance from United Nations
agencies such as the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization. China participated in the Paris Conference
and, in support of the Sudan’s transition, has already reduced or cancelled part of
the Sudan’s debts at the bilateral level. It is our hope that the World Bank and other
international financial institutions will soon reduce or forgive altogether the Sudan’s
debts so as to create an enabling environment for the Sudan to achieve post-COVID
recovery and economic development.
21-068465/29

S/2021/495

Fourthly, it is key to ensure a smooth handover and transition and fully
leverage the role of the United Nations. As the withdrawal of UNAMID will soon be
completed, the United Nations and the Sudanese Government should work closely
with each other to ensure a smooth and orderly withdrawal process and jointly
safeguard the safety and security of personnel and property. In order to measure
progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the Secretary-General has
developed related benchmarks and indicators covering all aspects of the Sudan’s
political process and nation-building. It is hoped that in the process of employing
those benchmarks and indicators, UNITAMS will give adequate consideration to the
priorities of the host country and fully heed its views.

6/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I join others in thanking the Special Representative for the Sudan, Mr. Volker
Perthes, for his insightful briefing, as well as the chargé d’affaires of the Sudan for
his statement.
Estonia welcomes the progress that the Sudan continues to make in its historic
transition despite the multiple challenges that the country is facing. For the transition
to stay on course, as envisioned by the revolution and the Constitutional Declaration,
the importance of institution-building cannot be overemphasized. Therefore,
we urge the transitional authorities to expedite the formation of the Transitional
Legislative Council, with 40 per cent representation of women. Similarly, we call
for the establishment of the Human Rights Commission, the Transitional Justice
Commission and the Anti-Corruption Commission.
In order to ensure the success of the Sudan’s transition, it is also crucial to
ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in decision-making bodies.
On that note, allow me also to express Estonia’s concern about the level of violence
against women and girls and to urge the Government to take additional steps to
create a protective environment that respects their full and equal rights.
Estonia also welcomes the efforts to implement the Juba Peace Agreement,
including the establishment of the National High Committee and subcommittees
to follow up on the implementation of the agreement. There is a need to accelerate
implementation in order to respond to the hopes of the population to live in peace.
For that reason, we urge the transitional Government to prioritize the implementation
of the security arrangements set out in the Juba Peace Agreement, including the
operationalization of ceasefire mechanisms. Estonia welcomes the declaration of
principles signed by Abdelaziz Al-Hilu’s Sudan People’s Liberation Movement —
North and calls on parties that have not yet joined the peace agreement to do so
urgently. Estonia also continues to encourage cooperation with the International
Criminal Court.
The socioeconomic situation unfortunately continues to impose significant
hardship on the Sudanese people, but we commend the important steps that the
transitional Government has taken to put the country on the path towards economic
recovery. Estonia welcomes the recent Paris Conference on the Sudan and hopes
that the Sudan can reach the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative decision
point soon.
Despite this progress, one persistent concern is the precarious security
situation in some parts of Darfur and the devastating consequences of intercommunal
violence. We know that the Darfuri people had fears about the departure of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and we cannot stand
by as those fears seem to materialize. Efforts must be redoubled to ensure the
safety of civilians, including women and children. Perpetrators of violence must be
held accountable. We therefore urge the transitional Government to accelerate the
implementation of its National Strategy for the Protection of Civilians. We call on
the Sudan to cooperate with the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) in order to build up the necessary capacities to ensure
protection for all civilians. On that note, we welcome that the Minister of the Interior
has requested the deployment of additional United Nations police officers. We also
call for the urgent deployment of the joint protection force.
UNITAMS was intentionally given a broad mandate in order to ensure that
it could provide assistance in the many areas in which the Sudan might need help.
21-068467/29

S/2021/495

However, in order to make tangible progress in the areas where progress is most
urgently needed, it might be useful to prioritize some objectives for the coming year
while still maintaining the broad mandate. Tracking progress will be crucial. Estonia
therefore welcomes the development of benchmarks and indicators that will help to
monitor the progress of UNITAMS against its strategic objectives. We also welcome
the news that the status-of-mission agreement is ready to be signed.
In conclusion, we welcome the progress that the Sudan has made, but also
acknowledge that a lot remains to be done. While the Sudan has a long road
ahead, it is important to emphasize that it will not be alone on that journey, as
the international community stands firmly behind its historic transition. I reiterate
Estonia’s full support for the Sudanese people in their efforts to achieve democracy,
peace and prosperity.

8/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex IV
Statement by the Minister Counsellor of France to the United Nations,
Sheraz Gasri
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Special Representative Volker Perthes for his briefing
and welcome the representative of the Sudan. You have our full support.
I would like to stress four points.
First, we support the democratic transition in the Sudan. The Paris conference
to support the Sudanese transition, held this week at the initiative of President Macron,
clearly demonstrated that the Sudanese authorities are determined to preserve
the momentum generated by the December 2018 revolution. The conference also
confirmed the Sudan’s return to the concert of nations, along with an unprecedented
effort by the Sudan’s international partners to support its democratic transition.
France intends to play its part and will provide a $1.5 billion bridging loan that will
enable the Sudan to repay its arrears to the International Monetary Fund. We call on
all of the Sudan’s bilateral creditors — whether or not they are members of the Paris
Club — to participate in a coordinated and equitable manner in debt relief for the
Sudan. France reiterates its commitment, under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
initiative, to cancel the Sudan’s nearly $5 billion in bilateral debt.
Secondly, reform efforts must continue, particularly in the areas of human
rights and the rule of law. The formation of the transitional legislative council,
with at least 40 per cent representation for women, cannot wait any longer. The
ratification of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment is an important step forward. We
call on the Sudanese authorities not to reduce the scope of such ratifications. We also
call on the Government to continue its efforts to enable the National Human Rights
Commission to fulfil its mandate, to establish the Transitional Justice Commission
without delay and to fight against corruption, with the support of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, whose cooperation with the
Sudan we welcome. We also hope that the dialogue with the International Criminal
Court envisioned by the Sudanese authorities will lead to concrete results in the fight
against impunity for crimes committed in Darfur.
Thirdly, we reaffirm the importance of the peace process and the protection of
civilians. The recurrence of large-scale intercommunal violence in Darfur confirms
the fragility of the security situation. France welcomes the political will shown by
the Sudanese authorities on this occasion and recalls the importance of the return
of the Sudanese Administration to Darfur. We call on the Government to speed up
the implementation of the Juba agreements, with the support of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), and to deploy
the joint protection force provided for in those agreements as quickly as possible.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian workers, and the guarantee of
humanitarian access must remain priorities. Effective dispute settlement mechanisms
are also needed to avoid escalation. In that respect, France welcomes the dialogue
established between the Mission and the Ministries of the Interior and of Justice.
Peacebuilding, of course, is a shared responsibility. We also call on all armed
groups that signed the Juba agreements to return to the Sudan and to stop recruiting
new fighters, especially children. Furthermore, we encourage those actors who
remain outside the peace process to join it without delay. In that regard, we welcome
21-068469/29

S/2021/495

the declaration of principles between the Chairperson of the Sovereign Council and
the party of Abdelaziz Al-Hilu.
Finally, France supports the rapid operationalization of UNITAMS in order
to ensure the Organization’s support for the Sudanese transition. That requires, first
of all, that the Sudan rapidly finalize the agreement on the status of the Mission.
UNITAMS has a broad mandate that will enable it to support the efforts of all the
Sudanese authorities in order for the country to meet the challenges posed by the
transition. That will be key, particularly in the area of capacity-building.

10/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his detailed briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan centred around the Mission’s four
strategic and interrelated pillars.
The Sudan, as illustrated by the positive developments in the past three
months, is making confident and steady progress in its democratic transition. The
authorities have outlined broad parameters of the federal system, in line with the
Constitutional Document and the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. The
expanded transitional Government has also announced its strategic vision, focusing
on five priority areas. Furthermore, the Sovereign Council has established the
National High Committee for Monitoring the Implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement. It is encouraging that another Sudan Liberation Movement faction has
joined the Juba Peace Agreement. The non-signatory groups, such as the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction, have agreed to
engage in negotiations. The Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction has also
shown willingness to engage in peace talks. We recognize the important role of
South Sudan in these efforts.
Nonetheless, there have been delays in the implementation of the transitional
agreements, particularly the establishment of the Transitional Legislative Council,
and there has been limited progress in the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement, particularly with respect to the security arrangements. We hope that
they will soon be resolved and that the threshold of 40 per cent representation by
women in the Transitional Legislative Council will be met.
On the economic front, we welcome the reforms undertaken and hope they
will bring stability to the economy and address social issues effectively. The
Sudanese authorities have also launched a cash-transfer programme — a noteworthy
development — to shield the most vulnerable segments of the population from the
impact of the removal of subsidies. The support of the international community will
be crucial in ensuring the Sudan’s peaceful and sustainable future. In that regard,
we welcome the financial assistance extended by the Sudan’s international partners.
We also welcome France’s hosting of an international conference earlier this month
to support the Sudanese transition. With domestic reforms under way to improve the
Sudan’s investment climate, there are real opportunities emerging in infrastructure,
mining, regional connectivity, agriculture, food industries and energy.
On the security front, the transitional Government has been swift in addressing
the continuing and worrisome intercommunal clashes in Darfur. It has also enhanced
security measures, including through the deployment of joint security forces. These
are positive developments that reflect the broadening of governance structures and
the sustained commitment of the authorities to implement the National Plan for the
Protection of Civilians. During the most recent reporting period, there were incidents
of criminality targeting the United Nations and its personnel. We encourage the
transitional Government to take measures to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel and its premises.
With respect to the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), we take note of the high level of coordination
between the Sudanese joint task force and UNAMID, as well as the commitment to
facilitate the administration process. We hope that all efforts will be made by the
Sudanese authorities — at both the central and state levels — to make this drawdown
21-0684611/29

S/2021/495

and liquidation an example of effective collaboration between the United Nations
and the Sudan.
India supports the rapid operationalization of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) as part of continued United
Nations support for the Sudanese transition. With an integrated country team and
in collaboration with partners like the African Union, UNITAMS should remain
committed to working closely with all components of the transitional authorities.
In conclusion, as the Sudan makes confident strides towards a brighter future,
let me recall an important aspect of India’s long-standing bilateral relations with
the Sudan. At India’s National Defence Academy, in Pune, the administrative block
named “the Sudan Block” —constructed in the 1950s — stands tall to this day as a
testimony of historical ties with the Sudan. It was gifted by the Government and the
people of the Sudan. Over the years, India has implemented several projects in the
Sudan in the sectors of energy, transport and agro-industry through concessional
lines of credit. We have also assisted in capacity-building through our scholarship
programmes and have extended humanitarian assistance by supplying food and lifesaving drugs. India remains committed to supporting the Sudan and its people in this
important phase of political transition.

12/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex VI
Statement by the Counsellor of Ireland to the United Nations,
Martin Gallagher
I want to also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes
for his briefing. Let me also welcome the Ambassador of the Sudan to the Security
Council this morning.
The Sudan is in the midst of a historic transition, with an unprecedented
opportunity to build lasting peace and prosperity for its people. The progress made
by the Sudan and the significant reform efforts undertaken by the Government are
very welcome.
However, let us be frank. As we just heard from others, much work remains to
be done. It is therefore vital that urgent, key aspects of the political transition, such
as the establishment of the Transitional Legislative Council and other remaining
institutions, be completed.
The Sudanese society is rich in its diversity. But we cannot expect real buy-in
from across the country if that diversity is not reflected in its Government’s make-up
and actions. We therefore encourage the Government of the Sudan to be as inclusive
as possible during this transition, while listening carefully to the views of women,
young people, civil society and internally displaced persons and striving to ensure
that their priorities are understood and integrated as appropriate.
The transition, furthermore, cannot be considered a success unless
commitments towards the meaningful and safe participation of women throughout
society are met, including through a 40 per cent female representation in the
Transitional Legislative Council. I want to underline that this percentage should be
considered a baseline, not a ceiling.
The establishment of the National High Committee for Monitoring the
Implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement is very welcome, but it is regrettable
that progress remains slow overall. Its swift implementation is urgent, in particular
regarding the security arrangements and ceasefire mechanisms. As envisaged by
the parties, the participation of witnesses and guarantors in these structures will
contribute to confidence-building. Seeing those commitments implemented will
bring hope and encouragement to the communities on the ground.
We join the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in welcoming the
declaration of principles signed between the Government of the Sudan and Abdelaziz
Al-Hilu’s Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North. We sincerely hope for a
positive outcome from the peace negotiations starting on 24 May. The successful
conclusion of the talks will be another milestone for peace in the Sudan and a beacon
of hope in a region undergoing conflict and upheaval. We urge all remaining nonsignatories to the Juba Peace Agreement, including the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid faction, to join the peace process.
The Sudan’s transition, of course, is taking place against a backdrop of a
stark economic crisis. That is further exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and, as in so many situations on the Security Council’s agenda, the
threat of the climate crisis also looms large. Given the scale of these challenges, we
commend the commitment of the Government of the Sudan to implement difficult,
but necessary, economic reforms. As a supporter of the Sudan’s debt-relief process,
we hope that others will join the Sudan on its path to reaching the Highly Indebted
Poor Country Debt Initiative decision point next month, we hope.
Despite the progress being made in the Sudan, the security situation in many
parts of the country remains deeply concerning, particularly in Darfur. Recent
21-0684613/29

S/2021/495

clashes have caused large-scale casualties and displacement. While the renewed
commitment by the Sudanese authorities — as we heard today from the Sudan —
to address the security situation is welcome, we urge the swift implementation of
the National Strategy for the Protection of Civilians. The deployment of the joint
protection force is an important part of this, but consideration will need to be given
to appropriate training and vetting, safeguards and oversight and, importantly,
community consent.
As we heard this week from Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, the killing and maiming of children in Darfur
continues with impunity. That is utterly unacceptable. We strongly support the vital
role played by the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS) in ensuring that child protection concerns are central to the ongoing
peace process. I would add that children’s needs and rights should be considered
during all phases of conflict — from prevention to mediation through to recovery
and sustainable, inclusive peace.
Likewise, reports of sexual and gender-based violence across the Sudan
are also deeply disturbing. If we are to break this recurring cycle of violence,
perpetrators must be held accountable. Strengthened reconciliation efforts and the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms to address the root causes of the
conflict are also vital.
Tensions are high in the wider Horn of Africa region, with numerous ongoing
crises. In this context, we urge the peaceful resolution of the Sudanese-Ethiopian
border crisis. All parties must avoid further escalation and reach a peacefully
negotiated settlement. The Sudan has shown great warmth and generosity by
welcoming over 70,000 refugees displaced by the conflicts in the Tigray and
Benishangul-Gumuz regions of Ethiopia.
Finally, the transition in the Sudan from the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to UNITAMS is among the most complex transitions
that this Organization has ever undertaken. We look forward to the UNITAMS
mandate renewal and welcome the proposed prioritization of the Mission’s objectives
as well as the mission’s new benchmarks, which will allow us to measure progress
on strategic objectives. The Mission has Ireland’s full support in achieving these
critical objectives and in supporting the Sudan’s transition.

14/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of three African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report highlighting the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS) (S/2021/470) and recent developments in the country. We also
thank Special Representative for the Sudan, Mr. Volker Perthes, for his briefing
(annex I) and welcome the participation of the representative of the Sudan in
today’s meeting.
The A3+1 commends the transitional Government of the Sudan for the
progress made in implementing the political, governance, economic, legal and
structural reforms outlined in the Constitutional Declaration and the Juba Peace
Agreement (JPA). The A3+1 wishes to underscore four imperatives: for peace,
stability, democratic governance and economic growth in the Sudan.
The first imperative is sustaining the peace process to entrench it in all parts of
the country. It is notable that since the signing of the historic Juba Peace Agreement,
the ceasefire continues to hold in Darfur, as well as in South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. We urge the parties to remain committed to the peace process and expedite
implementation of all aspects of the JPA in order to deliver tangible benefits to the
citizenry and avoid any relapse.
The A3+1 welcomes the signing of the declaration of principles by the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North faction of Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, in which
it committed to the Juba Peace process, and the signing of the JPA by the Sudan
Liberation Movement faction led by Mostafa Tambour. We appeal to the remaining
armed groups to join the peace process expeditiously and unconditionally.
The A3+1 is concerned at the recurrent violent intercommunal clashes in
Darfur. We appeal for prompt implementation of the National Plan for Civilian
Protection, as well as promotion of dialogue and reconciliation among the different
ethnic communities. We note that the Sudan has already demonstrated notable
success in its journey to peace and stability and that this is a matter of internal focus
and competence.
The second imperative is advancing democratic governance and institutional
reforms. The A3+1 commends the transitional Government for the adoption and
implementation of policies to broaden democratic governance as defined by the
Constitutional Document and the JPA. We urge the Government to expedite the
formation of outstanding transitional institutions, including the Transitional
Legislative Council.
The A3+1 also wishes to reiterate the importance of ensuring that all
transitional mechanisms and related institutions are inclusive. Special consideration
should be given to creating opportunities for women and youth, who were the pillars
of the 2019 revolution. In this regard, we welcome the Sudan’s recent ratification
of the Maputo Protocol and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women.
The third imperative is reviving the economy and addressing the humanitarian
situation. The deteriorating economic state of affairs, compounded by the humanitarian
situation and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, can exacerbate
21-0684615/29

S/2021/495

fragility. In addition, the adverse effects of climate change continue to take their toll
on the socioeconomic, humanitarian and security situation. Accordingly, we express
our appreciation for the efforts of UNITAMS aimed at addressing climate-related
security risks and building resilience of the Sudanese states.
The revival of the economy is a critical component of efforts to reduce poverty,
minimize inequalities, improve social protection, enhance cohesion and achieve
sustained peace. The A3+1 commends the transitional Government for its steadfast
commitment to implementing difficult but necessary economic and structural
reforms and encourages further efforts aimed at attaining the requirements for the
Highly Indebted Poor Country Initiative decision point.
The A3+1 appreciates the continued assistance of international partners and
international financial institutions in facilitating the clearance of the Sudan’s loan
arrears and in providing social protection. We welcome the International Conference
to Support the Sudanese Transition, which was recently hosted by France, as a
significant step in this regard. We have a responsibility to help the Sudan consolidate
its democratic transition, rebuild its economy and deliver sustainable peace and
development for all members of its diverse society.
The fourth imperative is consistent international support. The A3+1
commends the efforts of international partners and friends of the Sudan, which have
thus far provided the much-needed financial resources and investment and have
also addressed humanitarian challenges. We urge the international community to
do more by extending much-needed diplomatic, technical, financial and logistical
support in favour of the implementation of the Constitutional Document and the JPA.
Additional support is also needed to boost the humanitarian emergency
response, arrest the COVID-19 situation and confront climate challenges. In this
respect, we encourage the international community to honour its climate financing
pledges so that the Sudan can bolster its adaptation and mitigation efforts.
In conclusion, the A3+1 wishes to commend the progress made in the
establishment of UNITAMS, as well as the creation of benchmarks, plans and
programmes for implementation. We call on UNITAMS to continue working closely
with the transitional authorities to facilitate the expeditious implementation of the
reform agenda.
We wish to underscore that all programmes and initiatives must be Sudaneseowned and Sudanese-led. We also reaffirm our solidarity with the people of the
Sudan during the current period of their history, and we will continue to support their
endeavours to achieve sustainable peace, security and greater economic development.

16/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks Special Representative Perthes and acknowledges his work at
the helm of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) in this initial period of operation and welcomes the representative of
the Sudan.
The Sudan has seen great changes in the last year, and the signing of the Juba
Peace Agreement (JPA) is the foundation on which sustainable peace and inclusive
development in the country will be built. Just over seven months after its signing,
the Agreement’s implementation remains a priority for the transitional Government.
We welcome the establishment of the Sovereign Council and four of the five
subcommittees that will follow up on it. We hope that they will speed implementation
of the JPA, especially such security provisions as the establishment of ceasefire
mechanisms and the Transitional Legislative Council and respect the 40 per cent
quota for women provided for in the Constitutional Document.
We also commend the decree on the general outlines of a federal system of
government in the country and call for progress in the three-step preparation for
the conference on the governance system. This process must involve broad civic
participation, including the plurality of Sudanese voices, especially those of women,
youth and minorities. Furthermore, we welcome the Conference on the Sudan held
by France.
Mexico acknowledges the adoption by the Council of Ministers of the
Maputo Protocol and the Banjul Charter and its ratification of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), even though
reservations will apply to CEDAW articles on the elimination of violence against
women and access to justice. It is also essential to push for the establishment of legal
reforms and the of Gender Equality Commission, especially in the light of reports of
violence against women in both public and private spheres.
We reiterate that the full effectiveness of the JPA depends in part on all
armed groups signing onto it. We therefore welcome the signing of the declaration of
principles between the President of the Sovereign Council and the Al Hilu faction of
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, and we will closely follow the negotiations
that will soon begin.
Mindful of the immense challenge for the Sudan in implementing the National
Plan for Civilian Protection, especially with the outbreaks of intercommunal violence
in some regions of Darfur since January, we urge the Sudanese authorities to spare no
effort in the Plan’s implementation. We welcome the eight additional measures in the
Plan and call for ensuring that the joint protection forces are deployed without delay.
Mexico stresses the importance of avoiding creating gaps in the protection of
civilians. Despite the efforts of the Sudanese Government, the impact of the conflict
on children is alarming, especially in Darfur and South Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
We call for the implementation of the Plan, the development of a national prevention
plan and a redoubling of efforts aimed at ensuring accountability for grave violations,
as a large number of perpetrators of crimes against children remain unidentified.
We follow with concern the tensions in the Fashaqah border area and the
strained regional dynamics and encourage the parties to de-escalate the situation
21-0684617/29

S/2021/495

and seek a peaceful and negotiated solution to resolve their differences. The
consequences of regional instability are multidimensional and particularly acute
on the humanitarian side. Approximately 2.5 million Sudanese are displaced, and
the country continues to receive a significant influx of refugees from neighbouring
countries. The severe conditions of displacement exacerbate the protection risks of
civilians and heighten their vulnerability.
I would like to conclude by acknowledging the identification of benchmarks
and related indicators, which will allow for monitoring the four strategic pillars that
constitute the UNITAMS mandate. We will closely follow the establishment of the
baseline and targets against which the Mission’s work will be assessed.

18/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes for his
comprehensive and positive briefing today (annex I). Let me congratulate the Sudan
on the successful outcome of the Paris conference earlier this week. The message
was clear: we must stand together to make the transition irreversible, even though
many challenges remain.
The Sudan now has a unique opportunity to create conditions for sustainable
growth. The success of the transition process can — and should — be measured by
two main criteria: first, how well the transitional Government manages diversity
based on the principle of equal rights; and secondly, how the people as a whole
benefit from economic development. It is inclusive policies that bring both of these
criteria together.
In our view, success will also depend on how well the Government — and we
the partners — follow the script of transition laid out in the Constitutional Document
and in the Juba Peace Agreement. The Transitional Legislative Council should be
formed without further delay, and the Sovereignty Council in the Sudan must prepare
for the transition to a civilian chairperson.
Security sector reform also cannot wait. Assisting these processes are at the
core of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS). Norway remains deeply concerned at the security situation
in Darfur in particular and at the critical gaps in the protection of civilians, especially
the lack of effective measures against sexual and gender-based violence against
women and girls. The humanitarian situation — compounded by climate change — is
dire, and the number of persons displaced by conflict in Darfur is increasing. In this
respect, we welcome the transitional Government’s announcement of eight measures
to address violence in West Darfur and call for their speedy implementation.
Several of these measures are derived from the Juba Peace Agreement (JPA),
in which the United Nations — represented by UNITAMS — is given specific and
critical roles. Going forward, operationalizing and clarifying these roles is a key task
for UNITAMS and of great importance to the implementation of the JPA. In this
context, ceasefire monitoring is vital.
The peace process is not complete until all armed groups have signed on. We are
encouraged by the signing of the declaration of principles between the Government
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North faction of Abdelaziz Al-Hilu.
Negotiations on the substantive issues should be swift.
Furthermore, ongoing and future talks must be inclusive. The full, equal and
meaningful participation of women must be a top priority for all. Norway stands
ready to support the process in close coordination with: the negotiating parties, the
Government of South Sudan, UNITAMS and other relevant actors.
Pending final Government approval, Norway is planning to contribute
personnel to the specialized police team in UNITAMS in order to help to enhance the
capacity of the Sudan Police Force to conduct community policing and investigate
sexual and gender-based violence, which is an important step towards strengthening
the protective environment in the country. We are also considering putting forward a
candidate for the post of Military Advisor to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNITAMS.
Norway commends UNITAMS for progress achieved thus far with limited
resources, and we applaud the Special Representative’s commitment to making
21-0684619/29

S/2021/495

UNITAMS’s efforts relevant to the whole of the Sudan. The four strategic goals remain
relevant and should not change. Yet, on a daily basis, it is necessary to prioritize tasks.
Benchmarks are useful when they relate to measurable results. Indicators should be
agreed upon in dialogue with the full range of interested parties — Government
bodies as well as civil society — at the national and local levels.
A continued positive trajectory in the Sudan’s transition depends on constructive
dialogue and partnership among the Government of the Sudan, UNITAMS and the
Security Council. We are ready to play our part.

20/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
Before I start, let me draw everyone’s attention to how important it is for the
Security Council to return to having in-person meetings. The Council Chamber has
been equipped to accommodate them. The improving epidemiological situation in
New York and the relaxation of related restrictions indicate that life is slowly getting
back to normal.
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes
for briefing us on the developments in the Sudan (annex I). We also thank the
representative of the Sudan for his statement (annex XIV).
The internal political situation in the Sudan remains complicated. It is
negatively impacted by the developments in neighbouring Libya, the growing number
of internally displaced persons and refugees from adjacent African States, as well
as the spread of the novel coronavirus disease infection. Against this backdrop, the
escalating economic crisis and social tension are cause for particular concern. Over 9
million Sudanese need humanitarian assistance, and over 7 million people experience
food insecurity. We therefore expect that the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) will sustain
Khartoum’s potential in such important areas as peacebuilding, socioeconomic
transformation, the maintenance of domestic peace and the legal order.
The Juba peace agreement, which the Sudan’s transitional Government and
the Sudanese Revolutionary Front signed in October last year, was a meaningful step
towards lasting stabilization in the country and solving many of its urgent problems.
We call upon all armed groups that so far have remained outside the peace process
to join the agreement. We regret that Abdul Wahid Al-Nur refuses to engage in a
dialogue with Khartoum. Those who can influence this irreconcilable oppositionist
should exert the required pressure on him.
We look forward to the launching soon of negotiations between the authorities
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North/Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction on
the basis of the declaration on principles that the sides signed earlier. We trust that
UNITAMS will render the required assistance to that process.
We welcome Khartoum’s commitment to thoroughly address the root causes
of conflicts and intercommunal disputes in various regions of the Sudan. The prompt
implementation of the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians and the eight
critical security measures announced by the Government will help achieve that.
The Sudan faces numerous challenges. The implementation of initiatives for
economic recovery and the peacebuilding agenda need to gain momentum. Against
that backdrop, we attach great importance to maintaining well-balanced contacts with
all Sudanese authorities and supporting their efforts to implement the Constitutional
Document, of 17 August 2019, in order to stabilize the domestic situation.
The situation in Darfur is getting back on a peaceful track. Sporadic
intercommunal clashes in some states do not change the overall dynamic. A wellcoordinated response by the authorities to all incidents proves the eagerness of
Khartoum to take a comprehensive approach to stabilization.
We were glad to hear the Secretary-General’s assessments that the drawdown
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has been successful
21-0684621/29

S/2021/495

in carrying out all its tasks and is proceeding as planned and that there is close
interaction among the personnel of the United Nations, the African Union and the
Sudanese side. In that regard, we commend the relevant efforts of the management
of the Secretariat.
In conclusion, we would like to say a few words about the upcoming renewal
of the UNITAMS mandate. A special political mission deployed under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations can complete its mandated tasks only if it engages
in well-coordinated interaction with the host country. Therefore, we would expect
official Khartoum to comment on what tasks the Sudanese authorities believe should
be prioritized in the activities of UNITAMS. The Sudanese invited the United
Nations Mission to their country, so it is they who should determine the major tracks
of the international efforts there.

22/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I thank Special Representative Perthes for his briefing today. It is very good to
see my friend the Chargé d’Affaires of the Sudan here as well today and to have him
participating in our meeting. And, although it’s a little late, let me say Eid Mubarak
to you and to all the Sudanese people.
The United Kingdom wants to commend the continued progress made by
Prime Minister Hamdok and his Government towards delivering all aspects of the
Sudan’s transition. Progress on difficult economic reforms is particularly notable,
with the Sudan passing a second International Monetary Fund (IMF) review this
month and being on-track to reaching the first milestone of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative. The United Kingdom is committed to supporting these
efforts, including commitments to helping the Sudan clear its arrears at the World
Bank, the African Development Bank and the IMF, unlocking access to muchneeded international finance.
On the peace and security side, I want to welcome the signing of a declaration
of principles with the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North Abdelaziz AlHilu faction and the planned return to negotiations next week.
I also want to recognize the progress made by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in completing the closure and
handing over of sites within a challenging context, as well as the efforts of the
Government of the Sudan to secure the sites handed over to them by UNAMID. As
this is the final Security Council meeting before UNAMID closes on 30 June, let me
take this opportunity to thank all the personnel who contributed so much over the
years to UNAMID’s efforts to support peace and stability in Darfur.
Notwithstanding significant progress, many challenges remain. We are
concerned by use of violence against protesters in Khartoum on 11 May. And I want
to welcome the swift action taken by the Sudanese authorities to investigate. But this
incident is a reminder that accountability for crimes committed before, and during,
the revolution needs to be delivered if the Sudan’s transition is to succeed. It is vital
that progress be made in this area, alongside progress on implementing the Juba Peace
Agreement, good governance and constitutional reform. Only with such progress will
all citizens across the Sudan be empowered and will benefit from the transition.
I want to echo the Secretary-General’s concerns about increasing
intercommunal violence. We must prioritise peace and the protection of civilians,
and I call on the Government to accelerate the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement and the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians. The United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) can play an
important role in supporting these efforts.
As the Council discusses the renewal of the UNITAMS mandate, I want to
really commend the work of Special Representative Perthes and his team in recent
months. UNITAMS is a partnership between the international community and the
Sudan, and we are really encouraged by the positive engagement and commitment of
the Government of the Sudan in working with UNITAMS in support of the transition.
It was good to hear today that the status-of-mission agreement is ready for signing.
Let us hope that can be done as soon as possible.
We hope the Council will renew the UNITAMS mandate in the coming weeks,
enabling continued support in line with the four strategic objectives identified in
21-0684623/29

S/2021/495

resolution 2524 (2020). I believe that Council members will want to ensure that
the support of UNITAMS to the Government of the Sudan’s own priorities has the
maximum impact over the coming year. We should ensure a prioritized and focused
mandate to support UNITAMS in implementing its strategic objectives. The support
of UNITAMS to the Sudan should be underpinned by a whole-of-United-Nations
approach, and I call on all to coordinate across the United Nations system, and
indeed with the international financial institutions (IFIs).
This will be the last time that I speak on the Sudan in the Council. I want to
reflect on the enormous changes that I have seen in my four years here. The Sudanese
people showed incredible bravery and determination in their revolution to remove
a military dictatorship. The African Union played a critical role. Not all permanent
members of the Council supported the people of the Sudan and the African Union
in their desire for freedom, but I am proud that the United Kingdom stood with the
people of the Sudan throughout, and it does so now.
But navigating a successful transition, with all the many priorities faced
by the Government, also requires courage and determination. Democracy and
civilian rule remain fragile. And so I believe that it is more important than ever
that the United Nations, both UNITAMS and the agencies, funds and programmes,
prioritize support for the Sudan. It is vital that the international community works in
partnership, especially with the IFIs and non-governmental organizations.
Finally, those of us who celebrated with the Sudanese people when they threw
off dictatorship; those of us who believe in democracy, human rights and the rule of
law; those of us who saw the Sudan as a bright spot on this Council’s agenda, must
not be complacent. We must not be distracted. We must not lose focus. We must work
to support the Sudan’s transition. We must not let the Sudan’s people down. And
we must not let down all those across the world striving for their own freedom and
measuring our determination in our response in the Sudan.

24/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank you, Special Representative Perthes, for your briefing and your efforts
to deliver on the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). The United States supports your work. We are
committed to giving you the necessary tools from the Security Council to deliver on
your mandated tasks.
Before I turn to the UNITAMS mandate, let me join with others who have
spoken before me to express the United States concern about the killing of two
protesters on 11 May in Khartoum. The United States notes the commitment of the
Sudanese Government to hold accountable those who were responsible for a previous
attack on protesters in June 2019. As others have said, these incidents demonstrate
the need for further reform and for further restrictions on the use of lethal force.
Let me also extend my delegation’s thanks to the United Kingdom for its efforts
to bring the Security Council closer to consensus on the next UNITAMS mandate.
We strongly support the draft mandate. We believe prioritizing tasks is key in order
for UNITAMS to have maximum impact and support the Government’s priorities.
The United States firmly believes the Council can deliver a strong mandate for you,
Special Representative Perthes, for the civilian-led transitional Government and,
most important, for the Sudanese people.
The Security Council last discussed the developments in Sudan two months
ago (see S/2021/267). The United States remains concerned, as we were then, with
the transitional Government’s efforts and its ability to carry out its most fundamental
responsibility, namely, protecting its own people. We have seen recurrences of
violence in Darfur, particularly intercommunal violence, which has caused thousands
of new displacements — the most Darfur has witnessed since 2015. We cannot let
continued violence destroy the Juba Peace Agreement’s prospects for effective peace
in Darfur. The fulfilment of the Agreement is needed for a successful transition to
democracy and stability in the Sudan.
We strongly encourage the civilian-led transitional Government to commit
with conviction to ensuring that all Sudanese feel safe and secure in their communities
and their livelihoods. That can be achieved by expanding police presence and
capacity, by supporting community reconciliation and conflict resolution and by
implementing the Juba Peace Agreement’s sections on security arrangements, land
reform, gender equality and justice, among others. We also continue to encourage
the implementation of the Sudanese national action plan on women and peace and
security, in line with resolution 1325 (2000).
Despite these concerns, let me be clear that the United States commends
the progress on mediation efforts that have occurred under the auspices of the
South Sudanese Government aimed at building upon the Juba Peace Agreement
and bridging divides between the Government of the Sudan and armed opposition
groups. We also appreciate Special Representative Perthes’ engagement with the
South Sudanese Government and the armed groups that have not yet signed the
Juba Peace Agreement. We urge the Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction to conclude their negotiations and arrive
at an agreement that addresses the root causes of their conflict and makes way for the
full participation of the Movement in Sudan’s transitional process.
We are disappointed that, despite the Special Representative’s recent
engagement, the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid Al-Nur faction continues to
21-0684625/29

S/2021/495

refuse to join mediation efforts, or to engage constructively in peace negotiations.
Such intransigence defies the calls of the millions of brave Sudanese who demanded
peace during the revolution. It also undermines the transitional Government’s efforts
to achieve a negotiated comprehensive peace agreement in accordance with the
transitional Constitution.
Finally, commitment to the well-being of the Sudanese people, we believe,
extends to the turnover of team sites from United Nations hands to Government
hands. These spaces were for years investments by the United Nations in the Sudanese
people, aimed at protecting Sudanese and giving them a sense of stability. The failed
turnover of multiple sites, which has included violence and ransacking, has severely
diminished the appearance of commitment by local leaders to maintain these spaces
as sites for good. We call on Sudanese authorities to responsibly transition these team
sites to Government control and ensure that they do not fall into the wrong hands.

26/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I would like to start by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Volker Perthes for his comprehensive briefing. I also welcome the
representative of the Sudan to our meeting today and thank him for his statement.
The Sudan is in a critical period of transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. In the light of the recent developments in the country, I wish to
highlight the following three points.
First, it is imperative to further advance the transitional process in line with
the Juba Peace Agreement. Viet Nam commends the progress achieved so far in
the transitional process, with the participation of women. It is our sincere hope that
the Sudanese parties will continue to resolve their differences to implement the
remaining provisions of the Agreement. We also call on remaining armed groups in
Darfur to join the peace talks as soon as possible.
Furthermore, the synergy among the United Nations, the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the African
Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, neighbouring countries
and other international partners in supporting the peace process in the Sudan will
remain crucial. It is encouraging that neighbour South Sudan continues to agree to
host the Darfur peace talks on 25 May. More confidence-building measures and
dialogue opportunities should be promoted in this regard.
We also reiterate our strong support the active participation of women and
youth in all stages of the transitional period and beyond.
Secondly, we call on the Government of the Sudan to continue strengthening
its primary responsibility in the protection of civilians. We note the Government’s
efforts to address the violence in West Darfur in April 2021 and call upon it to exert
best efforts to prevent such incidents in the future. It is critical to ensure the full
implementation of the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians and to find more
comprehensive solutions to address the root causes of intercommunal violence in
Darfur in a sustainable way, including though reconciliation among different tribes
and communities. More efforts should be focused on ensuring the protection of
vulnerable groups, especially women and children.
In addition, we commend the cooperation between UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan in ensuring a safe and orderly withdrawal of the mission’s
personnel and assets. We call on the Government to further facilitate this process in
line with resolution 2559 (2020).
Thirdly, it is essential to further address the economic and humanitarian challenges
in the Sudan due to the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
natural disasters. As the Sudan’s economy is facing many difficulties, we call for further
facilitation of the country’s access to international financial institutions.
It is concerning that there is a high number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance in the country, including over 9.6 million people facing acute food
insecurity. Food prices increased by 206 per cent in February 2021, as compared
with the same period a year ago. The international community should continue to
support the Sudanese Government in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic as well as
the current socioeconomic challenges.
In conclusion, Viet Nam re-emphasizes our firm commitment in supporting
the Sudan in this transitional chapter towards long-term peace and stability. We
commend the work of UNITAMS and support the renewal of its mandate to continue
to facilitate the transitional process in the country.
21-0684627/29

S/2021/495

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to congratulate your country, and you personally,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this May, and
express our appreciation of your great efforts in steering the work of the Council in
the midst of the many challenges and crises that require its attention. I also applaud
the efforts of the representative of Viet Nam during his presidency of the Council
last month.
I would also like to thank Volker Perthes, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), and Atul Khare, Under-Secretary-General for
Operational Support, for their briefings today.
The Government of the Sudan has been working tirelessly to bring to
realization the objectives of the transitional period set out in the Constitutional
Declaration and the Juba Peace Agreement. The Government has made considerable
strides towards meeting the requirements of national reconstruction, in line with its
firm commitment, reiterated on numerous occasions, to silence the guns, establish
the foundations of a democratic transition, eliminate structural deficiencies in the
Sudanese economy and restore the standing of the Sudan as an active member of
the international community. It was in that spirit that the Transitional Government
concluded the Juba Peace Agreement with the Revolutionary Front and the Sudan
Liberation Movement-Minni Minawi. It is a comprehensive agreement that addresses
the causes of the conflict not only in Darfur, but also in the Two Areas and other
parts of the country. The Transitional Government will not rest until movements
that have yet to join the peace process do so. A declaration of principles has also
been signed between the President of the Sovereign Council and Abdelaziz Al-Hilu.
It lays the groundwork for negotiations that are slated to begin at the end of this
month under the generous auspices of South Sudan. We hope that Abdul Wahid AlNur will also engage with the repeated calls by the Government for issues related to
security, stability and peace, in Darfur in particular and in the Sudan in general, to be
handled constructively.
Now that the Juba Peace Agreement has been signed and the armed opposition
movements are taking part in the governance structures of the Sudan, the arrangements
under way to form a joint force to protect civilians and the participation of armed
opposition forces in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes
will transform the security situation in Darfur. In spite of certain security challenges
having to do with the tribal conflicts in Darfur, the Government is determined
to defuse tribal tensions, bring about reconciliation between different groups,
strengthen the rule of law and deliver restorative and criminal justice.
In terms of finalizing transitional governance structures, transition partners
are working to form the Transitional Legislative Council, a supervisory and oversight
body to monitor the performance of the governing bodies. Efforts are under way to
set up the commissions provided for in the Constitutional Declaration and the Juba
Peace Agreement. Laws establishing those commissions have been drafted and will
be enacted.
With regard to the protection of civilians, the promotion of human rights
and the rule of law, the Transitional Government continues working to undertake
institutional and legal reforms, strengthen and protect human rights frameworks
28/29

21-06846

S/2021/495

and achieve justice. In late April the Sudanese Cabinet approved the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and technical and
administrative measures are being taken in preparation for its ultimate ratification.
The Cabinet also approved the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa. These steps are being taken to
improve the situation of women in the Sudan, in recognition of the role that Sudanese
women played in the glorious December revolution. In order to deliver justice for the
victims of the Darfur war, an International Criminal Court (ICC) delegation paid
another visit to the Sudan last April. The topics of discussion during the visit included
the implementation of the memorandum of understanding signed last February to
strengthen cooperation between the Sudan and ICC and arrangements for a visit
by the ICC Prosecutor to Darfur. The Government is continuing to implement the
National Plan for the Protection of Civilians, aware of its responsibility for the safety
and security of its citizens. In cooperation with UNITAMS and other partners, it will
do everything in its power to create a secure environment in Darfur and ensure that
its people can live in security and dignity.
Recently, many laws and policies have been reformed to stimulate and promote
economic growth and attract investment. The Sudan looks forward to receiving the
continued support of friendly countries and international and regional partners to
create economically beneficial partnerships that yield returns, thereby helping to
alleviate the country’s external debt burden. We express our heartfelt gratitude to
the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, and his Government for the economic
conference to support the democratic transition in the Sudan held earlier this week,
and take this opportunity to thank all friendly countries and international financial
institutions for their support for the Sudan during the conference and for pledging to
work to cancel the country’s debt and improve the Sudanese economy.
The Sudan reiterates that it is cooperating fully with UNITAMS to achieve the
mission’s four strategic objectives, set out in resolution 2524 (2020). Those objectives
include assisting the political transition and progress towards democratic governance
and protecting and promoting human rights; providing technical assistance to the
electoral preparation and constitution-drafting processes; helping to establish and
build a comprehensive peace; and mobilizing economic and development assistance
in order to achieve those goals, in line with the principle of Sudanese national
ownership of the Mission’s work. We also stress that we are cooperating fully with
the United Nations Secretariat in order to ensure an orderly and safe drawdown and
liquidation of UNITAMS.

21-0684629/29
