S/PV.8438

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8438th meeting

Friday, 21 December 2018, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ipo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Amde
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Albanai
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Mielus
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Special Report of the Secretary-General on the strategic assessment of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2018/1086)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45700 (E)
*1845700*

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

registration, pending an investigation into alleged
irregularities. The Prosecutor General instructed
security forces to prevent access to the building of
the electoral body in charge of voter registration.
Thanks to the timely intervention of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which,
on 12 December, deployed a delegation to Bissau led by
the Nigerian Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Office
of the Prosecutor General reversed course and allowed
the resumption of the voter-registration process on
13 December.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea Bissau
Special report of the Secretary-General on
the strategic assessment of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (S/2018/1086)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and His Excellency Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, in his
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1086, which contains the special report
of the Secretary-General on the strategic assessment of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to introduce the special report of the
Secretary-General on the assessment of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS). I would also like to use this
opportunity to provide a brief update on the status of
the country’s preparation for legislative elections.
More than six months after the appointment of a
consensus Prime Minister and the formation of an
inclusive Government, both of which were key elements
of the Conakry Agreement, the political situation in
Guinea-Bissau remains fraught with uncertainty.
Due to technical challenges, the legislative
elections were not held as scheduled on 18 November,
in contravention of the legal and constitutional time
frames. It was in fact only two days ago, on 19 December,
that the Government declared the completion of the
voter registration. Prior to that, on 5 December, the
Office of the Prosecutor General had suspended voter
2/19

21/12/2018

In a communiqué, the ECOWAS delegation also
called for the legislative elections to be held in January
2019. However, the Prime Minister proposed that the
elections be held on 17 February, with 24 February and
10 March also floated as possible dates for the elections.
Yesterday, President Vaz issued a decree setting
10 March 2019 as the date for the elections. These
developments followed the infighting by the political
parties over technical aspects of voter registration,
during which accusations were traded of attempts to rig
and deliberately delay the process. Such tensions have
contributed to an unhealthy pre-electoral atmosphere in
the country.
The Party for Social Renewal (PRS), the Rally
of the Guinean People/Democratic Party of Guinea,
MADEM-G15 — all part of a collective of 18 political
parties — have demanded the resignation of the
Minister of Territorial Administration for allegedly
mismanaging the voter-registration exercise and
violating existing laws. In response, the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo
Verde (PAIGC) accused PRS of violating the Conakry
Agreement and noted that PRS continued to discredit
the voter-registration process despite lack of evidence.
PAIGC also accused President Vaz, PRS and their
allies of deliberately provoking delays in the electoral
process in an effort to cause a Government collapse and
postpone the parliamentary elections.
On 5 December, Prime Minister Aristides Gomes
responded to an invitation by the National Assembly
to provide clarifications on the voter registration. In
his response, the Prime Minister said that the voter
registration was transparent and that legislative
elections would be held in a fair and free manner. In the
meantime, an ECOWAS technical team comprising two
election experts is presently in Bissau to audit the voterregistration process. The team is expected to report to
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

the Government and to the ECOWAS Commission on
its findings.
Approximately 800,000 citizens — around 95 per
cent of the total estimated eligible population — were
reported to have been registered to vote as of 12 December,
the day the ECOWAS ministerial delegation arrived in
Bissau. The basket fund managed by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) has continued to
provide technical and financial support to the National
Electoral Commission and the electoral body in charge
of registration. Outside of the basket fund, Nigeria has
provided 205 biometric voter-registration kits to the
Government for the voter-registration process. Portugal
will make an in-kind contribution of approximately
€1 million, which should include the printing and
transportation of ballot papers. Timor-Leste pledged
a contribution of over $470,000 towards repairing and
purchasing electoral equipment and supporting the
voter-registration and electoral processes. Some 400
biometric voter-registration kits, procured by UNDP,
arrived in Bissau on 26 November. The kits will be
used for the annual voter-registration updates required
by law.
It seems appropriate at this stage that the
international community consider sending a strong
message to the Bissau-Guinean authorities and
political actors to demonstrate the requisite political
will for the organization of credible elections and
refrain from further delaying the process. The findings
of the assessment of UNIOGBIS undertaken by the
Secretary-General underscore the challenging political
context in which UNIOGBIS operates, as reflected in
the aforementioned developments. UNIOGBIS merits
recognition for the crucial role it has played in support
of the ECOWAS-led mediation process to resolve the
political impasse in Guinea-Bissau. Despite this year’s
breakthrough, and with the likelihood of avoiding
widespread violence, Guinea-Bissau risks lurching
from one political crisis to another, unless decisive
steps are taken by the Government to meet the new
election date decreed by the President.
While UNIOGBIS remains unanimously appreciated
by the Government, civil society and international
partners on the ground for its preventive role through
the good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and for strengthening the capacities
of civil society organizations, the Mission has now been
in Guinea-Bissau for close to two decades. Experience
has shown that in the absence of a nationally-owned

S/PV. 8438

and nationally-led reform process, UNIOGBIS alone
will not be able to contribute to sustainable peace and
development in Guinea-Bissau. It is for these reasons
that the recommendation of the Secretary-General, as
reflected in his special report (S/2018/1086), underscores
the need for the United Nations to strictly focus on
good offices, the coordination of international partners,
the promotion of human rights, the incorporation of a
gender perspective in peacebuilding, and combating
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime,
in close cooperation with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. These tasks would occur over
three phases: the first phase, the electoral period, runs
through mid-2019; the second phase, the immediate
post-electoral period, runs from mid-2019 to the end of
2019; and the third phase, the transition and exit period
of the Mission, would conclude no later than the end
of 2020.
To accomplish the foregoing objectives and
subsequent to the reconfiguration the Mission has
undergone this year to comply with resolution 2404
(2018), the Secretary-General has endorsed a further
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence during
the second phase, namely, mid-2019, through the
establishment of a streamlined good-offices mission
in Bissau, led by a Special Representative and focused
primarily on facilitation of the political process. This
good-offices mission would then continue to draw
down until the end of 2020, while, concurrently, the
United Nations Office for West Africa would increase
its engagement in Guinea-Bissau, in the light of the
mandate to support ECOWAS. The capacities of the
United Nations country team would also need to be
strengthened to take on further responsibilities going
into the transition and Mission drawdown and closure.
In this regard, we would expect the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission to play
a leading role during the transition period, as it did
under similar circumstances with the closure of other
peacekeeping missions in the subregion.
The latest results of our combined efforts to assist
Guinea-Bissau stakeholders in overcoming the political
and institutional impasse and launch the country on
the path of sustainable development have prompted
our guarded optimism. However, the roadblocks
encountered during preparations for the legislative
elections and the inability of the Government to hold
the elections on 18 November have also given us pause.
The period leading to the legislative and presidential

18-457003/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

elections will be critical and require the continued
attention and engagement of the international
community. There is still hope for the country to move
forward and its political leadership to show good faith
and meet its national obligations by holding legislative
elections on 10 March 2019.
Before I conclude, I would like to recognize the
work of Mr. João Honwana, the independent expert who
led the assessment mission to Guinea-Bissau on behalf
of the Secretary-General. The continued engagement
of the Peacebuilding Commission in mobilizing the
attention and support of the international community
for Guinea-Bissau has also been crucial, as has the role
played by Special Representative Viegas Filho and the
men and women serving in UNIOGBIS in promoting
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
Our
appreciation
extends
also
to
our
partners — ECOWAS, the African Union, the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries — for their cooperation and efforts, which
have helped pave the way to a better future for GuineaBissau.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Vieira.
Mr. Vieira: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
the invitation to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
First, allow me to inform the Council that, on
31 August, after my last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.8337), I hosted, upon the request of the Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Aristides Gomes, a highlevel meeting of the PBC, with his participation. That
was an opportunity for the Prime Minister to have a
direct and interactive dialogue with member States.
On 10 December, I convened a meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration when we received updates
from several briefers, including Mr. José Viegas Filho,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and Mr. Tanou
Koné, Permanent Observer of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS). Unfortunately, the
Government of Guinea-Bissau was not able to hold
elections on 18 November as scheduled, due to a series
4/19

21/12/2018

of sequential delays that led to the voter registration
process not being concluded on time.
Special Representative Viegas, in our meeting,
underlined that the political parties continued to
disagree over technical aspects of the registration,
trade accusations of attempts at fraud, and deliberately
delay the process. According to him, those tensions
are creating an unhealthy pre-electoral atmosphere.
Stability, in his view, is also affected by the spreading
of views that some would be interested in postponing
the legislative voting so as to combine it with the
presidential election in 2019. In that regard, it was
also mentioned during our discussion that some of the
political stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau could find it
financially difficult to organize two elections in the
same period.
We were also informed that the Government
announced the end of voter registration on 19 December
and indicated that more than 95 per cent of the estimated
potential voters were registered. I also received the
information that, yesterday, President José Mário Vaz
published a decree establishing 10 March 2019 as the
new date for the legislative elections. It is important
to underline that the international community has been
active in supporting Guinea-Bissau.
The contribution to the election basket fund
administered by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) was positively answered and
financing the legislative elections is no longer an issue.
The fund has collected up to $9.8 million. Nigeria and
Timor-Leste have also provided a number of voter
registration kits. Portugal will provide the actual
ballot papers and the United Nations Development
Programme, on its part, has offered another batch
of registration equipment and consumables for the
polling day.
The international community has also remained
engaged with the authorities of the country regarding
the electoral process, especially the so-called GuineaBissau P5 group of partners in Guinea-Bissau,
comprising the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the United Nations. I once again
commend the international community for supporting
the legislative elections.
Guinea-Bissau should also be congratulated for
starting the resource mobilization for the basket fund
with its own contribution. During our PBC meeting on
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

10 December, we were informed of the promulgation
by the President, on 3 December, of a gender-parity
law that establishes a quota of 36 per cent for women
candidates for Parliament and representation in publicsector institutions. Allow me to welcome that important
step towards gender inclusion in Guinea-Bissau.
Following the deliberations of the configuration,
I would like to call on the political stakeholders of
Guinea-Bissau to sustain their commitment to the
Conakry Agreement. In that respect, I would also call
on the leadership of the country to avoid further delays
and to hold legislative elections on the established date
as a conclusion for the transition towards stability.
Bissau-Guineans should continue engaging in
dialogue to resolve their political differences. The
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission will continue to focus on the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement and the preparations for
elections. We will continue to work closely with Special
Representative Viegas and all international partners
to that end. The ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB), UNDP and UNIOGBIS have an important
role to play in the crucial Guinea-Bissau electoral cycle.
At the latest PBC meeting, the Permanent
Observer of ECOWAS commented on the most
recent developments of the Community, including the
organization of the next Summit of the Heads of State
of ECOWAS, to be held on 22 December in Abuja. The
influence of ECOWAS remains very important given
the organization’s key role in the Conakry Agreement
and the presence of the ECOMIB military force in
Guinea-Bissau, which had its mandate extended to
August 2019.
Allow me therefore to commend the Government
of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS and the European Union
for working to extend the ECOMIB presence in the
country. Those developments once more highlight the
need to building the capacities of the Bissau-Guinean
security forces. The PBC will continue to support the
United Nations and the international community, in
consultation with the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
to consider ways to strengthen the institutions of the
State, especially the justice system.
Another reason for organizing the PBC meeting
was the fact that Prime Minister Aristides Gomes
transmitted to me the need of the Government for
assistance in addressing the financial crisis afflicting
his country, particularly the education sector. During

S/PV. 8438

our meeting, we heard from the World Bank on the
economic and fiscal situations of the country, which
remain severely strained. Officials from the Bank
informed me that economic growth is projected to
decline to 3.8 per cent from 5.9 per cent in 2017. Tax
revenues are also expected to decline from 10.3 per cent
of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 to 8.5 per
cent of the GDP in 2018 — that is, from $140 million
to $115 million — mainly due to lower income from
cashew exports. A decline in economic activity and
a consequent decrease in imports also contributed
to this scenario by lowering tax revenue. They also
highlighted the fact that, despite some recent increases
in investments in this area, the total spending in
education in the country remains low, at 2.2 per cent of
GDP, and is dominated by salaries.
In connection with the socioeconomic and political
environment, Guinea-Bissau has seen a series of
strikes, which have affected the activities of the public
sector. State-owned schools in Guinea-Bissau have
been closed for months and teachers have organized
demonstrations requesting unpaid salaries. According
to the information that I received, Guinea-Bissau needs
an estimated $7.8 million to pay 18 months’ worth of
accumulated salaries for teachers. We have also seen, in
the past months, a series of strikes and demonstrations
by civil servants and ex-combatants. Unfortunately,
student demonstrations organized on 9 November were
suppressed with force and resulted in the dismissal of
the Minister of the Interior by the President.
Allow me to add that I informally consulted
the International Monetary Fund and was informed
that a mission of the Fund to Guinea-Bissau is being
considered for 2019 in order to review the existing
programme with the country. Discussions in this regard
have been under way since October 2018 and have
not been able to reach a conclusion. I will continue to
follow this issue closely and bring it to the attention of
the PBC.
I would like to call on the international community
to consider the possibility of providing emergency and
targeted budget support to stabilize the public sector.
At the same time, I encourage the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, for its part, to do more to demonstrate
its full commitment to holding elections and to put in
place credible mechanisms to guarantee the proper and
transparent use of assistance that may be available.

18-457005/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

Today, we have just heard the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
introduce the special report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1086) with options for a possible reconfiguration
of the United Nations presence in the country and a
reprioritization of its tasks, as determined by the latest
revision of the mandate of UNIOGBIS. Among other
points, as mentioned today, it proposes a three-phase
new engagement of the United Nations with GuineaBissau that would end with a transition and the exit
of UNIOGBIS. I am informed that the Guinea-Bissau
Government was fully consulted in the recent United
Nations strategic assessment mission to reconfigure
UNIOGBIS. Allow me to add that I believe that it would
be positive if the Peacebuilding Commission were also
consulted in future assessments of this kind.
UNIOGBIS has continued to play a key supporting
role with the Government of Guinea-Bissau and in the
efforts of ECOWAS and of the Guinea-Bissau P5 to help
the country resolve its challenges. I would like to take this
opportunity to once again show the support of this PBC
configuration for the work of Special Representative
Viegas and his team. The PBC, in its advisory role to the
Security Council, could make a positive contribution
to the discussion of the reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS.
This effort should be consistent with a revised electoral
calendar and a transition plan that considers the
proposed ECOMIB drawdown.
There is also space for the engagement of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration in any transition effort
that might happen, including the elaboration of a
transition plan, if this is the decision of the Council.
The PBC has already demonstrated its potential in
transition settings, as exemplified by the work in Sierra
Leone and Liberia. We should continue building on
these best practices and lessons learned.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Viera
for his briefing.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Guinea-Bissau to participate in this meeting.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me join others in thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook Zerihoun
and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Mauro
6/19

21/12/2018

Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, for their comprehensive briefings on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
We take note of the overall developments and
political trends in Guinea-Bissau, as well as the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) in the country. We
support the continued role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his good offices in
support of efforts aimed at sustaining peace in GuineaBissau, in collaboration with regional, subregional
and international partners, through the promotion of
inclusive national political dialogues, constitutional
and democratic reforms and transparent and peaceful
electoral processes.
It is evident that strong political will and a sense
of ownership remain critical to supporting peace
consolidation in Guinea-Bissau. We take note with
concern of the challenges encountered by UNIOGBIS
in delivering its mandate, and we call upon all BissauGuinean stakeholders to exert collective efforts towards
that end. Currently, the political environment in GuineaBissau is dominated by the electoral process. We note
the postponement of the 18 November legislative
election due to delays in the voter registration process.
However, we underline the need for the holding of timely
and credible legislative and presidential elections,
in accordance with the Constitution and national law
of Guinea-Bissau, in order to consolidate sustainable
peace and national reconciliation.
In this regard, we take note of the Economic
Community of West African States communiqué
issued on 12 December, which calls upon the BissauGuinean authorities to set a new date for the election by
22 December. The decision of the President to implement
a gender-parity law, which establishes a quota of 36 per
cent for women candidates for Parliament and women’s
representation in public-sector institutions, is indeed
commendable. We believe that this is a step in the right
direction to enhance women’s participation in political
affairs and decision-making processes.
The growing threats caused by drug trafficking
and religious extremism, which undermine the peace
and stability of the country and the region, are a matter
of serious concern. In this regard, we stress the need
for concerted efforts of relevant bodies at the national,
regional and international levels in order to address the
challenge. We express our appreciation to the United
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

Nations strategic assessment mission for undertaking its
work in consultation with all stakeholders, including the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the Economic Community of West African
States and the European Union. We believe that the
United Nations engagement in the peacebuilding efforts
of the country is important, and we hope that it will
be taken into account in line with the recommended
United Nations reconfiguration during the renewal of
the UNIOGBIS mandate in February 2019.
We commend all international partners, as well
as subregional and regional organizations, especially
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union, for their considerable efforts in
facilitating dialogue and generating collective pressure
for the implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of the Conakry
Agreement in addressing the political and institutional
challenges the country is facing. Therefore, we call on
all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau to respect and comply
with the Agreement.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): It is with great satisfaction and enthusiasm
that Equatorial Guinea expresses its appreciation for
the convening of this meeting, which allows us once
again to analyse and share perspectives on the political
and institutional situation in Guinea-Bissau.
My delegation would like to thank Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira for their very
relevant briefings.
I would like to focus my speech on three vital
points. First, we stress the importance of the current
electoral process in ensuring a return to political and
institutional stability in Guinea-Bissau. Secondly, we
underscore the urgent need for far-reaching reforms to
move the country forward. Lastly, I will share my views
on the post-election period.
The main challenge to the consensus-based
Government of Prime Minister Aristides Gomes,
formed seven months ago, has been to create a political
environment that builds trust and is conducive to the
holding of free and transparent legislative elections,
in particular by updating the electoral register and
establishing a new mapping division that, in theory,
would enable the Government and the National Electoral
Commission to hold elections in an atmosphere of

S/PV. 8438

peace and tranquillity. Furthermore, despite the clear
desire of the United Nations and other regional and
international partners for the legislative elections to
be held on 18 November, in accordance with the legal
and constitutional timelines, organizing the elections
was fraught with difficulties, including a delay in the
delivery of electoral kits. That led the Government
to postpone the electoral census process, which was
suspended by decision of the Guinea-Bissau Public
Prosecutor’s Office, following an investigation into
irregularities reported in the process.
Nonetheless, Equatorial Guinea takes note of the
announcement made yesterday by President José Mário
Vaz to hold legislative elections on 10 March 2019.
It would be advisable for all stakeholders in GuineaBissau to refuse to allow the holding of elections to
undermine the fragile stability achieved thus far. In
that regard, it is essential that the parties concerned
continue to examine any initiative that could lead to
the implementation of other important provisions of the
Conakry Agreement that would contribute to ending
the current political crisis. In addition, we commend the
efforts of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and regional
and subregional actors, such as the African Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the European Union and the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau, whose support, through
their good offices function, is vital to ensuring that the
electoral process is brought to a satisfactory end.
We take note of the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for a UNIOGBIS drawdown once
the electoral process has been completed. After two
decades in Guinea-Bissau, we believe that it makes
sense to redefine the objectives of United Nations
presence in the country. We also recommend that the
political mission, in particular after its drawdown,
continue working closely with key regional actors in
support of the institutional reform programme.
Elections are by no means a panacea to the
country’s problems. That is why there is ongoing
focus on the need to implement reforms in the areas of
security, justice and public administration, including in
the education and health sectors. Firm political will and
a sense of ownership and identification on the part of
national authorities are crucial to that end.

18-457007/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

In conclusion, the path to restoring stability postelections will be a very important phase, since it will
enable the new Government to build on its reforms.
In that regard, UNIOGBIS will again have the
opportunity to continue assisting national authorities
in implementing their reform programme by providing
strategic support and advice on strengthening their
democratic institutions. Once the country is politically
stable and the long cycle of instability ends, it would
be well advised to seriously address the need for
sustainable economic development. To that end, it will
be essential to continue seeking additional partners to
implement social and economic projects initiated by the
new Government following presidential elections next
year. It is important for Bissau-Guineans to remain
united in the difficult and crucial times their country
will face in the near future.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and
Ambassador Vieira for their briefings today.
I would like to commend the hard work conducted
by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), under the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Viegas Filho, in support of the State and the people of
Guinea-Bissau.
When the Council last convened to discuss
UNIOGBIS on 30 August (see S/PV.8337), many
members were cautiously optimistic about the steps
taken in 2018 in Guinea-Bissau to bring the country
back on track to realizing the promises of the 2016
Conakry Agreement. Today, I suspect that many of us
share concerns that such aspirations might once again
be in jeopardy.
I would like to raise three specific points today.
First, I would like to recognize the critical role
that UNIOGBIS, together with the Guinea-Bissau P5
group and other partners, has played in accompanying
Guinea-Bissau in laying the ground for the political
and institutional reforms that we hope will enable
the country to move decisively beyond the political
crises that have plagued it. Alongside the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Mission
in Guinea-Bissau, UNIOGBIS has played an essential
preventive role in the country. Through its good offices
function, UNIOGBIS continues to be a trusted and
valued partner for Bissau-Guineans. The impact of
the mission’s support to civil society organizations,
8/19

21/12/2018

and women’s organizations in particular, in mobilizing
political will around the Conakry Agreement is a
tangible indication of the depth of trust.
Secondly, I would like to welcome President Vaz’s
decision yesterday to hold legislative elections on
10 March 2019. While we regret that the anticipated date
of 18 November was not met, we are optimistic that the
revised time frame will ensure that legislative elections
are concluded in due time before the presidential
elections, which is critical to ensure that constitutional
provisions are respected and pivotal to long-term
stability. In that respect, I would urge the leadership in
Guinea-Bissau to take steps to make progress with the
stability pact envisaged under the Conakry Agreement.
Guinea-Bissau has made important strides in meeting
its own objectives in terms of development and human
rights. Let us ensure that political instability does not
undermine those gains.
Thirdly, I want to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1086) and the findings of
the strategic assessment mission, which we found to
be both informative and refreshingly self-critical. That
kind of approach helps facilitate the work of the Council
enormously. The United Kingdom is committed to
seeing a phased drawdown of UNIOGBIS and transition
to national stakeholders, with the support of entities of
the United Nations country team. In that respect, we
would encourage the Secretary-General, UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations country team and all partners to
initiate the development of an integrated transition
plan, with immediate effect.
In conclusion, and as we close our work this year,
I want to underline the importance of the year 2019
for Guinea-Bissau. With legislative and presidential
elections on the horizon, watershed political moments are
imminent. The withdrawal of UNIOGBIS will require
a new form of partnership with the United Nations,
based on a new development assistance framework
to follow the United Nations Partnership Framework
Terra Ranka plan. Longer-term constitutional, judicial
and security-sector reform will take time and it will
be important that the Bissau-Guinean authorities are
supported to sustain those endeavours long beyond the
departure of UNIOGBIS. Building the capacity of the
United Nations country team and continuing to work
closely with ECOWAS, the African Union and other
Guinea-Bissau P5 group actors to ensure continuity of
support is essential. The Conakry Agreement provides
the framework for mitigating against future political
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

crises and provides a starting point for longer-term
institutional reforms.
The United Kingdom looks forward to starting
the new year with a constructive discussion on how,
working together, we can further our partnership with
Guinea-Bissau in pursuit of those objectives.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador
Vieira for their briefings on the situation in GuineaBissau. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/1086) on the strategic assessment of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS). We look forward to discussing
that assessment with our Council colleagues as we
negotiate the Mission’s future next February.
Today, we are having yet another Council meeting
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau instead of focusing on
the future of the country and the welfare of its people.
We are faced with another self-imposed political wound
and a delay in the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement. The Council addresses intractable issues
every day; however, in Guinea-Bissau, we have before
us a problem for which there are immediate and tangible
solutions. This spring, after waiting through nearly
four years of self-inflicted political gridlock, GuineaBissau’s frozen Government appeared to thaw, but
only after the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) took the bold step of sanctioning 19
spoilers of the Conakry Agreement. At that time, the
President of Guinea-Bissau had appointed a consensus
Prime Minister and scheduled legislative elections for
18 November. Given registration challenges, that date
was delayed. And while we understood the logistical
challenges that prompted the delay, the country’s
leaders have once again been capitalizing on a stalled
process for their own selfish political objectives. Let us
be clear — that has to end now.
We appreciate the recent announcements that have
set a date for the elections. However, we are greatly
concerned that the date set is well beyond the January
time frame set by ECOWAS. It is critical that there
be no further delays or slippage for the legislative
elections. Furthermore, we expect that the presidential
elections will and should take place separately and as
scheduled in summer 2019. Following the apparent
improvement of the country’s political situation this
spring, Guinea-Bissau’s partners and friends have
provided the necessary support needed to prepare for

S/PV. 8438

and hold the elections. We are pleased by the progress
and voter registration that has been observed over the
past several months.
However, like our partners in the region and the
international community, we are very concerned over
recent events in Bissau, specifically the actions of
the public-order police and the blocking of visiting
technicians seeking to access the technical support
office of the electoral process headquarters. We note
that, despite those actions and the ongoing delay, a
frustrated and disappointed public has shown patience,
and the pre-election environment has remained
relatively calm. However, that should not be construed
as passive acceptance. We urge President Vaz, Prime
Minister Gomes, Mr. Domingos Simões Pereira, who
is the leader of the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde, and other stakeholders to
follow through on their pledges to foster unity, continue
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and hold
the elections without delay.
The United States also welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic assessment of UNIOGBIS. We
appreciate that that report provides a frank assessment
of the strengths and weaknesses of the work of
the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau over the past
several years. We also appreciate that the report ties
its recommendations for the reprioritization of tasks
and options for a future United Nations presence to
conditions that must be met. While further detailed
discussions will be required in the Security Council
prior to the February mandate renewal, we support in
principle the concept of a three-phase drawdown and
the transfer of tasks from UNIOGBIS to the United
Nations country team.
What is clear is that for that transition to be
possible, Guinea-Bissau’s electoral process must be
credible and must proceed on schedule. Furthermore,
Guinea-Bissau must avoid a return to extended political
gridlock. We also agree with the sentiment expressed
in the strategic assessment that, given the significant
investment that the United Nations has made in GuineaBissau over the past two decades, the utmost care must
be taken to design a transition process that maintains
the gains achieved and identifies the appropriate parts
of the United Nations system that are to assume any
remaining tasks. We reiterate the need for stakeholders
to take the right action and put the people of GuineaBissau first, which entails the immediate rescheduling
and holding of the critical legislative elections.

18-457009/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): First, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his
useful briefing this morning. I also thank the Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Vieira, for the update he gave
from a peacebuilding perspective. Let me at the outset
also commend the leading role played by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
Guinea-Bissau and recognize the important of the
presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau on
the ground.
There have been a series of positive developments
in Guinea-Bissau over the past few months, including
the appointment of the Prime Minister, the formation
of an inclusive Government, the reopening of the
National Assembly, the approval of a new Government
programme and the adoption of a gender-quota law.
We have also witnessed the strong commitment of the
people of Guinea-Bissau to the electoral process, as
demonstrated by the high numbers of people that have
registered to vote. Targeted measures to ensure the
equal participation of women in the electoral process
are, however, still needed. While we note yesterday’s
announcement that set 10 March as the date of the
elections, we regret the postponement of the elections
and the lack of preparations in that regard. We now
call on the Government and all parties to urgently
ensure that the conditions for free and fair democratic
elections are in place and that there are no further
delays. As highlighted by the Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the six-point roadmap and the Conakry Agreement are
still valid and important. They must now be promptly
implemented in full. The stability pact is also important.
It needs to be based on an inclusive and consultative
process in order to be credible and sustainable.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1086) and his thorough assessment of the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). The timeline
set out for the transition seems realistic. The United
Nations system must now conduct a timely and
integrated transition-planning process. It is important
that the Council be kept updated on the progress of
that work. Predictable resources and adequate capacity
for the United Nations country team will be critical
to the transition, as the experience in, for example,
Liberia has shown. Another lesson from Liberia — as
was highlighted in the recently adopted presidential
10/19

21/12/2018

statement (S/PRST/2018/3) on the Peacebuilding
Commission’s advisory role to the Security Council with
regard to sustaining peace — is that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a particularly important role to play
in such transitions. For a transition to be sustainable,
it must be based on national peacebuilding priorities,
as well as on political will, local ownership and
inclusiveness. The Peacebuilding Commission’s efforts
in that regard have our full and active support.
It is important to address the root causes of conflict
in Guinea-Bissau through measures such as moving
forward on constitutional reform, reconciliation and
political dialogue, strengthening the rule of law through
strong and inclusive institutions and, not least, ensuring
equal access to economic opportunities. Regional
engagement will continue to be critical. Such regional
efforts should be backed up by coherent international
support. Our international engagement must also be
sustained in the delicate post-electoral phase and
include support for the aforementioned reforms. Our
continued support will be crucial to helping GuineaBissau to consolidate peace and build a stable and
prosperous future.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We also
thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their
important briefings.
Peru notes with concern the recent events in
Guinea-Bissau, where, despite the political progress
that had been made, the legislative elections that were
supposed to be held on 19 November have once again
been postponed. We hope that the elections can indeed
take place on 10 March of next year, in accordance
with the presidential announcement that was issued
yesterday. We are also concerned about the impact that
those repeated postponements will have on the holding
of the presidential elections in 2019. We stress that the
mass participation of citizens in free, fair and inclusive
elections is essential to the consolidation of democracy
and, in turn, the legitimacy and effectiveness of the
institutions needed to build sustainable peace. In that
vein and in accordance with the Conakry Agreement
and the six-point road map, we believe it is urgent for
the Guinea-Bissau authorities to convene legislative
elections that include the participation of all political
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

actors and are supported by regional and international
players and organizations.
We reiterate the importance of promoting the
greater participation of women and young people in the
country’s political and institutional spheres. It is also
important to bear in mind that elections represent one
step in a process that requires broad national consensus
to be reached so that the root causes of conflicts can be
addressed by building a safer, more stable and more just
country. To that end, it is essential to respond to threats
such as drug trafficking, transnational organized
crime and growing violent extremism, which would
undermine the institutional framework and the social
fabric in any country. It is also necessary to strengthen
the institutions required to promote economic growth,
fight poverty and achieve sustainable development for
the benefit of all sectors of the population.
In that regard, we highlight the work carried out
by the United Nations country team to support the
implementation of the national development plan, which
prioritizes growth, human development, the sustainable
management of resources and the strengthening of the
rule of law and governance.
I conclude by underlining how important it is that
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau continue to support the country in
all those efforts, in accordance with the provisions
of Council resolution 2404 (2018) and in close
coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission, the
aforementioned country team and other relevant actors.
In that vein, we also highlight the important roles
played by the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Community of Portuguese
Language Countries and the European Union.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would
like to express our sincere thanks to Côte d’Ivoire for
organizing this briefing. We wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador Vieira
for their informative briefings.
Please allow me to focus on three important
points in relation to the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
and the situation in that country: first, a responsible
transition; secondly, political developments; and
thirdly, the role of international partners.

S/PV. 8438

Regarding the possible transition of UNIOGBIS,
I would like to start by thanking Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun and the rest of the UNIOGBIS team
for the thorough report and its clear and honest analysis
(S/2018/1086). That is exactly the type of reporting
that we need in order for the Security Council to do
good work. The Kingdom of the Netherlands considers
that report to be an example of how the United Nations
can outline the evolution of peacekeeping and special
political missions and ensure a smooth transition. A
phased transition would definitely be necessary in any
possible UNIOGBIS exit scenario, which we do not
take as a given, based on resolution 2404 (2018).
Nevertheless, if the Council were to contemplate
an exit, it is imperative that benchmarks be set.
Benchmarks should not be linked to time but should
rather be based on the achievement of actual qualitative
benchmarks in the country. Those benchmarks
should include, at least, the successful completion of
the electoral cycle and the subsequent formation of a
Government. The Kingdom of the Netherlands would
like to emphasize the need for a responsible transition
strategy that takes into consideration the achievements
of the mission and the country and allows for the active
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission. A
responsible exit and a coherent transition are essential
in order to both build and sustain peace in GuineaBissau and to prevent Guinea-Bissau from sinking
deeper into political instability.
Secondly, the political situation in Guinea-Bissau is
extremely troubling. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
regrets the fact that the legislative elections scheduled
for 18 November did not take place. We take note of the
presidential decree of 20 December, in which the date
for elections has been set for 10 March 2019. While we
welcome the setting of a date for elections, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands regrets the fact that the date is not
in line with the end-of-January deadline, as stipulated
in the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) communiqué of 12 December. Also, given
the near completion of the voter registration process,
it is difficult to comprehend why the new date is not
in conformity with that deadline. It remains imperative
that free, fair and credible elections take place prior to
the presidential elections. Combining those elections
remains unacceptable.
We therefore request the authorities of GuineaBissau to base the date of elections on the ongoing
voter registration process and to adhere to the

18-4570011/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

timeline stipulated by ECOWAS in its communiqué
of 12 December. The Technical Office for Electoral
Processes Support should be able to continue its work
unhindered, and the legislative elections must take place
prior to the presidential elections. The organization
of free, inclusive, fair, transparent and credible
legislative and presidential elections is crucial for the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS six-point road map, the full implementation
of which remains the only way to achieve lasting peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands would, therefore,
like to highlight two other elements in that regard:
the signing of a stability pact; and the urgent need for
constitutional reform. The stability pact must be further
deliberated on in an inclusive manner, and the signing
of the pact should occur prior to the organization of
legislative elections. Additionally, the sanctions regime
imposed under resolution 2048 (2012) remains linked
to the electoral cycle. Any reconsideration of the
sanctions — in any direction — should be based on the
conduct and completion of a full electoral cycle.
My third point concerns the indispensable role that
ECOWAS plays in building and sustaining peace in
Guinea-Bissau. We commend the efforts of ECOWAS
in Guinea-Bissau, particularly the visit to Bissau
on 12 December. We welcome the issuance of the
communiqué following the visit, in which ECOWAS
called on President Vaz to announce, prior to the
ECOWAS summit on 22 December, a new date for
elections before the end of January. We regret that the
authorities in Guinea-Bissau have not adhered to that
line. In addition to the role of ECOWAS, we also want
to stress the important role that the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) plays in Guinea-Bissau.
We support the European Union’s decision to continue
to finance ECOMIB.
In conclusion, ECOWAS, the African Union,
the European Union, the Community of Portuguese
Language Countries and the United Nations remain
partners in building peace in Guinea-Bissau, with
UNIOGBIS as its main convener. We call upon the
Council to continue to monitor the situation closely
and base a possible reconfiguration of the tasks of
UNIOGBIS on clear benchmarks and achievements,
in consultation with relevant stakeholders and actors
on the ground. The Council’s involvement in GuineaBissau has a clear link to the prevention of the outbreak
of violence at a difficult political impasse. It remains
12/19

21/12/2018

crucial to continue to support the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and other political stakeholders in
sustaining peace in Guinea-Bissau.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the information
provided by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Zerihoun, and by Ambassador
Vieira, as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Almost two decades have passed since the special
political mission in Guinea-Bissau began its work,
seeking to address the complex social, political and
economic landscape in our brother country after
violence broke out in 1998. Today, we note with
concern that the situation in Guinea-Bissau has seen no
substantial improvement.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1086) containing the strategic analysis of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), resolution 2404
(2018) — which extended the mandate of the mission
until February 2019 — stipulates that it must focus
on three priority aspects: first, support for the full
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
facilitation of inclusive political dialogue and the
national reconciliation process; secondly, support
for the electoral process for this year’s legislative
elections; and thirdly, technical assistance to complete
the constitutional review.
With regard to the second point concerning the
electoral process, that process has been truncated by
the failure to hold the legislative elections scheduled
for 18 November owing to a lack of the technical and
financial means needed for their consolidation. In that
vein, in order to continue promoting the stabilization
process in Guinea-Bissau, we consider that, in the short
term, the commitment of the international community
is vital in order to ensure full cooperation and the
necessary support for the successful completion of the
voter-registration process, in addition to assisting with
electoral technical mechanisms to hold transparent,
inclusive and fundamentally peaceful elections.
Furthermore, one of the structural factors of
the crisis is related to the political impasse that was
eventually overcome by the country’s various political
forces through the appointment of a consensus Prime
Minister seven months ago and the formation of the
Government. However, the challenges in the areas of
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

governance, rule of law and socioeconomic development
must continue to be addressed within the framework of
the political process and inclusive dialogue.
Those aspects should enable members of the
Government and the political parties represented in
the National Assembly to demonstrate real political
will in order to continue advancing along the path
of consensus in order to constructively implement
the signed agreements. We believe that it is critical
to promote the legitimate commitment to reaching a
lasting political and social solution, guided exclusively
by the best interests of the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Additionally, in the context of ensuring State
stability and with regard to security aspects, the fight
against drug trafficking, transnational crime and
impunity must also be a priority. To that end, the United
Nations has a key role to play in promoting development
and strengthening and improving State capacities with
a view to reducing vulnerability to drug trafficking and
crime by bolstering the elements of justice and police
forces. The international community must also provide
Guinea-Bissau with the assistance necessary to enhance
State control of its coastline and airspace, in addition to
training the members of the relevant State institutions.
We also commend all the efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau, and appreciate the contribution of the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, and the crucial efforts of the Head of
UNIOGBIS to reconcile the parties to the conflict and
to promote dialogue. We further commend the work
carried out by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by Brazil. We
once again stress the importance of strengthening the
links between that body and the Security Council with
respect to coordination, exchange of information and
active participation.
In conclusion, we believe it imperative to redouble
our joint efforts for stabilization in Guinea-Bissau. We
have also stressed the need to use political tools to find
political solutions with a view to achieving sustainable
peace. In that context, in order to achieve stabilization
and sustainable peace in Guinea-Bissau, it is imperative
to place the well-being of the population and its most
vulnerable sectors above any political partisan or
personal interest.

S/PV. 8438

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ambassador Vieira, Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their briefings.
France welcomes the positive developments that
have taken place in recent months in Guinea-Bissau,
particularly the appointment of the consensus Prime
Minister Aristides Gomes. That is an important first
step towards the full implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, which, we remain convinced, is the only
way to help Guinea-Bissau out of the political and
institutional crisis it has been enduring for many
long months.
I would also like to acknowledge the central role
played by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and, more generally, by the P5
group — ECOWAS, the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union
and the United Nations — in achieving those results.
It is crucial that Guinea-Bissau continue to enjoy
significant regional and international support in the
months and years to come. The Council, in particular,
bears that responsibility.
While the progress made in recent months is
encouraging, other important measures are eagerly
awaited in the coming weeks, the most important of
which is the holding of parliamentary elections as soon
as possible. France regrets that they did not take place
on the announced date of 18 November, and takes note
of the new date of 10 March. All commitments must now
be honoured. We see that as an important test to gauge
the real willingness of the various actors to advance
the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
We therefore expect the Guinea-Bissau authorities to
become fully mobilized in the technical preparations
for those elections, including at the highest level.
Here, I am referring in particular to the finalization
and validation of the electoral list, which, like the
now closed voter census, cannot serve as a pretext for
indefinitely postponing the holding of elections that are
so important for the country’s equilibrium.
The international community, for its part, is playing
its full role in supporting the upcoming electoral
process through the financial assistance provided by the
main donors and the technical assistance of the United
Nations Development Programme and the European
Union. We have therefore raised our expectations of the

18-4570013/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

Guinea-Bissau authorities. In our view, the successful
holding of the forthcoming elections is a necessary
precondition for changes in sanctions. In that regard,
I again congratulate the Guinea-Bissau military
authorities on their commitment to non-interference in
political affairs, which they have honoured.
The restoration of lasting peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau also requires progress in other areas in
the medium term. In that regard, constitutional review
should enable the Guinea-Bissau institutional system
to avoid being subjected to the kind of blockages seen
in recent months. Also important is the fight against
organized crime and, in particular, drug trafficking,
which requires not only a firm commitment on the part
of the Guinea-Bissau authorities, but also the continuous
support of the international community, especially the
various United Nations actors present on the ground.
Of equal importance is security sector reform, without
which, as recent history has shown, there can be no
long-term stability in the country.
Finally, France has taken good note the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations for the future of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau following the strategic review conducted a few
weeks ago. We hope that the discussions on this topic
will take into account the objectives of extending the
scope of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices role, optimizing coordination
between the various actors of the international
community on the ground and providing the most
effective technical support, which Guinea-Bissau needs
more than ever now and for years to come.
It is still too early to know whether Guinea-Bissau
is truly on the road to sustainable stabilization. The
coming months, and in particular the effective holding
of legislative elections, will continue to provide us with
answers. In that regard, the supporting role of the region
and, more broadly, of the international community and
the Council is all the more important.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings.
The developments in Guinea-Bissau give abundant
cause for concern. We regret the fact that the progress
made following the establishment of a consensus14/19

21/12/2018

based Government in April has once again morphed
into clashes among the main political forces. Against
the background of pressing socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges, this is fanning the flames of
what is already a highly volatile situation in the country.
We welcome the President of Guinea-Bissau’s
announcement yesterday of the decision to set 10 March
2019 as the new date for parliamentary elections.
Although we wish to avoid dramatizing the fact that
the appointments to the National Assembly have been
postponed, timely elections on 18 November would
have generated an important positive momentum for
improving the overall climate.
We now see that the situation in Guinea-Bissau is
inching towards a perilous threshold, beyond which
turmoil awaits both the country and its people. At this
fateful moment, we call on all social and political forces
to act responsibly and to proceed in a way that reflects
national interests and leads to a prompt resolution of
existing disputes. We have closely studied the report on
the outcomes of the strategic assessment of the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2018/1086). We believe that,
at the present moment, the United Nations mission
is a unique guarantor for national reconciliation.
The Office is successfully undertaking projects for
social development and building the capacities of law
enforcement and the country’s armed forces.
At the same time, we must recognize the fact that,
in many areas, its potential, above all in the political
sphere, cannot be fully realized. In general, we believe
that the reconfiguration of the Integrated Office needs
to be approached in an extremely balanced manner.
Any hasty drawdown of the mission’s work would
lead only to greater divisions within Bissau-Guinean
society, degrade State institutions and result in an
increase in drug trafficking and corruption. In that
regard, we believe that it would be advisable to decide
on the details concerning the implementation of the
mission’s reconfiguration only after the electoral cycle
has been completed and the country has returned to the
constitutional path.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and
Ambassador Vieira for their briefings.
China has closely followed recent developments
in the situation in Guinea-Bissau. We take note of the
special report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1086)
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

on the strategic assessment of the work of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) and its analysis and assessment
of the situation in the country. China commends
the mediation efforts undertaken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
States of the region in promoting the political process
in Guinea-Bissau.
We take note of President Vaz’s 20 December
announcement of 10 March 2019 as the new date for
legislative elections. We hope that the Bissau-Guinean
parties will work together to ensure that elections are
held on schedule and in a smooth manner. At the same
time, the international community should provide
technical, financial and logistical support for the
holding of the elections commensurate with the needs
of the Guinea-Bissau Government. The international
community should fully respect Guinea-Bissau’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Bissau-Guinean parties should keep the long-term
interests of their State and people in mind, take concrete
actions with political decisiveness, build consensus,
resolve differences through dialogue and consultations
and work towards achieving a better quality of life for
their people and national stability and development.
As always, China supports African countries in
seeking African solutions to African issues. China
supports ECOWAS and the countries of the region in
continuing to mediate the situation on the ground and
play a constructive role in advancing the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS six-point
road map. We call on UNIOGBIS, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations
country teams and other stakeholders to strengthen
coordination and collaboration with the relevant United
Nations agencies and build synergy with the African
Union, ECOWAS and the States of the region through
mediation efforts so that each party can leverage its
own strength and provide robust support for economic
development and the improvement of life in GuineaBissau.
China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community to promote dialogue and
engagement among the Bissau-Guinean parties and
play a constructive role in securing sustained stability
and development in Guinea-Bissau and West Africa,
in general.

S/PV. 8438

Mr. Mielus (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their informative briefings on recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau.
Reported delays in preparations for the holding
of legislative elections raise our deep concern. The
credible conduct of the legislative elections is a crucial
step towards the resumption of peacebuilding and an
important element of the Conakry Agreement. That is
why we welcome the recent decision to hold elections
on 10 March 2019. We reiterate our call on the BissauGuinean authorities to provide firm political direction
and assume leadership in the electoral process, as well as
empower the electoral management bodies to implement
appropriate solutions for holding credible elections.
Poland believes that maintaining the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) with its current strength and
mandate throughout the upcoming months is crucial
to ensuring the mission’s full capacity to support the
electoral process, including by providing good offices
to national actors and coordinating efforts with the socalled Guinea-Bissau P5.
It is also important to ensure that the UNIOGBIS
exit is managed in a way that would help maintain the
gains achieved so far. In that regard, we fully support
the Secretary-General’s recommendation to establish
a streamlined good offices special political mission
following the end of the electoral cycle. It is equally
important to ensure that ECOWAS and individual
regional leaders maintain Guinea-Bissau on their
agenda not only during the critical electoral period, but
also beyond that period when the country will need the
assistance of the international community to implement
a reform agenda. In that regard, the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission will also be indispensable.
In conclusion, it is important for the United Nations
to remain engaged in Guinea-Bissau throughout the
transition and exit of UNIOGBIS, and beyond, to help
mobilize the international community in supporting the
institutional reform agenda. Finally, let me express our
full support to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the personnel of UNIOGBIS and the United
Nations country team for their dedication.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Tayé-Brook

18-4570015/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ambassador Mauro Vieira, in his capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their valuable
briefings on the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau.
I would also like to commend the pivotal role that the
PBC is playing in Guinea-Bissau.
I will comment on two fundamental aspects
concerning today’s subject: the political situation
and the strategic assessment of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS).
First, with regard to the political situation, we
regret the slow pace of preparatory work for holding
the elections, especially the voter registration process,
which is necessary for holding the legislative elections.
We also regret the Government’s decision to postpone
those elections, which were supposed to be held on
18 November, as well as its non-compliance with the
electoral calendar. In that regard, the State of Kuwait
appreciates and supports the role that the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) is
playing to resolve that issue. We also support the
ECOWAS request to the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to schedule the date for the elections before the next
ECOWAS summit, to be held on 22 December. In that
regard, we welcome yesterday’s announcement by the
Government of Guinea-Bissau of its intention to hold
the legislative elections on 10 March 2019.
Over this year, we have noted the progress made
in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
hope that the postponement of the elections will not
impact it, especially given that the date for holding
the presidential elections in 2019 is fast approaching.
The concurrent holding of legislative and presidential
elections would have an impact on all the political
actors in the country. Therefore, work must be done
mow to ensure that the elections are held on the date set
according to the most recent electoral calendar.
We renew our full support for the five
organizations — ECOWAS, the African Union, the
United Nations, the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries — seeking to achieve
progress in resolving the political crisis in the coming
period. I also commend the support of the neighbouring
countries in funding the electoral process. We look
forward to the outcome of the ECOWAS summit with
regard to the Guinea-Bissau situation
16/19

21/12/2018

Secondly, with regard to the strategic assessment, I
thank the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for his
report (S/2018/1086) submitted pursuant to resolution
2404 (2018). We take note of the recommendations
contained therein pertaining to the reconfiguration of
UNIOGBIS after the presidential elections are held
next year and the drawdown plan for the upcoming two
years. We hope that all efforts — international, regional
and those of the United Nations — will be coordinated
with Guinea-Bissau. We are ready to take account of
all the recommendations contained in the report when
the Security Council considers renewing UNIOGBIS
mandate during February 2019.
In conclusion, I commend once again the efforts
made by UNIOGBIS and its cooperation with the
various active elements in Guinea-Bissau. We stress the
need for all parties to cooperate in order to guarantee
the success of the transition plan, as proposed by the
strategic assessment, because many challenges in the
country are long term and require the participation
of various United Nations offices, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
Moreover, regional organizations and the Peacebuilding
Commission have fundamental roles to play in the
implementation of development strategies.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): As an observer of the
African Union, we join in and associate ourselves with
the statements already made by the members of the
African troika and to be made by the Ivorian presidency,
which has so ably and effectively conducted the
stewardship of the Council this month. Mr. President,
please accept our most sincere congratulations.
We also welcome Ambassador Da Silva, Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, to the Chamber. We
commend Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Vieira for their insightful
briefings on the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau.
We praise their tireless efforts to bring peace and
stability to the country. Please allow me to share some
of our observations and recommendations regarding
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
We welcome the progress made by all parties
with regard to the stabilization of and restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. We highly
appreciate the good offices of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) and the mediation efforts of regional,
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

subregional organizations and neighbouring States,
especially the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and the Guinea-Bissau P5 group
members, whose coordinated efforts are very helpful.
We also welcome the commitments of the international
partners to providing necessary technical, logistical
and financial support to the electoral process.
We acknowledge the decision of the President and
the readiness of the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
undertake and advance the necessary measures for a
timely conclusion of the preparations for the legislative
elections on 10 March 2019 and express hope for their
credible and timely conduct. We expect that all the
stakeholders will demonstrate good political will to
that end. We reiterate that all parties should respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Guinea-Bissau.
We also underscore the importance of the presence
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau in ensuring
stability during the electoral cycle, and we urge the
international partners to continue to support these
regional forces. We call on all parties to promptly
take the steps necessary to implement the remaining
provisions of the Conakry Agreement, which remains
the primary framework for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. That includes the adoption of the stability
pact and constitutional review. Political stability in
the country can be achieved by reforms aimed at
strengthening the governing bodies. There is a need for
an open and inclusive nationwide dialogue to develop
guiding principles of the reforms.
Ensuring the participation of women and youth in
the political process at every stage and increasing their
economic opportunities are equally important. Besides
the human dimension, the perils of drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime have a multifaceted
impact on the economy, overall security and community
and individual well-being. National engagement
is critical to implementing different international
programmes and projects aimed at strengthening the
security, judicial and law enforcement sectors. It is
therefore necessary to continue strengthening the
national institutional framework and response against
the threats and close cooperation with UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL.

S/PV. 8438

We are also worried by the deterioration of the
economic situation. We believe that the most effective
measures for sustainable peace and stability must be
sought to ensure the country’s resilience by providing
increased support for the existing development plans
and the United Nations peacebuilding programmes.
Further efforts need to focus on the structural drivers
of instability by reducing poverty; creating better
opportunities for education, employment and health
care; and strengthening local governance. We call
on all donors to provide the necessary funds for
the implementation of all such measures. We also
underscore the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in fostering national ownership of a
transition plan and call for preparations to develop an
inclusive and comprehensive peacebuilding plan.
Lastly, we endorse the Secretary-General’s special
report on the strategic assessment of UNIOGBIS
(S/2018/1086), and support his proposals on gradual
reconfiguration, a phased drawdown and the exit of the
mission by the end of 2020.
In conclusion, we would like to extend our full
support to the work of Mr. Viegas Filho, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau, and the UNIOGBIS team, and reaffirm our
readiness to cooperate closely with all the relevant
parties to support peacebuilding and consolidation
efforts in Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
I should like to commend Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their excellent briefings.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General and to the strategic assessment
mission, whose report (S/2018/1086), submitted to
the Council for analysis, reflects the interest of the
international community in the political developments
in Guinea-Bissau. Indeed, the request for an evaluation
of the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
expressed by the Security Council in resolution 2404
(2018), responds to the need to reconfigure the Office,
its mechanisms of action and its resources in order to

18-4570017/19

S/PV.8438

The situation in Guinea Bissau

achieve greater effectiveness on the ground with respect
to the objectives assigned to it.
Côte d’Ivoire, aware of the complexity of the
scope of action of UNOGBIS, commends the efforts
of the mission to accompany Guinea-Bissau towards
a definitive way out of the crisis. Through its mission
of good offices and mediation between national
stakeholders, its role of coordinator of the activities
of the various international partners and its close
collaboration with the Economic Community of West
African States, the United Nations Office continues to
play a fundamental preventive role, thereby contributing
to the preservation of the institutional balance within
Guinea-Bissau.
However, my delegation notes with regret that, as the
Secretary-General has pointed out, the results achieved
are not commensurate with the resources deployed
and the degree of investment on the part of national
stakeholders. In that regard, the Secretary-General
offers the Security Council a range of proposals that
could contribute effectively to the gradual recalibration
of UNIOGBIS and redefine its priorities in the light of
the major imperative of implementing the peace and
security pillar in a more coherent, more flexible and
more efficient framework, in greater harmony with the
development and human rights pillars.
To implement that recalibration, the SecretaryGeneral proposes a three-phase reconfiguration of the
mission, to be completed no later than 31 December
2020, namely, the election period, the post-election
period and the transition and withdrawal of the Bureau.
That timeline should help mobilize the support of the
international community for the institutional reform
agenda. Côte d’Ivoire takes note with interest of the
recommendations and invites Council members to
appropriate these new lines of thought in order to make
the best possible use thereof for a definitive resolution
of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
My delegation regrets that legislative elections in
Guinea-Bissau were not held by the scheduled deadline
of 18 November 2018. That situation should not make
us lose sight of the progress made or constrain our
momentum and our determination to support the
Guinea-Bissau authorities in the process of ending
the crisis. To that end, my country urges the Council
to remain in solidarity, while supporting the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
and strengthening its support for the leadership of
18/19

21/12/2018

ECOWAS. We applaud commitment of ECOWAS and
fully share the concerns it expressed in its 12 December
communiqué, including the urgent need to set a new
date for the parliamentary elections. In the light of that
requirement, President José Mário Vaz, by a decree of
20 December, set the date of the parliamentary elections
for 10 March 2019.
My delegation takes note of those latest
developments and urges all international stakeholders,
especially ECOWAS, whose next summit will be held
on 22 December, to assess the advisability of holding
the election on the scheduled date and to take all
necessary measures to support the people of GuineaBissau in that process.
In addition, Côte d’Ivoire encourages the BissauGuinean stakeholders to take definitive ownership of
their country’s future by placing the national interest
above all else once and for all. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the perfectly coordinated action of the P5 group,
comprising the United Nations, ECOWAS, the African
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the European Union which has enabled
the efficient mobilization of financial resources and the
registration of over 90 per cent of voters.
Moreover, my country is of the opinion that, in
the efforts to resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the
international community must integrate the thorny
issue of combating drug trafficking and transnational
crime. As mentioned by the Secretary-General, a
comprehensive approach at the subregional level
could help to reduce the negative consequences of
such scourges. In that regard, my country recalls,
particularly within the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and ECOWAS, the existence of the ECOWAS regional
action plan for West Africa for the period 2016-2020,
the implementation of which seeks to contribute, inter
alia, to the reduction of drug abuse, drug trafficking
and crime in the subregion.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and reiterates
its support to him in carrying out his mission.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its call on the
international community to continue supporting the
process to end the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. It also urges
Guinea-Bissau’s political actors to do everything in
their power to restore peace in their country and achieve
18-45700

21/12/2018

The situation in Guinea Bissau

S/PV. 8438

its economic recovery by implementing the 2016-2020
Partnership Framework with the United Nations.

here that, to date, more than 95 per cent of voters have
been registered.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The result achieved demonstrates the wisdom of
the President of the Republic’s decision to not rush
the issuance of a new decree to fix the date of the
parliamentary elections. After extensive consultations
with all political actors, the President of the Republic
issued a decree yesterday, 20 December, setting 10 March
2019 as the date to hold the parliamentary elections.

I give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
participate in this meeting of the Security Council
and to address you in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of my country.
The members of the Council will recall that in
April, at the Extraordinary Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States, (ECOWAS), held in
Lomé, which focused on the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
Bissau-Guinean political actors adopted a road map to
end the crisis, which persisted despite the Agreement
signed in Conakry in October 2016. The road map
provided, among other things, for the organization of
parliamentary elections on 18 November 2018.
However, delays in mobilizing funds from our
partners and technical difficulties related to electoral
kits and their delivery to Bissau, compounded by the
rainy season, made it impossible to meet the deadline
initially planned for the electoral census, which could
only effectively begin on 19 September, one month
later. Given that observation and the difficulties facing
the process, the President of the Republic decided not to
issue a new decree to set the date of the parliamentary
elections in order to give the census a chance to register
a large majority of the citizen voters. It should be noted

The upcoming parliamentary elections are
extremely important, but it would be an exaggeration
to believe that simply holding free, fair and transparent
elections would automatically establish a resilient and
stable political order at the institutional level. To that
end, allow me to refer to the Conakry Agreement, which
calls for political reform that will give our national
democratic institutions greater resilience and hinder
the re-emergence of political instability. It should be
recalled that in a context of persistent instability, no
other reform will be successful — neither defence
and security sector reform, justice sector reform, nor
the economic reform necessary to operationalize the
Sustainable Development Goals.
I take this opportunity to thank all those present
for their patience and solidarity and to wish a merry
Christmas and a successful New Year to their
respective countries, as well as health and well-being
to their families.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

18-4570019/19
