S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6706th meeting
Tuesday, 24 January 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ebrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Zhang Changwei
Mrs. Escorcia
Ms. Legendre
Mr. Eick
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Erroja
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Demin
Mr. Mbeou
Mr. Day
Ms. Finerty

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-21419 (E)

*1221419*

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure I invite the
representatives of Bahrain, Benin and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I wish once again to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Council and to thank you for having convened this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
Secondly, my delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
It is with deep concern and growing frustration
that we continue to endlessly address the situation in
the Middle East, particularly the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. As we begin a new year, we neither do so in
the expectation that we will make tangible progress in
the peace process, nor do we anticipate that we will
even take a step closer to our noble goal of achieving a
solution. On the contrary, we begin this new year with
a sense of pessimism that my delegation believes is
certainly well founded and based on troubling
developments on the ground.
Regrettably, Israel continues its expansion of
illegal settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, against all norms of international law and
despite the condemnation of their illegal acts by the
international community. With the number of housing
units being built in the West Bank having grown to
1,850 in 2011, the expansion of illegal settlements
since 2002 is taking place on an unprecedented scale.
In East Jerusalem alone, the eventual construction of
thousands of apartment units will almost certainly
change the geopolitical realities on the ground.
In a report recently published by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, since 1967
Israel has established about 150 settlements in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. In addition to the

2

unabated expansion of settlements, Palestinian
structures and residences in both the West Bank and
East Jerusalem are being demolished. It has been found
that over 60 per cent of Palestinian structures
demolished in 2011 were in areas allocated to
settlements. Furthermore, a greater expansion of
settlements has been accompanied by a corresponding
increase in settler violence against Palestinians and
their property, which has become more systemic rather
than a rarity.
The result of these activities is the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people. While morally
wrong, the settlements are also illegal under
international law as they violate article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and run contrary to Israel’s
obligations. In this connection, Malaysia supports the
action taken by NAM to request Switzerland, in its
capacity as depositary of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, to reconvene at the earliest opportunity a
conference of the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention for the purpose of upholding the
obligations and responsibilities incumbent upon the
high contracting parties in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. This is in
accordance with recommendations contained in
General Assembly resolutions 64/10 and 64/254.
Thus far, the calls of the international community,
including the United Nations, to stop these illegal
activities continue to fall on deaf ears as Israel stays on
its hastened path down the wrong side of history. This
it does unapologetically and without an ounce of
remorse, which begs the question: Does Israel have any
obligations at all to begin with?
At this juncture, it goes without saying that Israel
would need to halt illegal settlement activities that
have resulted in great injustice to the Palestinian
people. Illegal settlement activities have also time and
again stalled peace talks. All sides must realize that, in
order to achieve peace in Palestine and the Middle
East, negotiations would need to begin in a spirit of
sincerity, goodwill and trust. Obviously, this is not easy
to accomplish, but, for a start, all parties should refrain
from engaging in provocative actions that would
certainly do more harm than good.
As the deadline set by the Quartet to come
forward with comprehensive proposals on territory and
security is upon us, Malaysia feels that the Security

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

Council, serving as the custodian of international peace
and security, must do its part to ensure that conditions
are ripe for all parties to resume negotiations on
finding a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Malaysia is of the opinion that, if a fair and peaceful
solution to the conflict is to be achieved, the onus to
compromise and make way for negotiations does not
fall on Palestine alone. Israel’s insistence that Palestine
assume direct negotiations without any preconditions
does not reflect Israel’s willingness to be fair and to be
more accommodating to its future neighbour.
While my delegation speaks today with a sense of
pessimism, make no mistake that we remain resolute in
our commitment to finding a lasting two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of Palestine, where both sides could live side by
side in peace and taking into account the security
concerns of both. It is our earnest desire to see future
discussions on the issue take a different tone that is
more positive and reflects substantial progress on the
ground. The time for peace is now and we must not
miss this opportunity. Prolonging the conflict will only
create more problems and is not in anyone’s interest.
The President: I give
representative of Australia.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. King (Australia): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your country’s presidency of the Council
this month, and to thank you for having convened this
important debate at a critical time for the region. I
should also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing this morning.
One year on from the dramatic events in Tunisia,
then Egypt, Libya and other countries in the Middle
East, the outlook for the region is one both of
encouraging progress and of situations of continuing
concern. Australia will continue to actively support the
historic process of democratic transition under way in
the Middle East and North Africa. Elections are an
important step in this process, including in Egypt,
where strong participation rates in the country’s first
elections in November last year underscored the will of
the people to act on their legitimate aspirations to
freedom and democracy.
During this period of profound political change in
the Middle East, it is imperative for the future stability
of the region that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict be
resolved. The rapidly changing geopolitics of the
region present a new opportunity for reaching an

12-21419

enduring peace agreement. However, if this
opportunity is not seized and positive steps towards a
conclusion of the peace process are not made soon, the
prospects for a lasting settlement will become
increasingly remote.
Australia has consistently supported a negotiated
two-State solution that allows a secure Israel to live
side by side with a secure and independent Palestinian
State. As a friend of Israel, we recognize Israel’s
legitimate security concerns, and as a friend of the
Palestinian people we support the realization of their
right to self-determination through their own State.
We commend the ongoing efforts of the Quartet
to promote a resumption of direct negotiations. We also
commend and have been encouraged by the efforts of
Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah, to bring the two parties together for the first
time since late 2010. We also greatly welcome the
recent activity of the Secretary-General in support of
the peace process, including during his recent visit to
Lebanon and through his forthcoming visit elsewhere
in region, which are occurring at a critical juncture and
provide all parties with an opportunity to advance the
cause of peace.
We urge both sides to build on these initiatives
and move forward to substantive negotiations urgently
and without delay. To achieve this, both sides must
demonstrate that they are serious about resuming
negotiations in accordance with the Quartet’s statement
of 23 September 2011, including by refraining from
provocative actions that undermine the prospects for
achieving a two-State solution. This includes the
expansion of Israeli settlements and outposts in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, which the Australian
Government has called on Israel to end. Violence of
any kind targeting civilians must also cease. And,
while we recognize Israel’s legitimate security
concerns, more must be done to ease the humanitarian
situation in Gaza.
We applaud the efforts of the Palestinian
leadership in building the necessary economic and
institutional base for statehood. Australia’s five-year
funding plan of over $300 million is evidence of our
strong support for this endeavour. Now it is clear that
this institution-building must be matched by political
progress towards peace on both sides.
We continue to support the work of the League of
Arab States in assisting positive transformation in the

3

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

Arab world. This includes its efforts to end the
bloodshed in Syria. The continuing violence in Syria is
appalling; since the violence began in March last year,
the death toll has surpassed 5,000 according to
estimates of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We urge the Syrian regime to stop
its brutality and to implement credible political
reforms, including genuine dialogue with opposition
groups, in accordance with the Arab League plan of
action. And we urge members of the Security Council
to discharge their responsibility to deal with the
violence in Syria promptly and expeditiously.
To conclude, the Middle East remains a region
confronted by both challenges and opportunities. We
have common interests in securing durable peace and
stability and in satisfying the legitimate aspirations of
the people of the region for practical reform and
economic opportunity. It is imperative that the Council,
regional actors and other engaged members of the
international community take urgent, positive steps
towards realizing these goals.
The President: I
representative of Japan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the opportunity to address the Security Council on
the situation in the Middle East.
Japan fully understands the earnest aspiration of
Palestinians to build their own State and strongly
supports a two-State solution, under which Israel and a
future independent Palestinian State would live side by
side in peace, security and mutual recognition. Japan
supports the vision that the borders under a two-State
solution should be defined through negotiations, based
on the 1967 lines and with mutually agreed swaps, in a
way that would achieve the peaceful coexistence of a
viable Palestinian State and Israel, with secure and
recognized borders. Such a two-State solution can be
achieved only through sincere negotiations between the
parties concerned. Japan firmly believes that both sides
should do their utmost to conduct direct negotiations in
line with the time frame set out by the Quartet. In that
connection, Japan welcomes the meetings between
Israel and the Palestinians held in Amman this month,
and expresses its deepest respect for the efforts of
Jordan and the Quartet in preparing for the meetings.
Japan strongly expects that those meetings will lead to
the early resumption of direct negotiations.

4

Japan does not recognize any measures that
prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations, and
calls upon both sides to refrain from any provocative
actions in order to build mutual trust. Both parties must
abide by their obligations under previous agreements.
Japan reiterates its strong call to Israel to
immediately freeze its settlement activities in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem, which violate
international law. At the same time, we call upon the
Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to improve
security and fulfil its commitments to cease violence
and work against incitement.
Japan has been supporting the efforts of the
Palestinian Authority to establish statehood and is
committed to continuously providing assistance in that
regard. Japan is also keenly following Palestinian
efforts to establish a unified Government.
Japan shares the serious concerns of the
international community over the situation in Syria.
Japan supports the initiative of the League of Arab
States to bring about stability in Syria, and also hopes
that the Security Council will act effectively. We
deplore the continuing wide-scale use of force by the
Syrian authorities in spite of the League’s deployment
of the monitoring mission. We deem it important that
the United Nations provide technical assistance to
observers participating in the mission. Japan condemns
the use of force by the Syrian authorities against
civilians and reiterates its call to them to immediately
halt such acts of violence, promptly carry out reforms
and engage in dialogue with the Syrian people.
Tomorrow, Egypt will celebrate the first
anniversary of its historic change. Japan welcomes the
fact that the elections for the People’s Assembly were
conducted without any major disorder. We are also
pleased that Japan assisted in the conduct of elections
by providing funding and sharing expertise. As the
stability of Egypt is a linchpin for maintaining that of
the entire region, Japan hopes that the political process
will evolve in a peaceful manner and that economic
and social reforms will lead to tangible results at an
early stage.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving the floor to the European Union.

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
country Montenegro, the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Albania, as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this declaration.
Over the past few years, in these tri-monthly open
debates of the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East, we have very often heard that the peace
process was at a critical juncture and that decisive
progress was needed now in order to finally turn the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region for
peace, security and statehood into a reality. At the start
of this new year, such calls from the international
community are needed once again, now more than
ever, to help both sides to this conflict to settle their
differences and agree on the terms of a comprehensive
solution.
The European Union welcomes and supports the
efforts by Jordan to facilitate direct talks between the
Israelis and the Palestinians as part of the Quartet
process. The European Union calls on both parties to
come forward with comprehensive proposals on
borders and security, as envisaged in the Quartet
statement of 23 September 2011 (see SG/2178). A bold
and decisive demonstration of political leadership is
needed from both sides to maintain the momentum of
the talks. As have others during this meeting, the
European Union wishes to stress once again the central
role of the Quartet in that context and express its full
support for the ongoing Quartet process aimed at
achieving an agreement between the parties by the end
of 2012.
The Quartet statement issued on 23 September
2011 called on both parties to make substantial
progress within six months and to reach an agreement
by the end of 2012. In that vein, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine
Ashton, hosted a meeting of Quartet envoys in Brussels
on 9 October 2011 to launch the process. The Quartet
envoys subsequently met the parties separately on
26 October, 14 November and 14 December 2011 in
Jerusalem. Jordan then took the initiative to invite the
Quartet and the parties to a joint meeting on 3 January.
That meeting was a positive step, since it was the first
one in the current context during which the parties met
face to face. At that meeting, the parties agreed to
further bilateral preparatory meetings under Jordanian
auspices.

12-21419

The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
a two-State solution. The legitimacy of the State of
Israel and the right of Palestinians to achieve statehood
must never be called into question. The European
Union reaffirms its clear positions on negotiations,
with regard to parameters, principles and issues,
including the conclusions of the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council in December 2009, December
2010 and May, July and October 2011, as well as the
conclusions adopted yesterday and the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union at the
Security Council on 21 April 2011 (see S/PV.6520).
The European Union also reiterates its support for the
Arab Peace Initiative. On its tenth anniversary, the
Initiative deserves renewed attention.
The European Union underlines the urgency of
finding a negotiated solution and urges the parties to
refrain from actions that undermine the prospects for
peace. The European Union calls on the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to a peaceful solution
and to the Quartet process by taking actions that can
build confidence and create the environment of trust
necessary to ensure meaningful negotiations leading to
a comprehensive and lasting peace.
Developments on the ground play a crucial part in
creating the context for successful negotiations. The
European Union reiterates that settlements, the
separation barrier, where built on occupied land, the
demolition of homes and evictions are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible. The
European Union urges the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activity in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.
The European Union remains one of the major
supporters of, and contributors to, the Palestinian
institution- and State-building efforts led by President
Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad. The European
Union remains dedicated to continuing its support to
the Palestinian Authority’s successful State-building
efforts, which have been acknowledged as a
remarkable success.
The continuing financial difficulties of the
Palestinian
Authority
risk
jeopardizing
the
achievements made so far in institution-building. The
European Union therefore underlines the necessity of

5

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

providing predictable and further support to the
Palestinian Authority and calls for equitable burdensharing by the international donor community. The
European Union has consistently called for intraPalestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas as an important element for the unity of a future
Palestinian State and for reaching a two-State solution.
As regards Gaza in particular, the European
Union calls for the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009), for the full respect of international
humanitarian law and for an immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, including goods from the West Bank.
In this context, the European Union expresses its
concerns about the dismantling of the Karni crossing
and repeats its calls for the full implementation of the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access.
The European Union welcomed as a step forward
the measures announced by the Israeli Government.
However, more is needed. The European Union calls
for full implementation and complementary measures
in order to achieve a fundamental change of policy that
allows for the reconstruction and economic recovery of
Gaza, including through exports. The European Union
has offered its assistance in achieving that objective.
The European Union calls for a solution addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. The EU
wholeheartedly condemns any actions in which
civilians are hurt or killed.
In conclusion, regarding Syria, the European
Union remains deeply concerned about the
deteriorating situation in the country and the
widespread and systematic violations of human rights
perpetrated by the Syrian authorities against their
people, which may amount to crimes against humanity.
The European Union calls for an immediate end to the
violence, is particularly concerned by the recent
escalation of violence, and reiterates its condemnation
in the strongest terms of the brutal crackdown by the
Syrian Government, which risks exacerbating still
further the spiral of violence, sectarian clashes and
militarization. President Al-Assad must step aside
immediately to allow for a peaceful and democratic
transition.
The European Union recalls its support to the
League of Arab States’ efforts to end the cycle of
violence in Syria and to the deployment of its

6

monitoring mission. The EU welcomes the decision of
the United Nations to provide assistance to the League
of Arab States observer missions. It condemns the
attacks on the League of Arab States missions
monitors. The Syrian authorities have a responsibility
to protect the observers in their country. The European
Union is deeply concerned by the Syrian authorities’
lack of cooperation and urges them to fully comply
with their commitments under the League of Arab
States action plan to completely stop acts of violence
against civilians, free political detainees, remove
troops, tanks and weapons from cities, and allow
independent observers and the media to travel in and
report on Syria.
The European Union urges all members of the
Security Council to uphold their responsibilities to end
the violence against the Syrian population and support
the Syrian people in their legitimate desire for freedom
and political rights. In this regard, the European Union
will continue to engage with representative members of
the Syrian opposition, such as the Syrian National
Council, which adhere to non-violence, inclusiveness
and democratic values.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Müftüoğlu (Turkey): We listened to the
briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco with great interest. The Middle
East has always been a conflict-prone area throughout
its history. The region is undergoing a structural
reformulation. The issue is by no means confined to the
region; there are repercussions on a wider scale. It is
time that we, the nations of the world, assume our
individual and collective roles to effectively address
the challenges ahead.
Last week, the Security Council was briefed on
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. That briefing can be interpreted as another
call on the international community to immediately
address the Arab-Israeli conflict. The illegal blockade
of Gaza is still in force. Our memories of Israel’s
deadly military operation against a civilian
humanitarian aid campaign on the high seas are still
fresh. We sadly note the increase in settlement
activities and settler violence against Palestinians.
Those remain a major obstacle to the resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties. Furthermore,

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

they seriously endanger the vision of a two-State
solution.
We therefore call on the Israeli Government to
abide by international law and fulfil its responsibilities
to the international community. In any case, resort to
violence by any party cannot be tolerated as a means to
resolve existing disputes. The cornerstone of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East is
the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The
Palestinian people must as soon as possible be able to
fully exercise their inalienable rights in accordance
with numerous United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
An independent Palestine should be recognized, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace.
Last fall, we welcomed the membership of
Palestine in UNESCO. We also wholeheartedly support
the Palestinian application for United Nations
membership, submitted by President Abbas on
23 September 2011. The international community
should encourage the struggle for the long-overdue and
well-deserved right to statehood of the Palestinian
people.
We welcome the recent meetings between
Palestinian and Israeli representatives in Amman. We
call on both parties to conduct the meetings in good
faith, aiming for concrete advances towards a just and
comprehensive settlement. In the meantime, steps
towards national reconciliation in Palestine are of vital
importance. We praise the efforts of President Abbas
and the Palestinian representatives in that regard. We
call on all members of the international community to
support the process without prejudice.
The Palestinian people will prove that, given
viable circumstances, they are capable of performing as
a promising political and economic entity in the region.
We therefore call on the international community to
strengthen its support for the development,
reconstruction and humanitarian projects in Palestine.
The emergency appeal last week by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East for funding for that noble cause rightfully
deserves our attention.
We wish to highlight yet again that the times
ahead will require us to be even more vigilant. The
Middle East is going through a transition that will have
inevitable repercussions on a wider scale. We should

12-21419

identify the challenges accurately and set our priorities
correctly. We cannot and should not let the prolonged
dispute divert the path of people in search of a bright
and secure future. The Israeli-Palestinian question is
very critical to that path.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I should like to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
to wish you every success in your endeavours. I am
deeply indebted to you and to your colleagues on the
Council for giving our Committee the opportunity to
address the Council in today’s deliberations, which
again raise the alarm regarding increased Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
Our Committee reiterates its concern at the Israeli
Government’s headlong pursuit of this illegal policy,
which deliberately undermines the Promethean vision
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security within secure and internationally
recognized borders. The settlements, which have been
sheltered for too long behind a culture of impunity, are
violating the laws of occupation, the resolutions of the
Security Council and the road map. In practice, they
preclude the two-State solution and pose a threat to
international peace and security.
To date, the Council has failed to fully assume its
responsibility and to take the necessary decisions —
unlike most of its members and those of the regional
groups, which last month strongly condemned the
Jewish settlement activity. The Committee shares their
feelings of exasperation and urges the Security Council
to take strong measures to safeguard the two-State
solution before it is too late, in order to limit, if not to
avert, the unforeseeable consequences of a terrible
tragedy that has nonetheless been predicted.
The Council must realize that its credibility is at
stake, since, when the legal avenues for a resolution of
such an untenable situation are barred, peace and
security are everywhere imperilled. Under the present
circumstances, the signatories to the Fourth Geneva
Convention must take a firm stance and convene the

7

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

conference of the high-contracting parties, as should
have been done long ago. That means that the only
possible lasting solution is one that would result from
the full application of international law, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that spirit, it should be noted, neither with
displeasure nor with wide-eyed optimism, that there
has been some movement towards peace, although
tentative as yet, based on the recent preliminary
meetings between the Israeli and Palestinian
negotiators in Amman, under Jordanian auspices. We
cherish the hope that they will pave the way for
credible peace negotiations focusing on the two-State
solution and based on the 1967 borders.
It is therefore important that the Quartet and its
regional partners remain firmly committed by inviting
the parties, including first and foremost Israel, to meet
the existing commitments. We solemnly call on the
stakeholders to make a salutary return to the
negotiating table on the basis of clear criteria
guaranteed by the Quartet. In that regard, we have not
forgotten that such a resumption of negotiations should
be supported by confidence-building measures on the
ground, including an end to acts of violence, the lifting
of the blockade on Gaza, the removal of the
checkpoints and the release of Palestinian prisoners.
As the 26 January deadline set by the Quartet
approaches, we note that the Palestinian party has
submitted detailed border and security proposals. We
hope that Israel will do the same in order to
demonstrate an equal commitment to a resolution of
the conflict.
The Committee remains concerned by the current
impasse in the Security Council with regard to
Palestine’s application for membership in the United
Nations. We call on the Council and the General
Assembly to fulfil their responsibilities in that regard,
and reiterate the appeal for countries that have not yet
recognized the State of Palestine to do so. The
Committee also takes this opportunity to welcome the
recent progress in the Palestinian reconciliation process
centred on the Palestine Liberation Organization
platform.
In conclusion, we urge the Council to take
decisive action to bring an end to the settlement
activity and commence their dismantlement, while the
two-State solution is still possible. For its part, the
Committee will continue to contribute constructively to

8

the achievement of that goal, which requires only that
the commitments made be translated into clear and
unequivocal action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): As this is my first
appearance before the Council in my capacity as the
new Indonesian Permanent Representative, I would
like to congratulate South Africa on its presidency for
the month of January and to wish the members of the
Council, especially those that have joined this month as
elected members, every success in their endeavours. I
would also like to extend my sincere appreciation to
the members of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. My deep
appreciation also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing on such an important issue.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements delivered by the Permanent Representatives
of Kazakhstan and Egypt on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned
Movement, respectively.
The issue of Palestine is very dear to the people
and Government of Indonesia. We are deeply
concerned about the absence of progress in the peace
process between Israel and Palestine. The 26 January
deadline established by the Quartet for both parties to
resume direct negotiations will arrive this week, with
that goal nowhere in sight. Israel’s continued illegal
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, is not only a
grave violation of international law, but also a
stumbling block in that respect. The January report of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on the humanitarian impact of Israeli settlement
policies succinctly demonstrates the grave danger that
the settlement question poses, not just to the prospect
of peace in the Middle East but even for progress
towards the resumption of negotiations.
Continuing settlement construction, expansion
and encroachment on Palestinian land is an integral
part of the ongoing fragmentation of the West Bank,
including the isolation of East Jerusalem. As we know,
Israel has also continued its illegal construction of the
separation wall in the West Bank, including in and

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

around occupied East Jerusalem, in defiance of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.

United Nations, which was submitted on 23 September
2011.

Perhaps it is not surprising, therefore, that Israel
maintains the same kind of control in the Gaza Strip,
where its blockade continues to hinder the movement
of people and goods. The blockade is responsible not
only for the terrible humanitarian situation there, but
also for even deeper unemployment and a shrinking of
private sector businesses, as many of them continue to
shut down.

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): In
the debate held in the Security Council under this item
last year, my delegation described in some detail the
law applicable to the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, as confirmed previously by
the decisions of the Council and by the 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.

Despite all of that, indeed because of it, my
delegation is still hopeful about the resumption of
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians
under the guidelines outlined by the Quartet in its
statement of 23 September (see SG/2178). Indonesia
therefore calls upon the Quartet and the parties to
ensure that everything is done to minimize every delay
and eliminate every hurdle.
We urge Israel to demonstrate good faith by not
placing insurmountable obstacles, such as we now have
in its settlement policy, on the path of peace. A
resolution of the conflict will not be easy, and nobody
should expect it to be. The core final status issues —
borders, water, security, refugees, settlements and
Jerusalem — pose considerable challenges, but they
are not insurmountable.
It remains our view that the road to peace lies in
confronting the issues, not in avoiding or complicating
them. To that end, true leadership and courage are
required.
Indonesia reiterates its support for the two-State
solution, namely, Israel and a viable and independent
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side in peace and security on the basis of the
principle of land for peace and a just and
comprehensive regional peace consistent with Security
Council resolutions, the road map of the Quartet and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Let me also stress that a truly comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East also demands a viable
resolution of the Israel-Lebanon and Israel-Syria
tracks. Israel therefore has to withdraw completely
from the remaining Lebanese occupied land, as well as
from the occupied Syrian Golan.
Finally, Indonesia wishes to reiterate its support
for Palestine’s application for membership in the

12-21419

We wish to summarize our principal point briefly
again today: the applicable law in respect of the
exercise by Israel of military control over the occupied
Palestinian territories is not Israeli law, nor whatever
domestic law Israel sees fit to impose there, but
international humanitarian law applicable to all high
contracting parties, as well as obligations that are erga
omnes. Israel’s administrative and military regulations,
insofar as the West Bank is concerned, can be lawful
only if they are utterly consistent with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and its control guided strictly by
its obligations as the occupying Power.
The position of the International Court of Justice
on this very last point is unambiguous. It maintained,
in paragraph 78 of its 2004 opinion on the Legal
Consequences of the construction of a wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory, that:
“The territories situated between the Green
Line … and the former eastern boundary of
Palestine under the Mandate were occupied by
Israel in 1967 during the armed conflict between
Israel and Jordan. Under customary international
law, these were therefore occupied territories in
which Israel had the status of occupying Power.
Subsequent events in these territories … have
done nothing to alter this situation. All these
territories (including East Jerusalem) remain
occupied territories and Israel has continued to
have the status of occupying Power.” (see
A/ES-10/273)
It is also merits noting that there are no territorial
exceptions to that finding: all the territory of the West
Bank, as described by the Court, is considered
“occupied”. A closer reading of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) also bears this point out, as we
explained before the International Court of Justice on
24 February 2004. In his oral submission, the late Sir
Arthur Watts, Q.C, Counsel for Jordan, noted how
resolution 242 (1967)

9

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

“affirmed, unanimously, the principle of Israel’s
withdrawal of its armed forces ‘from territories
occupied in the recent conflict’ — and that meant,
and could only mean, territories on the
non-Israeli side of the Green Line. Thus the
Green Line is the starting line from which is
measured the extent of Israel’s occupation of
non-Israeli territory; originating in 1949 as an
armistice line, it became in 1967 the line to the
Israeli side of which Israel had to withdraw its
forces, and on the non-Israeli side of which
territory was ‘occupied’ by Israel.” (International
Court of Justice document CR 2004/3)
It is also perhaps worth our recalling how, in
negotiating the draft for what became resolution 242
(1967), the understanding reached between the
principal interlocutors was for a withdrawal from all
non-Israeli territory, with only minor reciprocal border
rectifications.
For decades Israel has been settling on territory
which does not belong to it, against the wishes of the
Palestinian people, to whom the territory does belong
and for whom freedom from military occupation is
long overdue. Is it right that their suffering — as
highlighted again in the most recent report of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
focusing on the humanitarian impact of the settlements
policy — draws from us, the international community,
year after year, only the thinnest response, best
encapsulated by the word “noted”?
It is deeply regrettable how in recent years the
Security Council has proved itself unable to adopt a
position on the issue of settlements. The transfer by the
occupying Power of parts of its own population into
the territory it occupies represents a clear and
continuing serious violation of the laws and customs
applicable in international armed conflict as codified
by article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
which is defined as a criminal act in article
8(2)(b)(viii) of the Rome Statute.
After all, the Council is obliged, under the terms
of Articles 24, paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1,
of the United Nations Charter — articles which
necessarily go together — to act in accordance with the
purposes of the Charter, and one of those purposes is
“the principles of justice and international law”.
How can the exercise of the veto by a permanent
member on the basis of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the

10

Charter, in respect of the Israeli settlements being built
in the occupied Palestinian territories, fit in with the
two other Articles of the Charter I just mentioned:
Article 24, paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1?
Are we comfortable with the fact that some of the
permanent members can, by their actions, make the
Council seemingly bypass the principles of justice and
international law? The argument is, of course,
applicable not just to transfer and settlement-building,
but also to other serious violations of international law
and international criminal law, and not just restricted to
the consideration of Israeli conduct, but also to the
conduct of others in our immediate neighbourhood
within the Middle East. Can the veto be used or
threatened like this, so unrestrictedly, when the
violations are so serious? And why should, in any case,
Article 27, paragraph 3, eclipse in importance Article
24, paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1?
All of this is lamentable, I am afraid. It is small
wonder that, when I served with the United Nations in
the Balkans in the early 1990s, the Council and its
actions seemed on many occasions to us to be so
distant from the bloody events unfolding before us
there.
The actions of the Israeli settler movement in the
occupied Palestinian territories must, for obvious
reasons, now stop, and the deep suffering of the
Palestinian people must be brought to an end through
the establishment of their own State on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
The Israelis will on occasion say to us that
resolving the conflict is less a matter of law than of
psychology, and, given the rhythms and the very real,
catastrophic traumas of Jewish historical experience,
they are cautious about placing their trust in anybody,
let alone, they say, in us, the Arabs. And perhaps, we
must concede, we could have done more to better
understand that point, done more to develop greater
trust by, inter alia, better explaining the terms of the
Arab Peace Initiative to the Israeli public. On the other
hand, the actions of States must also be guided by
customary international law, which the Council itself
must uphold and not undermine. Moreover, our deep
opposition to the policy of settlement-building and our
repeated condemnation of it, which we reiterate today,
is not founded on some form of genetically based
enmity or bigotry towards the Jewish people, and any

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

assertion of that is thoroughly distasteful to us, for it is
simply not true.
What it is built on is a continuing, three-decadelong violation of international humanitarian law,
confirmed by the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of 2004 and understood as such by
the vast majority of States existing in the world today.
Finally, the exploratory talks currently under way
in Jordan are not inconsistent with the law; far from it.
The key, as most of us know, to the resolution of the
settlements issue politically relies on the formulation
of an early agreement on the border rectifications, on
the basis of the interpretation just mentioned in my
statement. We hope that there will be a positive
outcome in this regard soon, opening the way for the
much-needed final status negotiations, which will
ultimately lead to freedom, security and peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I begin by thanking
your country, South Africa, and you personally,
Mr. President, for steering this important open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. I convey our
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing this morning. We are also grateful to His
Excellency Mr. Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim, Deputy
Minister of International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa, for his presence in chairing the meeting
and delivering a statement.
The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statements of the representatives of Egypt and
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Organization of the Islamic Cooperation,
respectively. In addition, I wish to briefly make certain
points that Bangladesh believes to be of importance.
May I congratulate Palestine on becoming a
member of UNESCO — the first United Nations
agency to admit it as a full member, in December 2011.
States members of UNESCO deserve credit for
adopting that resolution.
My delegation commends the recent meeting for
negotiations between Palestine and Israel brokered by
Jordan. We appreciate the efforts of King Abdullah II
of Jordan and the country’s Foreign Minister,
Mr. Nasser Judeh, in facilitating that meeting.

12-21419

We reiterate our concern over the impact of
Israel’s continued settlement activity in the West Bank
and its adverse effects on economic development and
Palestinians’ access to basic services. The ongoing
blockade of Gaza and the impact that the closure has
had on economic development and on the plight of
those living in the area is also worrying.
We are concerned about the destruction by the
occupying Power of properties, homes and economic
institutions and the construction of the wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around
East Jerusalem, contrary to international law. Those
actions have hampered the already critical socioeconomic situation faced by the Palestinian population.
We also express our concern about the inhuman
treatment of Palestinian prisoners languishing in Israeli
jails.
We also condemn the detention of the Palestinian
Legislative Council Speaker, Mr. Aziz Dweik. We
expect the occupying forces to release him
immediately as his imprisonment is a violation of
international law and human rights principles.
Moreover, his detention does not help to create an
environment conducive to a dialogue for a two-State
solution. We are saddened and puzzled and find
difficulty in understanding that the Jewish people, who
suffered discrimination and ill-treatment, are now
perpetrating inhuman ill-treatment towards the
Palestinians.
My delegation believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention; the relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly Security Council resolutions 242 (1968),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978); the principle of land for
peace; the Madrid terms of reference, which guarantee
Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories back to the 4 June 1967 line; the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative are the best
guides for achieving a two-State solution.
The principled support of the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination from all
corners of the globe, both bilaterally and multilaterally,
has been an essential pillar of Palestinian resilience
over the decades. It is heartening to note at least 131
countries have recognized the State of Palestine on the
basis of the 1967 borders. It would therefore be
morally befitting for this body to unanimously respect
the will of the majority of Member States and to
endorse the application of Palestine.

11

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

With regard to the situation in Lebanon and the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights, my delegation calls
upon the concerned parties to fully respect Lebanon’s
sovereignty and stop the recurrence of breaches of
resolution 1701 (2006). We further urge the occupying
State to immediately halt its actions to alter the legal,
physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights, in accordance with resolution
497 (1981).
In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh’s longstanding position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let us remind stakeholders that neither occupation nor
the destruction of Palestinian houses and olive trees
can help to achieve peace for the people of Israel. The
principle of live-and-let-live in harmony within the
legal, not the occupied jurisdiction, will lead to peace
and security for the States of Israel and Palestine.
Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region — both Arabs
and Israelis — and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side and in peace with all its
neighbours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for arranging this
open debate on the situation on the Middle East and
Palestine. We have started a new year, while popular
uprisings and the aspiration of the people in the Middle
East to democracy, the rule of law, independence and
rejection of foreign domination, as well as their
devotion to Islamic values, bear fruit.
One of the prime objectives of our foreign policy
is to strengthen the trust between the Islamic Republic
of Iran and our neighbours and the countries in the
region through active engagement, interaction and
partnership. The countries of the Middle East share a
common interest in the region’s security and long-term
stability, and each should play its role in promoting
regional socio-economic development. Obviously, a
stable, economically flourishing and prosperous
Middle East would create an ideal situation for each
and every country in the region to move forward on the
path of development and economic growth. Our

12

continued commitment towards brotherly relations with
our neighbours and regional partners in the areas of
security and economic development is therefore a goal
seriously pursued by my Government.
Mischievous attempts are being made to sow
discord and create divisions among the nations in the
Middle East region. They have tried to divide peoples
by fomenting sectarian, ethnical and religious
differences. The fact is that the nations of the region,
with their various ethnic and religious diversities, have
lived together in harmony and coexistence for
centuries.
We condemn the continuation of the Israeli
blockade imposed on Gaza by land, sea and air. We
believe that it is an aggressive and savage action that
breaches all international laws and norms, constitutes a
crime against humanity and poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, as well as regional
stability. The blockade also constitutes a collective
punishment that is unconditionally prohibited by the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which deals with the rights
and obligations of belligerent States.
The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the
settlement of the Palestinian crisis would be achievable
only if the inalienable rights of the people of occupied
Palestine are fully recognized, restored and maintained.
Regrettably, due to the lack of attention to the root
causes of the crisis, the Middle East conflict has
remained unsolved for more than six decades. There
have been numerous reasons for such failure, which
include the continued occupation of the Palestinian and
other Arab occupied territories by the Israeli regime, as
well as its persistent violations of the rights of the
Palestinian people, including the right to selfdetermination and, especially, the legitimate and
inalienable right of the Palestinian refugees to return to
their homeland.
We believe that the only solution to the
Palestinian issue and the establishment of peace is the
restoration of the sovereignty right to Palestine and
putting an end to occupation. The Palestinian people
should be allowed to express their opinions freely
regarding their own fate and future and the kind of
State and Government they want to have through a
referendum with the participation of all Palestinian
people.
There are disturbing reports on the worsening
situation of Palestinian political prisoners and

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

detainees illegally imprisoned and detained by the
Israeli regime, in violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law. Last week, a
number of elected officials were arrested and detained
by the Israeli regime, including Aziz Dweik, Speaker
of the Palestinian Legislative Council. The Council
should condemn this new wave in the detention
campaign against the members of the Legislative
Council and demand that the Israeli regime
immediately release all lawmakers who continue to be
imprisoned or arbitrarily detained.
The Israeli regime has continued its violations of
the land, sea and air space of Lebanon and refuses to
withdraw from the villages it occupies in Lebanon. The
Golan Heights are still under occupation. In spite of the
mounting international calls and efforts to end the
Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian and other
lands under its occupation, the Israeli regime continues
to violate international law. These occupations and acts
of aggression should stop immediately.
Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made this morning to my country by the
representative of the Israeli regime. That representative
has repeatedly diverted from the main debate in this
Chamber — that is to say, the issue of Palestine — and
has raised issues that have no relevance to the main
debate at hand, obviously in an attempt to deflect
attention from the long list of crimes and atrocities it
has committed and continues to commit, such as
occupation, aggression, militarism, State terrorism —
including masterminding the assassination of innocent
Iranian nuclear scientists — and crimes against
humanity.
Needless to say, my country is a leading nation in
rejecting and opposing all kinds of weapons of mass
destruction, including nuclear weapons. As a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Islamic Republic of Iran has on
many occasions, including in this Chamber, declared
loudly and clearly that nuclear weapons, being
inhumane, have no place in our defence strategy.
Furthermore, Iran’s peaceful nuclear activities are
under the supervision of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA); many inspection teams have
visited our installations, and another team from the
IAEA will visit Iran at the end of this week.
Furthermore, Iran has striven within the United
Nations framework for the realization of the nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East.

12-21419

However, what is urgent for the Council to
consider and take action on is the unlawful possession
of nuclear weapons by the most dangerous and biggest
threat to the world — the Israeli regime — which has
always remained the main and unique source of
destabilization in the Middle East. Given its past
history of aggression, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including ethnic cleansing, which it has
committed over the past decades in the region, it is
expected that the Council shall condemn the occupying
regime for the possession of nuclear weapons, urge it
to abandon such weapons, call on it to accede to the
NPT without delay, and demand that it promptly place
all its nuclear facilities under IAEA full-scope
safeguards. Peace and stability cannot be achieved in
the Middle East so long as the massive Israeli nuclear
arsenals and war rhetoric deployed by the officials of
that regime continue to threaten the region and beyond.
Finally, I also wish to give a short reply to a
reference made to my country in the statement of the
Ambassador of France, who accused Iran of sending
arms to Syria. We are surprised to hear that false and
baseless allegation. This allegation is another attempt
to whitewash the firm and verified report that France,
in line with its hegemonic policies of the past, is
arming illegal armed groups in Syria and is responsible
for fuelling the conflict, the violations of human rights
and the deaths of many civilians in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending your delegation, Sir, for convening this
important debate. The Sri Lanka delegation associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM).
The United Nations, since its inception, has
pursued the lofty goal of bringing about a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian issue. Over the years,
despite many laudable efforts, we have witnessed little
tangible progress, while the ongoing conflict has had
wide ramifications for regional and international peace
and security. It is our hope that this year, against the
backdrop of the transformation sweeping through the
region, will bring a renewal of hope, trust and
constructive thinking among the parties that will lead
to much needed progress on this issue.

13

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

In this context, my delegation is pleased to note
that, in recent months, there have been certain
developments that bode well for the future. The two
sides, since December 2011, have continued their
discussions with the Quartet. Hopefully, this will
contribute to de-escalating tension. The Israeli
Government has resumed the transfer of tax and
customs revenues to the Palestinian Authority and has
gone ahead with the second phase of prisoner
exchanges.
The blockade of the Gaza Strip has been lifted to
some extent. The Palestinian security forces have made
progress with the security situation in the West Bank,
including the seizure of unexploded ordnance. There
have been no recent incidents of rockets being fired
into Israel. The implementation of United Nations
projects in Gaza, especially schools, is proceeding with
the construction materials entering through the Kerem
Shalom crossing. We hope that these positive
developments will continue to enhance confidencebuilding and to further consolidation of the peace
process.
Along with such positive developments, there are
also some issues of concern, including incidents of
violence in Gaza, the demolition of Palestinian
structures in the West Bank and in Jerusalem, Israel’s
continuing settlement activity in the West Bank and
Jerusalem, the ongoing blockade of Gaza and the
impact the closure has had on economic activity, and
particularly on children in that area, as highlighted by
the Department of Political Affairs in its briefing on
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.
These will not help in building confidence and
will take the two parties away from establishing a
climate conducive to finding a way forward towards
the much-cherished two-State solution. We must not
forget the need for Israel to withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon. Its
failure to do so will add to the mistrust, tension,
frustration and instability in the region. All sides have
an obligation to desist from acts that generate
uncertainty, suspicion and intolerance.
We appreciate the ongoing efforts by
international donors, regional organizations and the
United Nations agencies in alleviating the sufferings of
innocent civilians, especially children, and in providing
protection for them. I would also like to commend the

14

work that has been carried out by the United Nations
Agency for Relief and Works for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East in assisting millions of Palestinian
people in need, especially in the Gaza Strip.
The Member States of the United Nations also
have a critical role to play in upholding the relevant
international laws and United Nations resolutions. We
align with the NAM view that efforts by the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
ensure respect for the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, would
be a vital contribution.
Sri Lanka’s position with regard to the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian People has been
unswerving. We have always supported a peaceful
negotiated settlement to the Palestinian issue and have
called for the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment of a
two-State solution. We hope that Palestine’s application
for admission to full membership in the United Nations
will receive sympathetic consideration this year.
We remain convinced that the two-State solution
is the only sustainable solution for this issue for Israel,
Palestine and their neighbours to coexist in peace and
harmony. The political unity and economic
advancement of the Palestinian people will contribute
to the viability of the two-State solution. In that regard,
we welcome the holding of the forthcoming Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections. The Government
and people of Sri Lanka would like to reassure them of
our continued support and solidarity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): Let me first turn to
the situation in Syria. Iceland condemns the
widespread human rights violations taking place in
Syria. We also condemn the recent terror attacks in the
country. The Syrian authorities must put an immediate
end to the violence. We urge the Syrian Government to
heed the call made by the Secretary-General for a
credible, inclusive and legitimate Syrian-led process of
comprehensive political change that will address the
democratic aspirations of the Syrian people. We also
urge the Security Council to do its utmost to prevent
the situation in Syria from escalating and to contribute
to a solution that will maintain peace and security.

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

Turning to the question of Palestine, let me at the
outset reiterate Iceland’s firm support for the peaceful
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
two-State solution. Developments on the ground, such
as the ongoing settlement activities in the West Bank,
including in East Jerusalem, remain the key obstacle to
peace. Settlement activities, which are carried out
unilaterally by the occupying Power and in violation of
international humanitarian law, continue to create
conditions on the ground that are rapidly making the
two-State solution unattainable. Time is running out,
and the Council has to take that into account in its
deliberations.
Living under occupation in and of itself creates a
security concern for the Palestinians. Settler violence,
including their so-called price tag policy, has
increasingly added an extra concern. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the weekly average of settler attacks resulting in
Palestinian casualties and property damage increased
by 40 per cent in 2011 as compared to 2010, and by
over 165 per cent as compared to 2009. At the same
time, more than 90 per cent of monitored complaints
regarding settler violence filed by Palestinians with the
Israeli police in recent years have been closed without
indictment. We call on Israel to shoulder its obligation
under international humanitarian law and human rights
law to prevent attacks against civilians and their
property and to ensure that all incidents of settler
violence are investigated in an impartial and
independent manner.
Iceland welcomed the agreement between Fatah
and Hamas last spring on reconciliation, but we await
further steps by the two factions. Presidential and
parliamentary elections in Palestine are crucial for
bringing Palestine forward, and we urge the Palestinian
parties to heed the calls of their own people to work
towards the realization of an agreement as soon as
possible.
Since I last addressed the Council (see
S/PV.6636), my country has formally recognized
Palestine as an independent and sovereign State within
the pre-1967 borders and established full diplomatic
relations with it. I would like to recall that Iceland
supported Israel when it brought its case to the United
Nations and emerged with statehood. In our view,
Palestinian demands for self-determination and
statehood are equally legitimate. In the middle of a
democratic revolution brought on by the fresh breeze

12-21419

of the Arab Spring, we cannot deny Palestine its right
to statehood. In fact, it is long overdue.
Iceland reiterates its appeal to the members of the
Security Council to seize the historical opportunity
they have been given to contribute to the realization of
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people for
self-determination by recommending to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations. There is no
contradiction between Palestine seeking membership of
the United Nations and the Quartet-led peace process,
which we fully support. United Nations membership
would be an affirmation by States Members about our
commitment to the two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you warmly,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We pay tribute to
the wisdom and ability you have demonstrated in
conducting the Council’s deliberations, enriching its
proceedings by organizing open debates on very
important issues, including our periodic debate today
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I should also like to thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing,
information and important observations on recent
developments in the region.
At a time when our region is experiencing
significant changes and as the people of region struggle
to regain freedom, dignity and the rights to a decent
life and to determine their own fate, and as we hope for
a better future that is more equitable, we still see the
terrible and painful suffering of the valiant, brotherly
Palestinian people, who have fought for decades for the
same rights, especially the right to live on their
historical territory in an independent and free State. We
are also seeing a serious paralysis in the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, as well as the same
repressive and provocative practices on the part of
Israel, the occupying Power, which flouts the dignity of
the Palestinians, deprives them of the most basic rights
and jeopardizes their lives, property and living
conditions.
The international community admires the changes
and the transitions towards democracy and dignity

15

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

among the peoples of the region, and was the first to
commend them on those preliminary accomplishments.
However, the same international community is
startlingly silent in the face of Israel’s blatant defiance
of every international instrument, in particular those
pertaining to the obligations of an occupying Power
vis-à-vis the people occupied. In that regard, my
country’s delegation would like to recall some painful
facts regarding the situation in occupied Palestinian
territory. We would like to share with Member States
certain facts that threaten to escalate events in the
region and that require courageous positions that would
lessen tensions in the region and lead to the
achievement of peace.
First of all, the gravity of the process of the
Judaization of Jerusalem, and faith in peaceful
coexistence among the three monotheistic religions,
call for mutual respect among those three religions as
the very foundation of peace and security throughout
the world. On that we must all agree. The Holy City of
Jerusalem is the example par excellence to illustrate
that historical reality, which must be protected against
any attempt to distort or change it. We are all aware of
the significance of that Holy City for Muslims,
Christians and Jews, which should impel us to be
vigilant with respect to any plans to change the
religious, demographic and geographical character of
the city, as has been the practice for years under the
Israeli occupation, despite repeated calls on the part of
the international community to stop such practices.
My country condemns the Judaization of the city
of Jerusalem, which seeks to change its character and
its image in a colonial and expansionist way, to other
ideological ends. We would therefore call upon the
international community to ask the occupying Power to
respect both the legal and the religious status of that
Holy City, a status that was not addressed in resolution
181 (II), of 1947.
Secondly, with regard to the increase in
settlement activities, which threaten the establishment
of a Palestinian State and peace itself, it is curious that
the Government of Israel, which tries to portray itself
as serious about returning to the peace process, still
acts in a way that contradicts the most basic principles
of peace and the rules of international law. We wonder
about the allegations by Israel that have enabled
settlements and residential units to be built, which
increased by 20 per cent in 2011 as compared to their
number in 2010, to say nothing about the acceleration

16

in the adoption of legal frameworks to recognize the
legality of those settlements. According to a report on
the occupied Palestinian territory published in
December 2011 by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, that cannot but
have an effect on any attempts made to resolve the
situation, because the historic territory of Palestine is
shrinking on a daily basis due to the practices that I
have mentioned, which seek to promote demographic
changes and the Israeli presence on Palestinian land
and to impose a fait accompli that could affect the
future of negotiations on final status issues.
On a number of occasions, the Quartet has
asserted that any unilateral action that could be
prejudicial to those fundamental issues would be null
and void and would have no legal basis. Acts of
colonization and the establishment of settlements
causes the fragmentation of Palestinian territory —
which risks undermining the foundation of a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State that could exist side by
side with Israel, the occupying Power — since
expansionist policies have been clearly condemned
under international law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. For that reason, putting
a stop to those policies would not be considered a
sacrifice, but should be done in order to ensure respect
for international law. Respect for those principles
should be approached without exclusivity and without
discrimination among States.
Thirdly, with respect to the legality of Palestine’s
demand for membership in the United Nations, my
country was among the first to support that claim,
whose legitimacy is historically, morally and legally
grounded. Tunisia believes that, after six decades of
struggle, the Palestinian people have the right to have
their existence recognized by the international
community. In that regard, I would also like to recall
the path along which my country embarked last year to
combat oppression and authoritarianism. My country
fully supports the struggle of the Palestinian people
because we are firmly convinced of the legality of their
claim, which, moreover, has been recognized by the
overwhelming majority of the States Members of the
Organization.
In that respect, my country believes that nothing
in that claim should be considered a unilateral action,
for the measure was put before the United Nations in
the context of full respect for the existing rules in that

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

regard. The Palestinian people therefore have the right
to be recognized by the Organization, just as they were
at UNESCO.
My country’s delegation would also like to praise
the Palestinians who are working for national
reconciliation. We would like to pay homage to the
wisdom of the Palestinian leadership, which is
attempting to promote their national interests in order
to transcend their differences and to close the gaps that
exist among the different Palestinian parties. Along
those lines, Tunisia hopes that the Palestinian side will
close ranks to tackle their internal differences so as not
to give the occupying Power an excuse that would
allow it to evade its responsibilities and continue its
repressive policies.
My delegation calls for the immediate and
complete lifting of the Gaza blockade, which continues
to exacerbate the humanitarian suffering of almost
2 million Palestinians, despite Israel’s allegation to the
contrary. In fact, the suffering due to the closing of
more crossing points has increased.
The Arab States presented Israel, the occupying
Power, with a peace initiative that they agreed to
respect and that reflects their sincere desire to achieve
a lasting, just and comprehensive peace that guarantees
peace and security in the region and allows its peoples
to focus on development and reconstruction. However,
the occupying Power continues to adopt the same
policies, which consist of evading its responsibilities
and commitments, by implementing programmes and
projects aimed at transforming the reality on the
ground. But no one is any longer taken in by Israel’s
claims, because Israel does not have the right to
trample democracy or to crush the rights of others.
Democracy is no longer Israel’s monopoly. Democracy
is the diametric opposite of occupation.
In conclusion, Tunisia calls for caution in the face
of the gravity of the situation and stresses the need to
end Israel’s policy of colonial oppression when people
elsewhere are being liberated from injustice,
authoritarianism and persecution. While some welcome
these changes, selectively, they ignore a bitter struggle
that has been waged by one people for over six
decades. We all have an historic responsibility in this
regard that should lead us to take firm positions and
bolder measures to implement the desired peace.
The President: I give the floor
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

12-21419

to

the

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for coming to New York to
preside over this important meeting of the Security
Council. Your interest in this matter is typical of your
friendly country, South Africa, which suffered decades
of injustice, racial discrimination, repression and
persecution by a minority that claimed superiority over
your genuine and sterling people merely because it was
of European descent.
When Syria courageously defended the struggle
of the African National Congress, under the leadership
of Nelson Mandela from his apartheid prison cell,
some who were entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security in the Security Council
considered him to be a terrorist. I should therefore like
to reiterate my thanks to you, Sir, for attending this
meeting and for demonstrating your friendly country’s
considerable interest in the situation in the Middle
East.
Since today’s topic, “The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question”, was first
inscribed on the Security Council’s agenda, some have
sought to make the Council’s deliberations on this
issue a matter of the mere delivery of speeches serving
unrelated political ends. We meet today once again to
call on the Security Council to take serious action to
end Israel’s occupation of Arab lands, inhumane racial
policies, and violations of international instruments
and norms, and to hold Israel to account for its feverish
settlement campaigns and systematic murder of
civilians in the occupied Palestinian and Arab
territories.
We call on the Council to help the Palestinian
people to regain all its legitimate rights, including its
right to establish its independent Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967, with its capital in
Jerusalem, and the right of Palestinian refugees to
return to their homes, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. That is the heart
of this agenda item; any other issue injected by other
delegations serves merely to distract the Council with
manoeuvres and tricks that do not serve but undermine
the interests of international peace and security.
We have listened closely to many statements this
morning, and were surprised to see some speakers
eagerly discover that the topic under discussion was no
longer the situation in the Middle East, which, as all
know, is directly related to ending Israel’s occupation

17

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

of Arab territories; preventing Israel, the occupying
Power, from undermining the peace process; and
drawing
international
attention
to
Israel’s
warmongering in the region, in blatant coordination
with some Council members and States of our region.
Some speakers have found that the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East has nothing to do with
Israel and its occupation of Arab territories, but is in
fact related to Syria, while others have come to the
illusory conclusion that the matter is related to Iran.
Others still may have come to the conclusion that
the item on the Middle East no longer belongs on the
Council’s agenda because they are under the
impression that Israel actually implemented the
resolutions of international legitimacy by squelching
the question of Palestine and the principles of
international law, even though it has not yet withdrawn
from the occupied territories in the Golan, southern
Lebanon and Palestine; shut down its machinery of
repression, settlement activities, assassination and
persecution in the occupied Arab territories; or
implemented General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
which stipulates the return of Palestinian refugees to
the cities, villages and homes from which they were
evicted in 1948 and 1967. This was the grand
discovery made by some speakers this morning.
Despite all international demands and resolutions
regarding the termination of Israel’s occupation of
Arab territories and the establishment of the
Palestinian State, unfortunately the Security Council
has not risen to its responsibilities under the Charter.
No visible progress whatsoever has been made; on the
contrary, the situation is deteriorating under Israel’s
aggressive escalation of its unbridled settlement
activities, which in 2011 reached their highest level in
10 years. The construction of settlements increased by
20 per cent in 2011. These disturbing statistics,
compiled by the Israeli organization Peace Now, also
reflect an increase of some 50 per cent this year in
settler aggression against Palestinian civilians and
Christian and Islamic holy sites over the previous year.
In addition, Israel, the occupying Power, is criminally
obsessed with cutting down olive trees.
All of those attacks take place either pursuant to
decisions of the Israeli Government or under the direct
protection of the Israeli authorities. Recently, Israeli
authorities evacuated 90,000 people in the Negev
desert from their homes and villages. We state time and
again that this adversarial situation presages disastrous

18

consequences for the region and will bring about war at
the expense of peace.
It is disconcerting that the Israeli escalation
enjoys unqualified financial, military and political
backing by some States that are basically responsible
for all of the tensions and conflicts in our region since
the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916 and the Balfour
Declaration of 1917. Historical, in-depth research has
recently shown that the confidential 1916 Sykes-Picot
Agreement between the two colonial Powers, France
and the United Kingdom, was designed to prepare for
the Balfour Declaration, which came a year later.
Today, those States falsely arrogate to themselves
the right to defend human rights — rights that they
have nothing to do with — and civilians and claim that
they oppose settlement activities and support the
establishment of two States. Those States have never
taken any action to stem or stop the settlement
activities that would lead to the establishment of a
Palestinian State and bring peace. Those States have
never tried to criticize Israel or apply any serious
pressure on that country. Rather, they prevent the
Security Council from taking any action on that score.
Similarly, we remind the Security Council here
that the United States has prevented the issuance of a
press statement condemning the settlements, giving
Israel illegitimate immunity for all the crimes it has
perpetrated in the occupied Palestinian territory.
In that connection, we would like to note that the
League of Arab States has warned of the continued
flow of funds from Europe and the United States to
radical Israeli organizations that support settlement
activity in Palestine and the occupied Syrian Golan.
There are so many questions, since none of the States I
just mentioned has paid heed to that warning, just as all
resolutions, statements and appeals made by the Arab
League over long decades — all calling for measures
to halt the Israeli massacres and violations in the
occupied Arab territories — have been ignored.
Yet those States themselves hastened to receive
anything issuing from the League of Arab States with
regard to Syria while Syria is absent from the
deliberations taking place within the Arab League,
even if the position arrived at is not consensual. The
purpose of that approach is to use the matter
negatively, as a weapon or Trojan horse against Syria,
in order to widen the crisis and internationalize the
situation in the country in implementation of their

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

agendas of flagrant interference. This was mentioned in
some of the statements delivered of my colleagues this
morning — and that despite the fact that a number of
members of the League of Arab States reject making
the League a device for calling for aggressive external
interference after the failure of its mission. Therefore,
the credibility of the Arab observers is being targeted
and their reports torpedoed, in order to justify future
aggression against Syria in all forms — military,
diplomatic, political, economic and in the media —
regardless of the cost.
Israel, defying international legitimacy, continues
to refuse to return the occupied Syrian Golan to Syria
and abide by the resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly resolution 497 (1981), which
considered the annexation of the Syrian Golan null and
void and with no legal effect. Israel continues its
settlement activities in the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as acts of terrorism and a policy of apartheid and
oppression against Syrian citizens chafing under the
yoke of its occupation. It also continues inhuman,
coercive detention practices that are contrary to United
Nations standards for the treatment of prisoners.
Further, the Israeli occupation authorities’
attempts to dismember the occupied Syrian Golan by
building a separation apartheid wall east of Majd
al-Shams have not been enough for Israel. It continues
its aggressive policy in the Golan, tightening the grip
on Syrian citizens and the environment, burning land,
destroying crops and engaging in the unfair distribution
of water by drawing water from Mas’adah Lake in the
occupied Golan for the exclusive use of the settlers,
which has caused grave and considerable harm to the
environment.
We tried to convey to the Secretary-General and
the members of the Security Council our official
complaints on that point. Regrettably, those complaints
were not heeded. Rather, the representatives of the
Secretary-General have not referred to those grave
Israeli violations in their monthly briefings to the
Security Council under the agenda item entitled “The
situation in the Middle East”. Israel has thus been
emboldened to persist in its pursuit of aggressive
policies and gross violations, which raises questions
about the credibility of the Secretariat’s ability to deal
objectively with our legitimate issues.
I would like to express here our dissatisfaction
with the disregard shown by Mr. Fernandez-Taranco

12-21419

this morning when he failed to mention the terrible
situation in the occupied Syrian Golan. That disregard
can no longer be glossed over, given that the officials
of the Secretariat have had their attention drawn to the
situation on dozens of occasions and since they are
compelled to include a paragraph on Israeli practices in
the Syrian Golan in their briefings. Despite our
acceptance of the very few references in previous
briefings, what happened today is egregious and makes
it clear that the Secretariat must reconsider its position.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the new
members of the Council — Morocco, Pakistan,
Azerbaijan, Guatemala and Togo — and to wish them
every success as they uphold the issues and principles
of justice and equity and reject hegemony.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation endorses the statement made this
morning by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Unfortunately, since the last time that the
Security Council met to discuss these items, exactly
three months ago (see S/PV.6636), the situation in the
Middle East has not changed in any significant way.
Cuba reiterates its support for the application made by
the President of the Palestinian Authority for
recognition of Palestine as a full State Member of the
United Nations.
As we all know, however, powerful interests
oppose that application, and it is those same interests
that have withdrawn their support for UNESCO for
having accepted Palestine into full membership in that
organization, as is only just. The rounds of negotiations
by the Quartet with representatives of Israel and
Palestine separately over the past three months have
led to no reduction in provocations or produced any
concrete proposals on matters such as the delimitation
of borders and security mechanisms in the region,
despite the fact that the parties had stated their
readiness to assess in a constructive way reciprocal
actions that might help to reduce tensions and the
Quartet had set a deadline of 26 January for the
submission of proposals by the parties.
There must be a resumption of the negotiation
process, which was interrupted by Israel’s
intransigence and its decision to continue to build

19

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Israel, as we all know, continues to vandalize
Palestinian assets, including in Jerusalem. The Israeli
authorities are identifying areas in East Jerusalem in
which to establish national parks, with the clear
intention of continuing to hamper the development of
Palestinian neighbourhoods and districts.
Violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinians
and their assets has become systematic. Suffice it to
say that the average weekly number of attacks by
settlers increased by 40 per cent in 2011 compared to
the previous year, and by 165 per cent in comparison to
2009. The abuse and harassment of Palestinian
prisoners continues in Israeli prisons.
We reiterate our profound concern regarding the
critical humanitarian situation in Gaza, which has been
compounded by the ongoing imposition of the total
blockade by Israel, preventing access to humanitarian
aid, goods and supplies and freedom of movement into
and out of the Gaza Strip. That situation must be
resolved without further delay.
The Security Council cannot stand by and merely
engage in meetings and thematic debates every three
months on these matters. It is essential that the
Security Council play its proper role in defending
international peace and security, and that it adopt
concrete, practical measures to ensure that Israel ends
its deliberate policies, which flout international law.
The Powers that hold the anachronistic veto power
must not be allowed to perpetuate their complicity in
this state of affairs or to continue to manipulate the
Security Council in pursuit of their own private
interests, as occurred with the imposition and
reinterpretation of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973
(2011).
Today we are aware that deployment has begun
on bases for unmanned drone aircraft, which cause
further uncertainty; that natural resources are being
exploited to the benefit of outside interests; and that
insecurity is increasing in areas of the Middle East that
supposedly were to be defended through those
resolutions. Cuba reaffirms yet again that all those
measures and actions, including illegal construction
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian
Golan since 1967, are breaches of international law,
international agreements, and of resolutions and the
Charter of the United Nations.

20

It is not by chance that attempts are being made
to paint for Syria the same scenario of manipulation
and pressure that was embodied in resolutions 1970
(2011) and 1973 (2011). That is precisely what is being
sought by certain major Powers and their allies so as to
bring the Syrian Government into conflict with its
brothers in the League of Arab States. The people of
Syria have the ability and the wisdom to resolve their
issues without outside interference or pressure of any
kind.
Cuba reaffirms its position in favour of a just and
lasting peace for all peoples of the Middle East that
will put an end to the occupation of all territories
occupied by Israel since 1967 and guarantee the
exercise of all rights, including the right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people through the
establishment of the independent State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this very important meeting and for
giving me the opportunity to speak.
As I commence my statement, it is my pleasure,
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC) group in New York, to extend sincere
congratulations to the States that have joined the
Security Council as non-permanent members, and to
wish them every success.
At the outset, the OIC group would like to
welcome the important decision made recently by the
Kingdom of Thailand to recognize the State of
Palestine on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. The OIC group urges the
States that have not yet done so to uphold their
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
by recognizing the State of Palestine and supporting
the efforts being made for Palestine to obtain full
membership in the United Nations and to take its
rightful place among the community of nations.
Our deliberations today have special significance,
given that, most regrettably, they coincide with Israel’s
continuing illegal actions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
Israel continues to disregard the mounting
international calls and efforts to enforce the relevant
United Nations resolutions that call for ending the

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

Israeli military occupation of the Arab lands, its
violations of international law and its denial of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. The OIC
Group remains firm in its conviction that the Security
Council must act effectively to ensure the full
compliance of Israel with its legal obligations and
commitments, and end its daily acts of aggression.
Israel is moving forward with its attempts to alter
the demographic fabric of occupied East Jerusalem by
expelling thousands of Palestinians and replacing them
with illegal settlers. That violation is accompanied by a
deliberate and conscious effort to construct and expand
such unjustifiable settlements and build the “Apartheid
Wall” around the occupied city of East Jerusalem.
Similarly, illegalities such as the appropriation
and annexation of Palestinian lands, military actions,
imposing oppressive security measures, constricting
movement and restricting access to religious sites,
including Christian and Muslim places of worship,
have become a part of the everyday oppression of
Palestinians. Even today, Israel is conducting
excavations underneath the sacred Al-Aqsa mosque,
which aim to completely alter the facts on the ground
and isolate occupied East Jerusalem from its natural
Palestinian surroundings.
That cycle of oppression and fear represents not
only a grave violation by the Israeli authorities and
settlers vis-à-vis the unprotected and vulnerable
Palestinian civilians, but also a challenge to the
international community and the United Nations, which
have a special responsibility to strongly call on Israel
to end those acts of aggression and respect
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Israeli policies and practices in East Jerusalem
are particularly alarming given the recent deliberations
of the Israeli Knesset on a bill declaring Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel and the Jewish people. Such
deliberations are not only directed against humanity’s
heritage and history but also challenge international
law and international resolutions, which legitimize and
affirm the fact that Jerusalem is part of the Palestinian
territories occupied by Israel in 1967. The OIC Group
therefore has very serious concerns about this issue,
which threatens the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.
Given all those circumstances, the international
vision of a two-State solution is diminishing with

12-21419

Israel’s persistence in constructing illegal settlements,
with all the accompanying consequences.
The construction of the separation Wall is in clear
violation of international law and the categorical
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Those illegal and provocative actions on the part of
Israel have brought the entire Middle East peace
process to a standstill and undermined international
peace efforts.
The OIC Group affirms beyond question that an
international consensus on realizing a just and
comprehensive solution to the Middle East conflict
requires the enforcement of international law and
international resolutions. There must be full
acknowledgement and respect of the commitments and
pledges made in that regard, as embodied in the terms
of reference of the peace process, namely the relevant
United Nations resolutions; the Madrid terms of
reference, including the principle of land for peace; the
Arab Peace Initiative; and the Quartet road map. Every
effort must therefore be made, first of all by the
Security Council and the Quartet, to fulfil the
collective legal and moral responsibilities for the
maintenance of peace and justice in the region. That
will be attainable only by compelling Israel to abide by
international law and respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
At this crucial time in history, there has to be an
acknowledgement of and full support for Palestinian
State-building efforts, which are commendable. Since
the peace process, regrettably, remains stagnant, the
time has now come to recognize the independent State
of Palestine on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders.
This, in fact, is the cornerstone for the attainment of
stability, peace and security for Palestine, Israel and
other neighbouring countries in the region.
The OIC Group reaffirms that East Jerusalem
remains an integral part of the Palestinian territory
occupied by Israel since 1967, and that its illegal
annexation by Israel has gone unrecognized by the
international community. The Group reiterates the
centrality of the Palestinian cause for the entire Islamic
world; stresses the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic
character and profile of occupied East Jerusalem; and
strongly reaffirms the need to fully respect the sanctity
of the Islamic and Christian cultures.
Finally, the OIC joins the international
community in reaffirming that all actions taken, or to

21

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

be taken, by Israel to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status and institutional structure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, are to be made
null and void and have no legal effect. The OIC
demands that Israel abide fully and immediately by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of
4 June 1967, and thus implement Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In closing, the OIC Group wishes to reaffirm its
full support and solidarity with the Palestinian people
in their struggle to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their right of
return, to self-determination, and to the establishment
of their independent Palestinian State on their national
soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Mr. President, allow me first of all to
express my gratitude to you for the very timely
convening of today’s open debate of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation fully believes
that under your able leadership, the current debate will
bring about substantial results.
My delegation highly appreciates and fully
supports the statement made by His Excellency
Ambassador
Maged
Abdelaziz,
Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt and
Chair of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Middle East question, which arose with the
Israeli occupation of the Arab territories in 1948,
continues to be at a stalemate, despite the many United
Nations resolutions that have been adopted so far and
the various proposals, including the Arab Peace
Initiative, brought to the table for negotiation. That is
due entirely to Israel’s stand against peace and to the
prejudicial Middle East policies of some forces.
Palestinian land and other Arab territories, including
Jerusalem, are still under the Israeli military
occupation. The use of force continues to prevail and
the construction of settlements continues to increase.
That reality is negatively affecting the peace and
security process in the Middle East.

22

My delegation believes that an early solution to
the Palestinian problem is the core element of the
Middle East question. We must therefore put an end to
Israel’s military occupation, discrimination and
violations of human rights in Palestine at the earliest
possible date and allow the Palestinian people to
exercise their full rights for national selfdetermination.
It is also the position of my delegation that
mediation in the peace talks between Palestine and
Israel should be carried out in line with the principles I
have mentioned.
Palestinian membership in the United Nations in
particular is vital to the settlement of Middle East
question. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
officially recognized Palestine as a State in 1988. Since
then, we have extended our unreserved support and
solidarity to the efforts of the Palestinian people to
establish an independent sovereign State. In that
regard, my delegation strongly urges the Security
Council to take speedy action with regard to the
application for full United Nations membership
submitted by Palestine on 23 September 2011. My
delegation will continue to extend full support for
Palestinian membership in the United Nations.
My delegation takes this opportunity to draw the
Council’s attention to the violation by an unmanned
United States spy plane of Iranian air space on
4 December 2011. The United States drone invasion of
Iranian air space constitutes a clear violation of the
independence and territorial integrity of a sovereign
State. That act contravenes all universally accepted
international norms on sovereignty and the
inviolability of the airspace of sovereign countries.
While strongly denouncing such an act, my delegation
demands that the Security Council take appropriate
measures to stop such acts against sovereign States.
My delegation also would like to draw the
Council’s attention to Lebanon and the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights. Israel’s continued violations of the
sovereignty of Lebanon must be addressed and halted
immediately, as they are serious breaches of resolution
1701 (2006). My delegation strongly condemns Israel,
the occupying Power, for all its attempts to alter the
legal, physical and demographic status of the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights, and demands that Israel return
unconditionally to the borders of 4 June 1967, in

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

situation in Gaza can be improved. The following four
points are essential.

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
continue to stand firmly with the Palestinian and Arab
peoples in their struggle for peace, stability and their
just cause.

First, Palestinian revenues must be increased by a
widening of the tax base and improved tax collection.
Two thirds of such revenues are collected by Israel and
subsequently transferred to the Palestinian Authority
each month. There is scope for improving the
efficiency, transparency and predictability of that
mechanism.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway chairs the donor
support group for the Palestinian territory. We take the
floor today to draw attention to the dangers threatening
the foundations of a viable Palestinian State and to
point out that the removal of those dangers and
obstacles could clear the way for the Palestine State
without any further delay.
In recent years, we have witnessed unprecedented
progress in the quality and functioning of Palestinian
institutions, high levels of growth, improved living
conditions and security in the West Bank and the
revival of hope for the people. Those positive trends
were halted in 2011 and are now being reversed. Now,
early in 2012, reduced international financial support
and shrinking private-sector investment are increasing
the budget deficit and creating an acute liquidity crisis
for the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the Israeli
occupation undermines the potential for growth. In
particular, the Israeli restrictions of access for
Palestinians hamper economic activity in Area C of the
West Bank. Norway is gravely concerned about the
continued expansion of Israeli settlements in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The settlement activity is
illegal under international law and a lethal threat to the
two-State solution. The parties have the opportunity to
prove their commitments to a two-State solution
through concrete actions on the ground. In continuing
settlement activities, Israel is doing the opposite. Israel
must stop all settlement construction. The deep
impasse between the parties cannot endure without
undermining the vision of the two-State solution. That
is also why the efforts of Jordan to facilitate talks
within the framework proposed by the Quartet are so
important and must be supported.
The donor support group will reconvene in
Brussels on 21 March. The meeting will discuss how
we can enhance the sustainability of the Palestinian
Authority, how private-sector-led growth can be
strengthened in the Palestinian economy and how the

12-21419

Secondly, Israel must take further steps to ease
restrictions on access and movement on development,
trade and exports in the West Bank and Gaza.
Restrictions, in particular those in Area C, including
East Jerusalem, reduce the space in which the
Palestinians can sustain their livelihoods. According to
the United Nations, today 43 per cent of the West Bank
is essentially off-limits for Palestinian use. Palestinians
must be able to utilize their natural, productive and
land resources in Area C, which are crucial for a viable
Palestinian economy.
Thirdly, donors must continue to provide
assistance for covering Palestinian recurrent costs for a
transitional period in the time ahead. Without such
assistance it will be difficult to ensure the long-term
viability of the Palestinian Authority and the readiness
of the Palestinian institutions for statehood.
Finally, on Gaza, resolution 1860 (2009) calls
upon Member States to support international efforts to
alleviate the humanitarian and economic situation in
Gaza. The resolution also condemns all violence and
hostilities directed against civilians and all acts of
terrorism. While important progress has been made
with regard to the import of goods and the
implementation of infrastructure projects, those
improvements are not sufficient to provide the
economic growth that would realize the full economic
and social potential for the population in Gaza. At their
next meeting, donors must take further steps to find a
solution within the framework of resolution 1860
(2009) that lifts the closure and ensures movement and
access through the legitimate crossing points, while
also taking security challenges into account.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlMutairi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the South African
presidency for the convening of this meeting on the

23

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I should also like to congratulate the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council.
We reaffirm and support the statements made on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Arab Group
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
There can be no doubt that a meeting on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, at this time is very opportune. It reflects the
importance that the international community gives to
the situation of the Palestinian people in the light of
Israel’s violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The peoples and States of the region look to
the international community, in particular in the case of
the occupied Arab territories, to implement
international law and resolutions, since the region
continues to be unstable as a result of the disruption of
the peace process.
Israeli
violations
of
international
law,
international humanitarian law and human rights laws,
the blockade of Gaza, the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people, the refusal to release detainees, the
demolition of their properties and assets, the forced
deportation taking place and the demographic changes
in and judaization of Jerusalem continue. According to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestinian Refugees in the Near East, more than 1,100
Palestinians are reported to have been displaced as a
result of the destruction in East Jerusalem — compared
to 606 people displaced in 2010.
The very difficult economic situation, the high
level of poverty and unemployment, the illegal
settlement activities and reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs stating that
attacks on civilians in Palestine grew in 2011, with an
increase of no less than 50 per cent over the previous
year, with the full knowledge of the Israeli authorities
— all these factors demonstrate that peace efforts are
threatened.
Since 1967, Israel has not ceased constructing
new settlements. Some 150 settlements have been built
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. That undermines
the rights of Palestinians — the rights to selfdetermination, equality, freedom of movement — and
is contrary to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,
the United Nations Charter and international law. That
is reflected in resolutions adopted under international

24

law that prohibit annexation and the construction of
settlements and provide that they must be dismantled.
Israel’s continuation of those unlawful colonial
practices in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and its aerial attacks on
unarmed civilians demonstrate its disregard for all the
agreements made with the Palestinian Authority and
for its international obligations. Such actions
undermine all efforts to resume the political peace
process on the basis of the two-State solution, the
4 June 1967 borders and the road map of the Quartet.
Given Israel’s ongoing violations and practices
against Palestinians in the occupied territories and its
non-compliance with the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, the international community, particularly the
Security Council, must send a strong message, without
reservations, to the occupying Power that its illegal
acts and practices must stop. Otherwise, we will see a
further deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. That will lead to failing efforts
to restore mutual trust between the two parties and will
jeopardize a political solution on the basis of two
States. In addition, we are witnessing the Palestinians
trying to establish their State through the support of
international organizations and institutions and the
United Nations.
Kuwait
reiterates
that
the
international
community has the legal and moral responsibility to
protect Palestinians, whose territory is occupied, and to
uphold the United Nations Charter, and Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1860 (2009) in particular. It should
implement the Arab Peace Initiative, the road map and
the principle of land for peace. Recognition of the
Palestinian State would be the greatest investment in
peace in the region.
On 22 January 2012, the League of Arab States
adopted several resolutions with regard to Syria. The
Arab League reiterates the need for Syria to respect the
League’s plan of action and to implement its provisions
in order to reaffirm the aspirations of the Syrian
people.
Here,
we
reiterate
the
importance
of
implementing resolution 497 (1981), which states that
Israel must withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the 4 June 1967 line. We urge Israel to stop
threatening and violating Lebanese sovereignty and to
withdraw from all its occupied territories, in

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

accordance with resolution 1701 (2006), and to respect
the water rights and territorial integrity of Lebanon. In
this context, we welcome Israeli-Palestinian talks in
Jordan. Nevertheless, we reiterate that the Quartet
should give priority to putting an end to the Israeli
settlement policy. Otherwise, the peace process will
fail; it will not succeed in achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your country’s
presidency of the Security Council and on your efforts
so far to successfully manage the Council’s busy
programme of work this month. I also thank you for
convening this open meeting. I wish to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing this morning.
When the Quartet proposed a timetable for the
activation of direct negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli parties in its statement last
September (see SG/2178), with a view to reaching an
agreement that included key issues before the end of
2012, we supported that proposal and hoped for its
success in achieving the goal desired by everyone,
although the past positions of the Israeli side were not
encouraging. On previous occasions we emphasized
that the work of the Quartet should not be limited to
setting dates and timetables, but should ensure the
appropriate conditions for their implementation.
However, as expected, the Government of Israel
did not remove the main obstacle to the success of the
negotiations, which is illegal settlement activity.
Although it recently held meetings with the Palestinian
side in Amman, those meetings are not enough to break
the vicious circle experienced by the Palestinian cause
as long as the Israeli Government has no real intention
to make peace. That Government continues to ignore
all international calls urging it to halt and dismantle its
settlements in the territories occupied since 1967.
Those settlements are illegal and constitute a real
threat to the peace negotiations and the two-State
solution and are a blatant violation of international law.
A few days ago, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos briefed the Council
on the grave humanitarian impact of the presence of
illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

12-21419

When one thinks about the fact that Israel has
already exceeded all limits, the Government of Prime
Minister Netanyahu surprises us with unprecedented
transgressions. A few days ago, by proposing the
construction of new housing units in the West Bank,
the Israeli Government attempted to legitimize not
homes currently inhabited by settlers in the settlement
of Migron, but settlements that even Israel itself
considers illegal. In that regard, it is necessary that the
States that sponsored the Quartet’s proposal and that
believe in a negotiated solution act to bring the
required political pressure to bear for the success of
this endeavour.
In that context, some have suggested that the
Palestinian side has not been acting in a manner
conducive to the implementation of those steps. The
Palestinian attempt for recognition of the State of
Palestine as an independent State does not undermine
the two-State solution at all. That is why we will not
shy away from calling on the Council to support it. In
so doing, we call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibility towards the Israeli actions that
undermine the two-State solution by imposing a fait
accompli situation that makes it impossible to build a
viable Palestinian State in the territories occupied by
Israel in 1967, including East Jerusalem.
It goes without saying that the solution to the
crisis in the Middle East depends upon Israel’s
withdrawal from all occupied Palestinian land, the
remaining Lebanese territory and the Syrian Golan, as
well as on abiding by the resolutions of the United
Nations.
What is of concern to us in particular is the
escalation of the illegal measures taken by the Israeli
authorities aimed at the Judaization of occupied
Jerusalem. In that regard, we would like to stress our
firm opposition to such measures by Israel and its
attempts to change the Arab identity of the city, its
demographic composition, its legal status and its
religious character. We stress also that these attempts
are null and void and have no legal effect.
We urge the international community to express
its rejection of the attempts by Israel to damage Islamic
and Christian holy sites, demolish homes and expel the
Arab population, including cancelling their identity
cards. Such attempts violate the obligations of Israel,
the occupying Power, as well as international law, are
contrary to the relevant United Nations resolutions and

25

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

undermine the foundations of a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian issue and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Syrian issue is no less urgent, in terms of the
high and unfortunate number of victims of violence in
Syria, as stated in the briefing of the Assistant
Secretary-General, or in terms of the nature of the
situation in the country, with its complex composition
and regional dimensions, and in terms of the risk of
seeing the country slide towards a greater level of
violence.
We, like other countries, are concerned about the
continuing serious crisis in a brotherly Arab country.
We are keen to stop the bloodshed that has befallen the
Syrian people. We have demanded an end to violence,
murder, violations of fundamental freedoms and
bloodshed. We also urge the Syrian Government to
discharge its responsibility. At the same time, we stress
the need to protect the cohesion and unity of the Syrian
people and Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Arab League has spared no effort in playing
a positive role in order to resolve the Syrian crisis in a
regional framework through the Arab League initiative,
devoid of any violence or military intervention. That
initiative included the deployment of a mission of
observers to Syria to monitor its implementation. On
Sunday, after the Arab ministerial committee in charge
of the Syrian crisis reviewed a report of the Arab
observers in Syria and made its recommendations to
the meeting of the Arab Foreign Ministers, the
ministerial committee developed an Arab League
action plan for an Arab solution to the Syrian crisis,
similar to the solution proposed for the crisis in Yemen.
The Arab League asked the President of the
ministerial committee and the Secretary-General to
inform the Security Council and to ask for its support
for the plan. While we commend the request made by
the Secretary-General to the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities, we specifically believe that the Arab
League’s request to the Council to adopt its plan, in
accordance with the resolutions of the Arab League,
was in line with the demands of the Secretary-General
and the international community. We stress the
importance of supporting the efforts of the Arab
League as part of energizing regional solutions in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.

26

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I am pleased to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on South Africa’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am
confident that your leadership of the work of the
Council will lead to success in its deliberations. By the
same token, I would like to express our appreciation
and respect for the outgoing non-permanent members,
as well as to congratulate the friendly and brotherly
new States members of the Council, namely, Morocco,
Pakistan, Azerbaijan, Togo and Guatemala. By the
same token, I would like to thank Mr. FernandezTaranco for presenting his briefing on the situation in
the Middle East.
I should like to express my country’s support for
the statements made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the League of Arab States.
This debate comes at a time of critical economic
and political circumstances, the most salient features of
which are the following.
First, Israel, the occupying Power, still practises
in the occupied Palestinian territory a policy that aims
at increasing settlements, which reached a record level
in 2011. Further expropriation of Palestinian land,
particularly in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, has thwarted the
aspirations of the Palestinian people for freedom and
independence in accordance with relevant international
resolutions.
Secondly, it seems that Israel is turning a blind
eye to the renewed situation in the Middle East. While
it views the aspirations of the peoples of the region for
freedom with disrespect and arrogance, it also thinks
that it can deny the Palestinian people their legitimate
rights to self-determination and the establishment of
their independent State on their national soil, within
the borders of 4 June 1967 and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital.
Thirdly, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which has
the honour of being the Custodian of the two Holy
Sites, views with considerable concern the Israeli
practices in Al-Quds Al-Sharif that are designed to
efface its Arab and Islamic identity and to undermine
the rights of the Christians and Muslims in the Holy
City. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls upon the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities
vis-à-vis Israeli actions in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, including
settlement activities, the confiscation of Palestinian

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

land and homes, the eviction of Palestinians and
endangering the Holy Shrine.
Fourthly, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls upon
the international community to take a courageous and
decisive position by fully recognizing the Palestinian
State, within the borders of 4 June 1967 and with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, by responding
positively to the application transmitted to the Security
Council for Palestine’s membership in the United
Nations. It should also call upon Israel to end the
occupation, lift the blockade of Gaza, dismantle
settlements and release Palestinian detainees. Any
procrastination will constitute an abandonment of the
moral responsibility that must be shouldered by the
international community and the Security Council.
My country presented a comprehensive Peace
Initiative to the international community to end all
aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, including an end to
Israeli occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan and the
remaining Lebanese territory and the establishment of
the State of Palestine. That Initiative has been endorsed
by all Arab States. It is a source of pain that Israel
continues to disregard that initiative, as if it believes
that it can be kept on the table forever. Israel’s
settlement policy uproots the two-State concept and
therefore undermines the bases and principles around
which the Arab Initiative revolves.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is deeply pained
by the suffering of the brotherly Syrian people. We call
on the Syrian authorities to cease repelling the
legitimate aspirations of their citizens with violence
and bullets. We hope that the Syrian Government will
heed the voice of reason and wisdom and abide by the
proposals of the Arab League to find a balanced
political solution that achieves the aspirations of the
Syrian people, preserves the unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, halts the cycle of violence, and
spares the country from foreign interference in its
internal affairs.
My country decided to withdraw its observers
from the Arab observer mission to Syria because we
did not feel that the Syrian authorities were serious in
responding to the Arab initiative. We want to be more
than mere witnesses and supporters of the killing and
persecution of the great Syrian people. It is high time
for the international community to shoulder its
responsibilities towards Syria. The Security Council
should hasten to take the necessary decisions in

12-21419

support of the Arab initiative, and to adopt the
political, economic and security measures that are
designed to implement all its aspects.
My country views with concern Iran’s threats to
the security of the Arabian Gulf and the safety of its
waterways. We call on Iran to refrain from any actions
that threaten the security of the region. In that regard,
we hope that Iran will swiftly respond to the appeals of
the international community with respect to its nuclear
programme and the need to subject it to international
supervision in order to ensure that it does not go
beyond the peaceful uses of energy. At the same time,
we call for making the entire Middle East, without
exception, an area free of nuclear and all other
weapons of mass destruction. The new Middle East
needs more prosperity, not more nuclear weapons;
more reconstruction, not more settlements; more
freedoms, not more killings; more justice, and not
more injustice, persecution and despotism. Those are
the hopes of the Middle East and the aspirations of its
peoples. Those are the Council’s responsibilities and
duties.
The President: I
representative of Libya.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Shalgham (Libya): First of all, on behalf of
the Arab Group, I would like to express our great
thanks for the convening of this debate on the Middle
East. Also on behalf of the Arab Group, which it is my
honour to chair this month, I would like to warmly
thank all members of the Council for their ongoing
interest in events in the Middle East, and in particular
the cause of the Palestinian people and the Israeli
occupation of their territory.
The suffering of the Palestinian people under the
yoke of the Israeli occupation requires no further
explanation or discussion. The international media
continually transmit images, sounds, figures and facts
that bear witness to the actions of the Israeli occupying
army and settlers in their repression of unarmed
Palestinian citizens. They confiscate land, disperse
families, establish settlements and commit acts of
physical violence against Palestinian citizens.
I will not go on at length about the number of
Israeli settlements and settlers in the West Bank or
about the rise in violence committed by Israeli settlers
against Palestinians, because a few days ago, before
this body, Ms. Valerie Amos, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, took the floor to

27

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

describe very forcefully Israeli practices in the West
Bank. Those facts and figures are undeniable proof that
Israel does not want peace and that all its proposals on
negotiations are simply stalling tactics intended to
allow them to annex Palestinian lands and to swallow
them up fully. Israel’s expansionist policies are
systematic. Their aim is to Judaize the Palestinian
territories, and we all know that.
The Council does not see what is happening on
the ground. The Council does not see settlers taking
over Palestinian land or restrictions being imposed
upon Palestinian citizens, including Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the Palestinian Authority, and the Speaker
of the Palestinian Legislative Council. But the question
we must ask is whether the Council does not see, does
not want to see, or does not want to do anything. Does
anyone in this Council approve of the practices of the
occupying Power, which contravene all international
covenants and instruments? The prevailing suspicious
silence could even be construed as approval of the
crimes that Israel is committing in full view of the
world. The Council needs to assume its responsibilities
and to take strict practical measures to put an end to
these crimes.
The Arab world is experiencing a historic
revolution that marks a decisive turning point in the
life of our peoples. It is a revolution of freedom,
democracy and progress against tyranny and
authoritarianism. This revolution will restore to the
Arabs, who seized their liberty as free people, the right
and the power to make decisions. Now we are able to
usher in true and bold peace. Despots are incompetent;
they are not capable of building peace. Despots yield
only to occupation. They close their eyes to reality and
attack their own people, but the revolution of liberty
embodies in the Arab Spring is democratic and will
pave the way and open the door to liberation. It will
allow us to embark on a path of peace.
Israel, its people and its Government must realize
that free Arabs, who have put an end to oppression and
overthrown despots, are not going to accept that their
brothers in Palestine should continue to suffer the
pangs of oppression, persecution and despotism under
the yoke of Israeli occupation. Israel must therefore
adopt a peace policy. It must reject the annexation of
Palestinian territory and the establishment of
settlements; it must give up the Judaization of
Jerusalem and racist extremism, because those will not
bring us peace; they will only incite to further hostility

28

and confrontation and lead to political and military
escalation, which would be very prejudicial to world
peace and the global economy.
Humankind seeks to overcome its economic
obstacles to achieve greater cooperation and prosperity,
and people today have made enormous progress in
science and communications. Humankind realizes the
dangers of confrontation, wars and destruction.
Humankind is capable of dealing with problems
through dialogue and compromise because there is no
victory in war. Profiteers may try to attain greater
benefits, but in the Arab Spring of liberty people want
peace, freedoms and progress. They believe in
coexistence on the basis of justice, respect for human
rights and the rejection of oppression, occupation and
authoritarianism. We are prepared to work with the
Security Council to bring about the goals of the United
Nations for the sake of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
commend you, Mr. President, and your country, South
Africa, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. We also welcome the new
members of the Council.
Since 1947, the Security Council has adopted
many resolutions on the situation in the Middle East
and the question of Palestine. Without exception, not
one of them has met with compliance from the
Government of Israel. Speakers in today’s meeting
have primarily focused on addressing Israel’s repeated
non-compliance with those resolutions and its impunity
for crimes committed against the Palestinian people,
which are, today, the main obstacles to the peace so
ardently desired in the Middle East. The Council has a
duty to reject the continued non-compliance of Israel
with the resolutions on peace and security in the
Middle East. The United Nations Charter bestows upon
the Council the powers to do so and to establish
whether or not that State is willing to meet its
obligations set out in the Charter.
So long as the efforts of the Security Council are
delayed or blocked — in an atmosphere that is strained
owing to the existence of double standards — the
United Nations will continue to face a paradox,

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

namely, continuing to include among its members a
State that disrespects — ad infinitum and flagrantly —
the founding principles of the United Nations and of
international justice, while, at the same time, denying
recognition to the State of Palestine, which has fully
complied with all of the requirements for admission
and which has already been recognized by the vast
majority of States Member States of the Organization.
We must ensure that decisive progress is made
towards achieving a peaceful and just solution for the
question of Palestine. It is a sine qua non condition that
the suffering of the Palestinian people be ended and
that the ethnic cleansing, aimed at attempting to
expunge that people from its ancestral lands, be
averted. That is why we support the Non-Aligned
Movement’s call to hold without delay a conference of
the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention in order to guarantee respect for the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including in East Jerusalem.
We condemn the actions of the Israeli
Government aimed at preventing the establishment of a
Palestinian unity Government and, in particular, the
holding without charges of Mr. Aziz Al-Dweik, the
leader of the Palestinian Legislative Council. We call
upon Israel to free him immediately, as well as the
increasing number of Palestinian political prisoners
being held in Israeli prisons.
Stability in Syria is fundamental for peace in the
Middle East. We welcome the endeavours of the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad to preserve
the unity, integrity and stability in his country and to
find a peaceful, political and inclusive solution. In that
context, we condemn all terrorist and antidemocratic
acts aimed at hampering the programme of reforms,
which, under the auspices of the Syrian Government
and with the majority support of the people, is moving
forward in that Arab country. The aspirations of this
age-old and honourable people must be channelled
through political dialogue and peaceful means. We
deplore the manipulation of the legitimate demands of
the people, which has created chaos and sown terror in
order to impose a regime designed to satisfy the
interests of imperialism and Zionism.
The double standards of certain Powers disqualify
them entirely from being able in any way to pass
judgment on the situation in Syria. We firmly condemn
those who promote interventionist sanctions and

12-21419

endeavour to repeat the military and political
aberration that was committed against Libya. The
agenda of dialogue and peace must prevail, and not the
warmongering and interventionist agenda that the
imperial Powers wish to impose at any price. We
therefore welcome the calls made by many countries,
including members of the Security Council, for a
peaceful, constitutional and inclusive solution to the
issue of Syria.
It is heart-rending when any lives are lost
anywhere on Earth. We are talking about avoiding
human sorrow. Political, cultural or religious
differences must be overcome by means of dialogue
and understanding.
Those who promote interventionist unilateral
action against the Government and people in Syria are
violating international law and flouting the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter.
The valuable information submitted to the
Security Council by the representative of the Syrian
Government must be taken constructively. The many
measures adopted by the sovereign Syrian Government
and its readiness to take into account the positive
recommendations of the Arab League are a
demonstration of a spirit of dialogue and political will
that guides the authorities of that country. We stress
that respect for the sovereignty of States,
non-interference and the peaceful settlement of
disputes are fundamental principles of international
law and essential conditions for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The Israeli Government is taking advantage of
current conditions in the Middle East to perpetuate its
occupation of the Syrian Golan and continue its
outrages against the Palestinian people. We therefore
reiterate our support for the implementation of
resolution 497 (1981) of 17 December 1981. We recall
that that resolution reaffirms that the acquisition of
territory by force is inadmissible and declares that the
Israeli decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights is
null and void and without international legal effect.
We renew the call for the State of Israel to respect
the sovereignty of the Lebanon and to avoid further
conflicts, such as that which took place in July 2006.
Only through direct negotiations between the parties,
as set out in resolution 1701 (2006), can constructive
solutions be reached.

29

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin): At the outset, allow me, Sir,
on behalf of the African Group, to congratulate South
Africa on its assumption of the Security Council
presidency and on its wise leadership of the Council.
Allow me to also acknowledge the presence of South
Africa’s Deputy Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation, who is presiding over this important
meeting today. The African Group would also like to
express its appreciation to the Russian Federation for
its proficient stewardship of the Council during the
month of December. The African Group furthermore
expresses its warm congratulations to the new Security
Council members and conveys its appreciation to the
members whose terms ended in December.
The African Group remains deeply concerned by
the grave situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, as a
result of the continuation and escalation of illegal
Israeli policies and practices. Israel’s unlawful actions
and illegal practices have contributed to the worsening
of the humanitarian situation and to economic
deterioration in the occupied Palestinian territory. In
this connection, the African Group calls for an end to
all of those illegal practices and policies, and for the
immediate and complete lifting of the illegal blockade
imposed by Israel on the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip.
The African Group is especially concerned by the
continued construction and expansion of illegal
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in East Jerusalem. The African Group
reiterates that all Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, constitute grave breaches of international
law and a grave danger to the viability of the
internationally agreed two-State solution of Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
The African Group calls on the international
community, including the Security Council, to act in
unison to compel Israel to cease forthwith its
construction and expansion of settlements and to abide
by its obligations under international law and relevant
United Nations resolutions. That is imperative for
salvaging the prospects for realizing the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders.

30

The African Group regrets the lack of progress in
the peace process and calls for the resumption of peace
talks between the Palestinians and Israelis. It reaffirms
its support for a peaceful solution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict on the basis of the principles of international
law and all relevant United Nations resolutions, with
an emphasis on the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
It is high time for the international community to
act decisively, guided by the rules and principles of
international law and justice, in order to finally bring
an end to the Israeli occupation. It is high time to
enable the Palestinian people to exercise their
inalienable right to self-determination and freedom. It
is high time to resolve all other final status issues in
accordance with international law and United Nations
resolutions.
(spoke in French)
Having made that group statement, I would like
to make some remarks and comments in my national
capacity. At the outset, I wish to say that recent history
teaches us that the greatest threats to international
peace and security come from peoples who have long
been frustrated. The Palestinian question makes of the
Arab community a frustrated community. Benin
believes firmly that the United Nations, with the
dynamism that characterizes it today — and which
Benin greatly appreciates — has the resources to find a
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question,
and that it should not shirk its historic responsibility to
do so.
Benin has always supported and continues to
support a free and independent Palestinian State living
in peaceful coexistence with Israel. Benin lends its
unflagging support to the two-State solution and calls
on the Security Council to facilitate the prompt
execution of that solution in order to offer the
Palestinian people relief from the compound sufferings
that mark their daily lives.
We believe in the virtues of mediation and of
choosing that option as the means to resolve disputes in
today’s world. We therefore urge the Quartet to step up
its efforts to quickly restore dialogue between the two
parties in order to find a lasting solution to this
situation, which has gone on far too long.

12-21419

S/PV.6706 (Resumption 1)

A settlement to the Palestinian situation should
go hand in hand with the settlement of all the pending
issues in the Middle East, including the establishment
of a nuclear-weapons-free zone, respect for human
rights and the promotion of gender equality in all
countries of the region, respecting the fundamental
principles and values contained in the United Nations
Charter.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on an
issue that has preoccupied the Organization for over
six decades and will endure until the Palestinian people
recover their full rights, including the right to establish
their own State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Allow me also to welcome Azerbaijan, Guatemala,
Morocco, Pakistan and Togo to membership in the
Security Council.
Some weeks ago, we celebrated the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. On that
occasion, as on previous ones, it was clear that the
question of Palestine lies at the core of the crisis in the
Middle East and that the Israeli settlement policy is the
major obstacle to peace. If the peace process is now at
a stalemate, one of the most serious and principal
causes of the paralysis is Israel’s insistence on
pursuing its policy of colonial annexation, to the
frustration of the Palestinian side as expressed in the
activities of the Committee on the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. Israel’s refusal to implement
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, the road map, and other resolutions of
international legitimacy is a flagrant violation of the
rules of international law, which will inevitably lead to
further confrontation, tension and strife throughout the
region.
The Supreme Council of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, at its thirty-second session in December last
year, took up developments surrounding the question of
Palestine. It stressed that a lasting, just and
comprehensive peace can be achieved only through the
creation of an independent Palestinian State within the
borders of June 4 1967, with East Jerusalem as its

capital; that East Jerusalem is a red line; and that its
support for Palestine’s application to United Nations
membership is legitimate, just and a further
encouragement to the peace process.
The Security Council has another historic
opportunity today to resolve the question of Palestine
through the two-State solution by accepting the
membership of the State of Palestine within the June 4
1967 borders. It is clear that the UNESCO decision to
accept Palestine as a full-fledged member was an
important milestone on the road to creating an
independent Palestinian State on Palestinian land.
I would like to reiterate the position clearly
expressed by His Majesty King of Bahrain in his
statement before the General Assembly on
22 September 2011 (see A/66/PV.15). His Majesty
called on the international community to take this
opportunity to give help our brothers, the Palestinian
people, to realize their legitimate aspirations by
recognizing their State on their own land inside the
June 4 1967 borders. He called on the international
community to put an end to the conflict by ensuring
full Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab land to
the June 4 1967 lines, including from the occupied
Syrian Golan and lands occupied in southern Lebanon,
in accordance with relevant international resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. That is a firm position of
Bahrain on the situation in the Middle East.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain again
appeals to the Security Council to intensify its efforts
towards a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East, based on relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council; to put an
end to the Israeli occupation that has endured since
1967; and to establish a sovereign, viable, contiguous
Palestinian State living side by side in peace with the
State of Israel.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

12-21419

31
