UNITED

NATIONS

L REC
THIRTY-SECOND

th
198i

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

S
.

14 JANUARY

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . , . . , , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . +. . . . .

1

. ,, , ,. .. .. . .. .. ,, . . . .. .. ... . . ., .. .. . .

1

Complaint
of the Government of Botswana against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of
Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 2262) . , . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , , , . . . , . . . . . ,

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1985)

Adoption

of the agenda

s/W. 1985

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given’.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1985th MEETING
Held in New York

on Friday,

14 January

1977, at 3 p.m.

2. Tile PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As
President of the Security Council, I have received letters
from the representatives of Somalia, Togo, the German
Democratic Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Mali and Cuba in
which they request to be invited to participate, without the
right to vote, in the discussion of the item on the agenda of
this meeting of the Council. Pursuant to Article 31 qf the
Charter of the United Nations and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council and also in
accordance with established practice, I propose, if there are
no objections, to invite the representatives of those
countries to participate, without the right to vote, in the
discussion of this item. Accordingly I invite them to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber on the understanding that they will be invited to
take seats at the Council table when they wish to speak.

President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 985)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the
illegal rCgime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Botswana to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2262).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. H. Hussein
(Somalia), Mr. A. A. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr. B. Neugebazrer
(German Democratic Hepublic), Mr. M. Ecua Milco (Equatorial Guinea), Mr. M. B. Kant& (Malij and Mr. R. Alarcdn
(Cuba) took the places reserved Jbr them at the side of the
Council chamber.

The meeting was culled to order at 4.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russiatz): The
first speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite
him to take a place at the Council taole and to make his
statement.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint of the Govermnent of Botswana against the
illegal rCgime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations
of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the letter
dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12262)

4. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): Mr. President, on behalf of
my people and Government, I wish to thank you and,
through you, all the members of the Security Council for
allowing me to participate in this partic;llar debate concerning the aggression of Southern Rhodesia against Bbtswana.
It is a great pleasure to see you guiding the deliberations of
this very important series of meetings dealing with a subject
related to colonialism and racism in southern Africa. The
Soviet Union has always shown a deep underst’anding of
and commitment to the cause of the peoples of southern
Africa as they have struggled, and are continuing to
struggle, to free themselves from the oppression of colonialism and all its ilIs. I am confident that under your
leadership this Council will reach the proper decisions
about actions to be taken.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from
Russian): 111
accordance with the decisions taken by the Security
Council at previous meetings, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representatives of Botswana,
Morocco, Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Lesotho, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Yugoslavia, Kenya
and Nigeria to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s consideration of the item on the agenda.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. M. Mogwe
(Botswalzc1) took a place at the Council table; Mr. M. S.
Zaimi (Morocco), Mr. S. G. Mwale (Zambia), Mr. I. A.
Sepetu (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. L. E. Mathaba
(Lesotho), Mr. J. C Lobo (Mozambique), Mrs. S. Y.
Gbujama (Sierra Leone), Mr, J. Petri6 (Yugoslavia), Mr. F.
M. Kasina (Kenya) and Mr. L. 0. Harriman (Nigeria) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The Mozambique delegation would also like to note
with pleasure the presence in this body of the newly elected
members of the Security Council. I am certain that the
presence of this new blood within the Council will
invigorate this august body in its efforts to come to correct
decisions on pertinent world problems.
1

6. Recently, the minority and racist regimes of southern
Africa, in their desperate effort to try to stop the
irreversible movement of national liberation of the peoples
of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa, who are determined to free their beloved countries from colonialism,
illegal occupation and racism, have become deliberately
engaged in spreading throughout the entire area the
conflicts which exist within their own borders. As my
President, His Excellency Mr, Samora Moises Machel, once
said, “Ian Smith’s aggressions have already mixed our blood
with the blood of the people of Zimbabwe”.
7. Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Swaziland
and Zambia, on one occasion or another, have been the
target of some type of serious and deliberate provocation
by the minority and racist regimes of Pretoria and
Salisbury. Although it is only now that the Security
Council has learned of the acts of aggression committed
against Botswana by the illegalminority regime in Southern
Rhodesia, President Samora Moises Machel informed the
world of it on 3 March 1976, when he said: “The Republic
of Botswana and the Republic of Zambia have been, like
ourselves, victims of numerous criminal actions by the
Salisbury regime.” At its thirty-first session, on 5 October
1976, the Foreign Minister of my country, Mr. Joaquim
Albert0 Chissano, informed the Genera1 Assembly of the
fact that:
“In Zimbabwe, the struggle has been intensified in the
last year. The intensification of military action, as well as
the active solidarity of various African States, have placed
Ian Smith’s regime in an unsustainable position , . , Smith
even pretended to move to the offensive, trying to
expand the conflict to the free States of southern Africa
through provocation and through the escalation of
violence.“i
8. Judging from the last series of constant provocations
and aggressions that have been taking place in southern
Africa, we can see that Smith is desperately trying to
internationalize the conflict by constantly invading the
neighbouring independent and sovereign States of Zambia,
Mozambique and Botswana. We consider those desperate
acts of Smith as an open admission by the racist regime that
the forces of independence and freedom in Zimbabwe,
under militant and revolutionary leadership, are getting
stronger every day. We, in Mozambique, are convinced that
Ian Smith is condemned to defeat. Ian Smith will be erased
from history as the other colonialists have been before him,
9. However, a cause for concern in this international body
must be the realization that, for approximately the last 12
months, southern Africa has been an arena of massacres of
refugees, kidnappings of nationalists, mass killings of
villagers, terrorism, invasions, military aggressions and all
sorts of crimes which have been condemned by this
Council. All those criminal activities have been perpetrated
by only one group: the minority racist regimes. We now
ask: For how long should the racist regime of southern
Africa be allowed to continue to abuse our patience and
tolerance?
1 Official Records of the General Assembly,
nr-..-...
I,.. _1~~-- .nl.
.a

Thirty-first

Session,

lo.

It would seem unnecessary at this particular series of
to go into detail by enumerating all the incidents
in each of the aforementioned countries, since the Council
is trying
to concentrate on the specific case of the
aggression
of Southern Rhodesia against the sovereign State
of Botswana.
meetings

ll, After hearing all the evidence presented by His
Excellency, the Minister of External Affairs of Botswana
[1983rd meeting/, a sister country and member of the
front-line States, the Mozambique delegation cannot help
but. vehemently condemn all the acts of provocation and
aggression
committed against it by the racist and minority
regime
in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia. We
strongly believe that harassment, military threats, murder
and all acts of aggression which are being perpetrated in the
area by the regime from the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia, constitute a grave threat to international peace in
general and seriously contribute to instability and a hostile
atmosphere in southern Africa in particular.
12. The danger of instability and the lack of peace in
southern Africa becomes very clear, especially when one
realizes that, since the time when the forces of the illegal
minority regime in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia
started their incursions into the neighbouring countries,
most of their targets have been refugee camps like Nyazonia
in Mozambique, and defenceless villagers like those in
Matsiloje in Botswana and Mapai in Mozambique. Most of
the victims of the Rhodesian forces have been those
children, women and the elderly, who are being mowed
down in a cowardly fashion by the racist soldiers when they
and the Smith mercenaries find the freedom fighters of the
Zimbabwe People’s Army (ZIPA) too difficult to deal with.
Incapable of containing the devastating wave of freedom
fighters and being humiliated on the battlefield by ZIPA,
the Smith racists resort to massacres and mass killing of
refugees and villagers in Mozambique, Botswana and every
where they can go.
13. All those acts of aggression against the sovereign and
independent States of southern Africa have come as an
immediate consequence of the existence in the area of the
oppressive, racist, colonial, rebel and illegal regime of Ian
Smith.
14. Peace cannot be guaranteed in the area if the political
situation is permitted to remain the same as it is now.
Consequently, all the criminal actions and atrocities now
being committed by the illegal minority regime in the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia against the people of
the area will continue. This fact, which has proved to hold
true throughout many different historical instances, was
put forward for the purpose of illustration on 20 July 1973
by Mr. Marcelino dos Santos, Vice-President of FRELIMO
LFrente de Libertapio de Mocambique], before the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples. He said:
“The atrocities committed by the [fascist] army,
despite their horror and barbarism, express the true
nature of the . . . fascist colonial regime, just as the gas
chambers of the Nazi concentration camps, the massacre

enemy away from our frontiers, consolidating our independence and creating conditions for the establishment of
peace. So we say: support and solidarity are not charity;
they are not a favour; they are mutual help between
forces that are fighting for the same objective,”

at Lidice in Czechoslovakia and that at Oradour in France
expressed the true nature of Hitler and nazism; just as
Sharpeville expressed the true nature of the regime in
South Africa; just as Sakiet Sidi Youssef expressed the
true nature of French colonialism in Algeria; just as Deir
Yassin in Palestine in 1948 showed the nature of Zibnism;
just as Guernica in Spain showed the nature of France
fascism; just as My Lai expressed the true nature of
American imperialism in Viet-Nam. Each colonial war,
each racist war, each nazi war . . . includes a Mueda, a
Sharpeville, a Pijiguiti, an Icolo e Bengo, an Oradour, a
Guernica, a My Lai, a Sakiet Sidi Youssef.

19. In the present situation of constant provocation,
military threat and aggression, Botswana deserves the full
support of the international community so as to enable that
sister country to cope with the economic hardship confronting it as a result of the imperative need to divert funds
from planned development projects to unplanned and
unbudgeted projects for military and security needs, in
order effectively to defend itself against the Ian Smith
forces. The international community must do everything
within its power to relieve Botswana of the weight and
burden it is enduring at this moment, in order to enable
that country to continue playing its positive role in the
cause of African liberation. Mozambique is ready to carry
out the part that the international community wants it to
play in assisting the sister State of Botswana.

“Therefore, let us try to understand these facts, this
reality, in that manner . . .: every act of the . . . fascist
colonial regime is a crime. As long as that rCgime exists,
crime will exist.“2
15. In Mozambique, we are convinced that the situation,
as it was presented by the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana, is a product of the colonialism, oppression and
racism that is going on within the boundaries of the illegal
minority regime in the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia. Therefore, to establish peace, justice and harmony in the area, all the causes responsible for the present
situation must be removed. Colonialism in Southern Rhodesia must be brought to an end. Otherwise, the crimes of
colonialism will go on. It is an incontestable fact that
colonialism thrives on crimes and its crimes have no limits.

20. At this point, we should like to express our satisfaction at the fact that the United Kingdom has finally
decided to assume the responsibilities of the decolonization
process in Southern Rhodesia. Nevertheless, we should like
once more to appeal to the Security Council and to the
British authorities to make sure that the transfer of power
to the people of Zimbabwe is carried out in good faith and
is real and not a fiction. We want to alert the world
concerning the kind of manoeuvres going on right now in
Southern Rhodesia. Those manoeuvres consist in the
proliferation of puppet groups organized on a tribal basis in
order to undermine the decolonization process and to
dilute the entire meaning of the transfer of power. My
delegation hopes that the Conference on Zimbabwe being
held at Geneva will succeed in establishing conditions for an
early and real independence on the basis of majority rule, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions adopted by the
United Nations.

16. The fact is that Zimbabwe is occupied by foreign
forces which have established an illegal oppressive and racist
regime in a territory which does not belong to them,
condemning the majority of the country’s people to live in
concentration camps, with all their movements controlled
by rifles, pistols and machine-guns.
17. The international community must stop treating Ian
Smith as a responsible politician, because in reality Smith is
an assassin of the masses, and he must be treated
accordingly. Those who created Smith and still have power
over him must act immediately to stop building him.up
through their mass media which are constantly poisoning
the world with lies and calumnies against the people of
Zimbabwe and the people of the front-line countries. The
international community must do something to stop
Smith’s allies from providing him with mercenaries, military
hardware and all the economic help that is given to him
either openly or covertly. The international community
must fully support the armed struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe that is being waged by ZIPA under the correct
operational and energetic leadership of the Patriotic Front.

21. I repeat that, in the present situation of constant
.provocation, military threat and aggression, Botswana
deserves the full support of the international community so
as to enable this sister country to cope with the economic
hardship confronting it as a result of the imperative need to
divert funds or assets. This assistance is urgently needed,
owing to the fact that the Republic of Botswana is
economically heavily dependent on the racist rCgimes of
southern Africa. The international community must do
everything within its power to relieve Botswana of the
weight and burden that it is enduring at this moment in
order that it may continue to play a positive role in the
cause of the liberation of southern Africa.

18. As far as Mozambique’s duty towards Zimbabwe is
concerned, my President, His Excellency Mr. Samora
Maids Machel, put it very clearly on 3 March 1976 when
he said:

22. In spite of all the difficulties with which it has to deal,
Botswana has taken a courageous stand and has been
playing a leading role in the struggle for the liberation of
Africa, in general, and for the immediate liberation of
Zimbabwe, in particular. Mozambique fully supports the
position of its sister State of Botswana and we are
confident that the Security Council will take the necessary
measures to resolve the situation,

“By supporting the struggle of Zirrbabwe we are
defending Mozambique. By supporting the development
of the fight of our Zimbabwe brothers we are pushing the
2 SeeA/AC.109/PV.929.
3

go not least to those United Nations Member States which

23. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Russian): I
thank the representative of Mozambique for the kind words
he said about my country.

have expressedtheir confidence in the Federal Republic of
Germany in the elections to the Security Council, by calling
our country to this responsible position within the community of nations three years after our accession to
membership in the world Organization.

24. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): At this stage of OUI
deliberations, and on behalf of eight members of the
Council, I wish orally to introduce a draft resolution, the
sponsors of which are Benin, India, the Libyan Arab
Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama, Romania and
Venezuela:

32. Let me assure representatives that, in this new
function, the Federal Republic of Germany will do everything in its power to co-operate actively and constructively
in the attainment of the common aims of the United
Nations: to maintain international peace, to develop
friendly relations among nations, based on respect for the
principle of equal rights and self-determination and to
strengthen international co-operation. We consider it an
essential task of the United Nations to promote economic
co-operation among nations, to accelerate their peaceful
development and to redress the disparities between rich and
poor. It waswith those aims in mind that we participated in
the work of the United Nations in the past.

[The speaker read the draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document S/12276.]

25. This draft is so clear and straightforward that I do not
believe it calls for any explanation. However, I may perhaps
add that a great deal of work has gone into it. The sponsors
have listened very attentively to the views of other
delegations during private consultations, and we have, as far
as possible, accommodated those views in a spirit of
understanding and co-operation. Thus the draft does not
refer to “aggression”, but rather to “hostile acts”. In the
circumstances, I believe members wiI1 agree that the
language is moderate.

33. As a member of the Security Council, the Federal
Republic of Germany will continue to pursue the policy for
peace to which it has been committed ever since its
foundation.

26, The three main objectives of the draft regard the
cessation of hostilities, the dispatch of a mission by the
Secretary-General, and financial and other assistance.It is a
realistic draft. I hope members will consider it as such, and
that it can be adopted by consensus.

34. We believe that it is not enough to overcome existing
or newly emerging crises, although much will already be
achieved if that endeavour is successful. It is necessary, in
particular, to promote world-wide respect for the right to
self-determination of peoples and for human rights for
every individual.

27. Incidentally, I may perhaps add that the draft is open
to further sponsorship, should any other delegation wish to
add its name.

35. It is our conviction that the use of force as a means for
attaining political objectives should be renounced once and
for all. With that in view, we shall endeavour to play our
full part in the Security Council during the two years of our
membership.

28. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Allow me, in speaking for the first time at the beginning of
our first term as a member of the Security Council, to
convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the office of Permanent Representative of the USSR to the United Nations and on your
accession to the presidency of the Council. I also wish to
thank you for the kind words of welcome which you
addressed to my delegation. Relations between your country and the Federal Republic of Germany have developed
favourably since the beginning of this decade and we are
determined, as Federal Chancellor Schmidt pointed out in
his recent policy statement, to continue consistently along
the road of co-operation.

36. Turning now to the subject before the Council, I may
say that we have,studied with special attention the letters
of the Permanent Representative of Botswana contained in
documents S/12262 and S/1227.5. We listened with great
interest to the account which the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana gave [1983rd meeting] of the precarious situation facing his country. I welcome him as a friend
of my country and we recall with great pleasure his visit to
Bonn in February 1976.

30. I should also like to associate myself with the
congratulations extended to the delegations of Canada,
India, Mauritius and Venezuela, the other Member States
which are joining the Council together with us.

37. I should like to express the deep sympathy of my
Government to the people and the Government of Botswana on the losses their country has suffered. My
delegation deplores the untenable situation created by the
regime at Salisbury and regards the development outlined
by the Foreign Minister of Botswana as most regrettable, It
can only render more difficult the search for a peaceful
solution to the Rhodesian problem-a solution which
should lead the country to self-determination, in conformity with the freely expressed wishes of its population.

3 I. At the same time, I wish to express our gratitude to all
other delegations gathered around this table for the warm
welcome they extended to us. We are looking forward to
co-operating with them all in the months ahead. Our thanks

38. We believe that the present situation, described in the
letters from the representative of Botswana and outlined in
the statement of the Foreign Minister of Botswana, as a
result of repeated violations of Botswana’s territorial

My felicitations also extend to the outgoing President
of the Security Council, my good friend Ambassador Datcu
of Romania, for the efficient and successful way in which
he presided over the Council’s work during last month.
29.

4

integrity by the illegal Smith regime, must be viewed in the
over-all perspective of the events which have occurred since
the so-called declaration of independence in Southern
Rhodesia.

bloodshedand increasedsuffering for .a11the peoplein the
area. We therefore wish our colleague,AmbassadorIvor
Richard, every successin the arduoustask still aheadof
him.

39. The Federal Republic of Germany has consistently
termed illegal the Smith regime’s unilateral declaration of
independence. It has desisted from relations with Rhodesia.
Ahhough it wasnot a Member of the United Nationsat the
time, the Federal Republic of Germany, as early as 1968,
strictly applied the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council resolutionsunder Chapter VII of the Charter. The
necessarylegal and administrative stepsto ensurecompliance with the sanctionswere implementedby my Government.

44. The Security Councilhasrepeatedly dealt with situations createdby the Rhodesianminority regimein that part
of Africa. I recall, in particular, the acts of violence and
economicextortion committedagainstZambiain 1973and
Mozambiquein 1976.The presentsituationmust beviewed
in the light of thoseearlierevents.The real solution to the
problem before US lies in the achievementof a just and
acceptable settlement for a free and truly independent
Zimbabwe.Only in that way can the incidentsdescribedby
the Foreign Minister of Botswanafinally be brought to an
end.

40. The situation in and around Southern Rhodesiahas
continued to be a matter of grave concern to my
Government. The Federal Republicof Germany hasalways
been a strong advocate of the right to self-determinationin
all parts of the world. We therefore reject the intolerable
policiesof the minority regimewhich hasperpetuatedracial
discrimination and deniedbasichuman and political rights
to the majority of the people of Zimbabwe. We sharethe
deep concern of the international community with what
hasincreasinglybecome an anachronism,namely, a minority regime which imposesits will on an overwhelming
majority.

45. My Government is aware of the grave economic
consequences
the policy of the Smith regimehasbrought
about for the neighbouringcountries.In the framework of
our developmentaid programme,we haveundertakengreat
efforts to assistthose States, among them particularly
Botswana,to overcometheir difficulties Weshallcontinue
and strengthenour aid even further this year. My Government is convinced that the appeal made in the draft
resolutionbefore usto extend increasedeconomicsupport
will not remain unheededby the StatesMembersof the
United Nations.

41. We have alwaysheld the view that any solution should
be attained by peaceful means.It wastherefore with great
relief that my country viewed developmentsin the course
of last year which resulted in the convening of the
Conferenceat Geneva, in which the parties concernedare
taking part. We welcomed, in particular, the intention of
establishingan interim Government in Southern Rhodesia,
which would pave the way for early independenceand
majority rule. On 18 October 1976, my Foreign Minister,
together with his colleaguesfrom the nine membercountries of the EuropeanEconomicCommunity, welcomedthe
speedy action taken by the British Government in convening that Conference under the able chairmanshipof
Ambassador Ivor Richard. We continue to hope for a
positive result.

46. Recent events have stressedthe importance of the
closelinks of friendshipand co-operationwhich we have
maintained with the Government and the people of
Botswanasincethey attainedtheir independence.We have
strong and cordial relationswith the peaceful people of
Botswana.Thoserelationsare exemplified by severalvisits
to Bonn by the Vice-Presidentof Botswana,Mr. Quett
Masire, as well as by the visit of its Minister for External
Affairs. Let me assurethe latter, through you, Mr. President, that in view of the graveproblemsfacinghis country
as a result of the repeated violations of Botswana’s
territorial integrity by the illegalSmithregime,my Government is preparedto continue and further strengthenour
co-operationwith hisGovernmentandpeople.
47. With those considerationsin mind, my delegationis
prepared to support any solution which would be of
genuine assistanceto Botswana and would support the
efforts towards an over-all settlement of the Rhodesian
problem.

42. We, together with our partners in the European
Community, placed on record our unqualified support for
the efforts of all those who contributed to the preparation
and progressof that Conference,in particular the Governments of the United States of America and the United
Kingdom, the Presidentsof the front-line States and other
African leaders,aswell asthosemost directly involved. <.!

48. As this is probably the last time that I shall be
speakingduring this seriesof meetingsof the Security
Council,I hopeyou will permit meto concludemy remarks
with a few wordsof farewell to the representativeof the
United States,Governor Scranton,andI would askAmbassador Sherer to be kind enoughto relay them to him. I
shouldlike to convey to Governor and Mrs. Scrantonmy
very best wishesfor the future. The Governor will always
be rememberedby my delegationhere, at the United
Nations, as an outstandingrepresentativeof the United
Statesof America. With his great experience,his extraordinary skill, his warmth and grace, he has rendered
invaluable servicenot only to his country but also to the
United Nationsasa whole.Weshallmissa true friend.

43. My country felt encouragedby the fact that the
parties concerned were prepared to seek a settlementto
bring about an orderly and peaceful transfer to majority
rule and independence.We now urge them to spare no
efforts to resume the Conference and to bring it to a
satisfactory conclusion assoon aspossible,so that further
bloodshed and hostilities in the area, such as those
preoccupying this Council at the present time, can be
averted. We are hopeful that further progresswill be made;
it would be tragic if this chance for reaching a peaceful
solution were lost. The alternative could only be more
5

made a prophetic statement, in which he said, among other
things:

49. TIPZ PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rusfianl: I
thank the representative of the Federal Republic of
Germany for the congratulations he extended to me.

“The Security Council is dealing . . . with a question
which has very grave implications not only for Lesotho
but ultimately for other States in the region, and
certainly also for the international community as a
whole .”

50. The next speaker is the representative of SOmalia. 1
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
51. Mr. HUSSEIN (Somalia): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to extend to you our warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of January and also on your appointment as the
Permanent Representative of your great country, the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, to the United Nations. It is
particularly gratifying to my delegation to seeyou presiding
over the Council at a time when an important and serious
matter has been brought to it for its consideration, a matter
which is especially vital to Africa and indeed to all freedomand peace-loving people throughout the world.

57. The Council has heard the statement made at the
present series of meetings by the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana, Mr. Mogwe /1983rd meeting], who
succinctly but clearly described to the Council the havoc
caused by the actions of the security forces of the illegal
r&&me at Salisbury against the territory and people of
Botswana, In commiting more than 36 acts of aggression,
provocation, harassment, murder, kidnapping and destruction of property in Botswana, the illegal regime at Salisbury
has as its objective the blackmailing of the neighbouring
countries and the frustration of the efforts of the African
people in Zimbabwe in their struggle for majority rule and
their yearning for human dignity. Those acts are also‘
directed towards compelling Botswana to change its present
policy of giving refuge and assistance to the victims of
oppression from southern Africa.

52. I am happy to express the satisfaction OFmy delegation at the close ties of friendship and co-operation which
have existed between our two countries for a long time, ties
which are based on equality and mutual respect and are
constantly growing. I am sure that such close relations will
continue to exist at the level of our Missions to the United
Nations. We are confident too that your long experience in
international relations and your tested ability and diplomatic skill will ensure a useful contribution to the work of
the Security Council as a whole, especially during this series
of meetings over which you are presiding.

58. There is no doubt that the arrogance and intransigence
of the illegal regime at Salisbury is part and parcel of the
over-all strategy of the unholy alliance of illegal minority
and racist regimes in southern Africa. The existence of such
folly and of such a desperate strategy is clearly shown by
the recent scenario of blatant aggression arranged by these
rdgimes against Mozambique, Zambia, Angola and now
Botswana.

53. I should also like to extend a very warm welcome to
the new members of the Council: Canada, the Federal
Republic of Germany, India, Mauritius and Venezuela. We
are familiar with the good work and long experience of the
representatives of those countries and therefore more than
confident that they will make an invaluable contribution to
the work of the Council.

59. The Somali delegation is gratified that Botswana, like
other neighbouring sister countries, refused to succumb to
the rebel regime’s intimidation through force of arms, let
alone to its other forms of pressure such as economic
blockade.

54. Before I pass to the substance of the matter at stake,
Mr. President, allow me to express my delegation’s appreciation also to your predecessor, Mr. Yakov Malik, for the
unforgettable role he played during his long tenure of office
as Permanent Representative of his country to the United
Nations, in the cause of peace,justice and freedom.

60. We commend the Government and the people of
Botswana for the wisdom of reacting to such acts of
aggression by submitting a complaint to the Security
Council so that this body, and indeed the international
community, may be kept abreast of the true picture of the
aggression and other evil machinations perpetrated by the
illegal and racist rCgimes in southern Africa, which, as we
have always maintained, are capable of endangering the
peace and security of the area and indeed of the whole
world. While the Council has the responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security, my Government believes that the African States should re-examine the whole
situation in southern Africa in the light of recent developments. It is because of this conviction and in the light of
the deterioration of the situation in that part of Africa that
my Government is led to believe that African States should
hold a meeting with a view to making a serious and
comprehensive re-assessment of the prevailing situation
which, in the opinion of my Government, is very, very
grave.

55. The Security Council is once again called upon to
examine a complaint submitted by the Government of the
Republic of Botswana in connexion with the wanton
aggression committed by the illegal regime at Salisbury
against Botswana, a country which has resolutely and
steadfastly stood against the illegal and minority regimes in
southern Africa.
56. The serious complaint submitted by Botswana reminds
US of the statement made by the Permanent Representative

of Botswana in the Security Council on 22 December 1976
[1982nd meetilzg], when the Council was faced with the

serious situation created by South Africa’s closure of
certain border posts between South Africa and Lesotho, an
action aimed at coercing Lesotho into recognizing the
so-called bantustan, Transkei. In a statement during the
discussion of that situation, the representative of Botswana

61. The Security Council should realize that African
States cannot remain passive in the face of the wanton
6

aggressions committed against sister African States, whose
only crime is to extend a helping hand to their beleaguered
brothers and sisters.

convinced that, in view of the excellent relations between
our two countries, the relations between our two delegations will continue to develop within the same spirit of
co-operation.

62. The situation caused by the aggression of the illegal
regime of Salisbury against Botswana, as presented by the
Foreign Minister of Botswana and by various members of
the Council, provides sufficient elements to justify a
condemnation by the Council of the unprovoked aggression
and a demand for the immediate and total abandonment of
those lunatic acts of violation of the sovereignty of African
States. The Council should also request the United Nations
and its specialized agencies and, indeed, other non-governmental organizations to extend assistance to Botswana,
which has been subjected to inhuman pressures in many
forms.

68. I should also like to thank Ambassador Datcu for the
competence, courtesy and efficiency with which he presided over our proceedings during the month of December. I
am sure that you will not mind, Mr. President, if I also pay
a tribute to the remarkable linguistic talents of your
predecessor.
69. In reassembling, as we do now after the new year, we
find that some of our colleagues have departed, a fact
which we regret very sincerely. For two years we have
benefited here from the support and the work of the
representatives of Guyana, Italy, Japan, Sweden and the
United Republic of Tanzania. We shall miss them because
their contribution to the work of the Council was valuable
and conspicuous. However, we are very pleased to welcome
five new members: Canada, the Federal Republic of
Germany, India, Mauritius and Venezuela, whose representatives, for the most part, are experts in United Nations
matters and familiar with the work of this body. They will
bring to our debates the knowledge and experience which
they have displayed in other circumstances, and indeed
sometimes in this body.

63. The Somali delegation unreservedly subscribes to the
words of the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana
when he said, in his statement before the Council on 12
January:
“We are here today to reaffirm our continued belief in,
and dedication to, the cause of international peace and to
condemn the acts of aggression by Southern Rhodesia
against our country and people. It is because we believe
that the present conflict in Southern Rhodesia could
eventually spread into other parts of southern Africa, that
we have decided to bring this matter before the Security
Council.” [Ibid., para. 41.1

70. I should also like to associate myself whole-heartedly
with the compliments which have been paid to Governor
Scranton on the occasion of his forthcoming departure. On
behalf of my predecessor, Mr, de Guiringaud, and on my
own behalf, I should like to tell him that the talent and the
breadth of vision he brought to the representation of his
country in the United Nations have won him the friendship
and unanimous respect of the members of the Council.

64. Finally, allow me to place on record a note of
warning. If the Security Council fails to examine the
present situation in southern Africa in a true and realistic
perspective and to take prompt and adequate measures as
the gravity of the situation requires, then those responsible
for such inaction should be held accountable for the
consequences. In the words of the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana:

71. I now come to the item on our agenda. The French
delegation has listened with greatest attention to the
statement of the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana
[1983rd meeting/, whom I should like to welcome here. He
presented to us clearly and sincerely the complaint of his
country against the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia.
Repeated violations of the frontier of his country and
numerous incidents have occurred and are still occurring.
The international community and the Council cannot
remain indifferent to these facts because of their gravity.
They must come to the assistance of a country which is
suffering from the hostile actions of the r&ime at Salisbury. We are aware, in particular, of the economic
difficulties which confront that country. But that situation
and those incidents recall to our minds the underlying
reasons for our debate, It is the refusal to bring about
majority rule in Rhodesia which is at the root ,.of this
tension. It is the anachronistic nature of a policy which
refuses to give a voice to the majority which has led us into
the present situation. As was stated by the representative of
the Netherlands on behalf of the European Community on
8 December last in the Fourth Committee,3 our nine
countries unreservedly support the efforts made by all
those who have contributed to the preparation and progress

“the present acts of aggression on the part of the regime
in Southern Rhodesia could, if they continue unchecked,
eventually engulf the whole of southern Africa in the sort
of racial conflagration which we all wish to avoid”.
[Ibid/
65. In conclusion, the Somali delegation vehemently urges
the Council to act and to act quickly.
66. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Somalia for his kind words
about my country, my predecessor and me personally.
67. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, it is in your twofold capacity as
Permanent Representative of the Soviet Union and President, for this month, of the Security Council that the
French delegation would like, in its turn, to address to you
its words of welcome and warm congratulations. 1 should
also like to take this opportunity to request you to be good
enough to convey to your predecessor, Ambassador Maiik,
our best wishes for success in the important task which has
been entrusted to him. I wish to say how much we
appreciated the cordiality of our relations with him. We are

3 official Records of the General Assembly, i%irfy-first kxiofz,
Fourth Committee, 42nd meeting.
7

Zimbabwe and of international human values. These pressures are born not from racism but, on the contrary, from
the will of individual blacks and liberal whites in Zimbabwe
to set wrongs right and to achieve their inalienable rights to
self-determination and natibnal independence. That syndrome manifests itself in Ian Smith’s double talk and
brazen-faced hypocrisy in pretending that he is in the
processof working towards majority rule, based on a real
majority government, while he is covertly arranging to put
forward puppets who call themselves the movement ZUPO
[Zimbabwe United People’sOrganization]. That syndrome
is amply evident in the recent atrocities of Ian Smith’s
quixotic hot pursuit of imaginary guerrillas. Like his
mentor Vorster, Ian Smith appears to believe that, by
destroying the refugee camps and by bombing and scaring
villagers within and on the outskirts of besieged Rhodesia,
he can successfully intimidate front-line States in the
process and terrorize border villages within Rhodesia into
subservience. There could be no better evidence than that
from United States Senator Dick Clark, who visited those
refugee camps in Mozambique and attested to the fact that
they were not guerrilla camps. That was as recently as
December last year. As my Government has advised, the
Geneva meeting is a unique opportunity for Ian Smith and
for white minority interests in Zimbabwe. He should take
advantage of the will of African States to make the best out
of Geneva, in spite of the initial doubts which we had about
the usefulness of the Conference and, in particular, about
the motivations behind the Conference.

of the Geneva Conference. They urge all parties to spare *o
effort to bring the Conference to a successfulconclusion as
soon as possible, thus averting further bloodshed and new
hostilities h the region, They consider that it would be
tragic to lose the opportunity to bring about a peaceful
solution. That statement remains just asvalid today. France
supports the efforts of the United Kingdom, and ln
particular the mission undertaken by Ambassador Ivor
Richard, a mission to which most members of the Council
have already given their encouragement. The mission of
Mr. Ivor Richard is now probably in its most delicate phase.
It Is therefore important, in our view, that nothing that is
said here, nor the resolution which will result from our
debate, should in any way hinder his initiative or compromise the successof his mission and thus the prospects for a
peaceful settlement.
72. It seems essential to us today to give to the Covernment and people of Botswana some evidence of support
commensurate with the confidence they have shown in US
in deciding to appeal to the Security Council. The
international community as a whole should also unite its
efforts with the efforts of those who have been striving to
put an end to the present situation in Rhodesia by
facilitating by peaceful means the rapid establishment of
government by majority rule.
73. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Russian): I
thank the representative of France for his kind words about
my predecessor, and I shall certainly convey them to him. I
also thank him for his kind words about me.

78. The acts of aggression committed against independent
States in Africa by terrorists based at Pretoria and at
Salisbury are in clear disregard of provisions of international law and of the Charter of the United Nations. If we
members of the world community, by our silence and lack
of will, fail to act against such terrorist adventures, we may
just as well forget the basic principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity as well as the fundamental premise that
all independent States are equal, no matter how great the
economic or military superiority of one or the other.

74. The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria, I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
75. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): Mr. President, on behalf of
my delegation I bid you welcome to the United Nations.
You represent a country with which my country, Nigeria,
maintains very cordial relations, Permit me to express my
delegation’s congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of this Council during the first month of the
year. The vanguard role played by your country, the Soviet
Union, in the liberation of Africa is traditional and does not
require any comment here, It is a position of principle for
which my Government and people are eternally grateful,

79, Two days ago, we heard the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana [1983rd meetingj give a most lucid
and pathetic account of the events occurring in areas near
the borders of Botswana and Zimbabwe, While I do not
wish to reiterate the specific acts of aggression committed
against African States, a number of pertinent points have
emerged in the complex situation building up in southern
Africa.

76. Like other speakers, I wish to thank you and the other
members of the Security Council for allowing me, on behalf
of my Government, to participate in this debate on the acts
of aggression committed by the terrorists at Salisbury
against independent African States. We still hear the echoes
of the debate on the aggression by racist South Africa
against Lesotho. The debate on the complaint brought
against the illegal rdgime of Salisbury by Zambia also is still
fresh in our minds. The sovereignty of the independent
State of Mozambique has also been constantly violated by
the racist Government in Salisbury,

!80. First, no African State has declared a state of war
between it and the racist regimes at Salisbury and Pretoria.
Pretoria, on the other hand, in order to protect its interests
in southern Africa, has not only done so but has encouraged Salisbury, not only by words but also by action in the
form of invasion, thereby creating a state of war in
southern Africa. African States and, indeed, all men of
conscience the world over have declared their full and
unequivocal support for the oppressed peoples of those
racist-dominated countries in Africa and their solidarity
with the struggle of a people to emancipate itself from the
clutches of racial domination by a settler colonialist r&me
that holds 7 million blacks as hostages in inhuman degradation in Zimbabwe. Those international terrorists based at

77. Today, we are again faced with another example of a
panic syndrome generated by the nervous reactions of a
tyrant under seige, generated by a faltering r&me whose
support, both at the national level and internationally, Is
giving way under the inexorable pressuresof nationalism in
8

Pretoria, with their scions at Salisbury, have not only
carried out acts of war against neighbouring independent
African States, but have gone so far as to enact legislation
empowering their armed forces to attack any black African
States in their way. I refer here to the provision of South
Africa’s National Defense Act of 1976, which represents a
dangerous move in international relations and which provides an umbrella for Salisbury’s actions. Yet, this Council
has declared that there is no threat to peace in southern
Africa.

always upheld among the front-line States, exposed to the
whims and caprices of the foundering southern African
rdgimes, reflects the triumph of the will over overwhelming
oppression and repression. South Africa has successfully
used Ian Smith to sustain a buffer State in Rhodesia.
Rhodesia is, however, under siege and will sooner or later
become independent Zimbabwe. Its actions today are
manifestations of the motions of desperation of a drowning
individual.
85. Fourthly, over 200,000 Africans in Rhodesia are being
forcibly removed from their homes and their lands and
herded into what are called “protected villages” along
Rhodesian borders with African States. At first sight, this
move might seem to be one aimed at protecting those
people from the fighting between the nationalist forces and
the racists. But on second thoughts, as is becoming
increasingly evident, it is clear that this move offers no
protection to those Africans. On the contrary, those
“protected villages” are being used as human shields by the
racist forces in their losing battle against nationalist forces
in that area. The wanton bombing of African cities and
villages within Rhodesia itself is well documented.

81. Secondly, over the past months, international action
against the minority and racist regimes in southern Africa
has almost ground to a halt, At the United Nations, a lot
has been said about the delicate nature of certain initiatives
taken with the aim of evolving solutions for the problems
of southern Africa. As a matter of fact, it goes far beyond
that.
82. We were informed that Vorster was bringing pressure
to bear on Ian Smith. His objective, we were advised, wasto
play a role in a settlement in the interests of majority rule
in Rhodesia. It is evident from direct pronouncements
made by Vorster-which I clearly heard on United States
television two weeks ago-that he has denied ever bringing
such pressuresto bear on Rhodesia and has ruled out such a
method for a solution of the problem of southern Africa. In
order to frustrate international sanctions, South Africa’s
supplies to Rhodesia proceed unabated and continue to be
the main prop for the survival of that illegal regime at
Salisbury. Yet we have been informed that Vorster, who is
the prop of Ian Smith, is an indispensable factor in the
solution of the Rhodesian problem. These very racists, to
whom protection has been so neatly given and on whom a
label of respectability has been bestowed, violate at will the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent African
States such as Botswana, which does not even have a
standing army.

86. Many of us must have read the report of the
International
Commission of Jurists, published some
months ago, which commented profusely and profoundly
on quasi-slavery in Rhodesia. I am informed that the
Master-Servant Act is still in force in Rhodesia. I imagine
that some of us must also have read recent reports compiled
by the Rhodesian Catholic Commission for Justice and
Peace which comment at length on that regime of abduction, torture and death in Rhodesia. I quote from an open
letter published by Bishop Lamont of Umtali following the
bombing of the city of Umtali, within Rhodesia, by the
Rhodesian racist air force:
“The African civilian population has been clearly made
to feel that it is now the deliberate target of what would
normally be called ‘the forces of law and order’. The
army and police have been officially accorded excessive
powers and guaranteed indemnity against the abuse of
them. Approval has been granted for the bombing and
destruction of villages, even though they should contain
innocent people. Obstacles of all kinds have been placed
in the way of those who seek either legal justice or
compensation for death or brutal treatment or loss of
property. The media of communication have been placed
almost entirely under the control of one political
party,“-the
racist political party-“your
own, and are
manipulated constantly to suppress or to distort the
truth.

83. Obviously, aggression by Ian Smith against neighbouring States is incompatible with the spirit of discussion and
compromise that it washoped would prevail at this time, in
order to lead to an amicable solution of the Rhodesian
problem in the interests of both blacks and whites in
Zimbabwe. I believe that Ian Smith is either schizophrenic
or, as usual, insecure. Ian Smith does not act in good faith
and only military pressure by the guerrillas and effective
pressure by the world Powers can get him to end this futile
clinging to phantom power.
84. Thirdly, the Government of Botswana, like some other
independent African States in southern Africa, is today
facing the problem of refugees from Rhodesia and South
Africa. Botswana, which is a poor country and overpowered
by exploitation and by its own dependence on its neighbours, is coping with that problem with immense courage.
Botswana has talked of principles. Botswana represents, as
an international entity, a beau geste in the wilderness of the
exotic fantasies of its racist neighbours. Botswana deserves
succour, not only from Africans, who can hardly protect
themselves against the terrorists from Pretoria and Salisbury, but from the entire international community, for
what Botswana has embarked upon today amounts to the
victory of principle over expediency. What Botswana has

“Nor is this all. In a State which claims to be
democratic, people are restricted or imprisoned without
trial, tortured or tried in camera, or put to death by
secret hanging, and justification for all this barbarity is
sought by you”-Ian Smith-“‘in the name of Christianity
and of Western civilization and for what you call the
‘maintaining of Rhodesian standards’. Surely this is the
final absurdity.”
87. Finally, as members of the world community, we
should begin to ask ourselves in all seriousness what
9

measures we intend to take to contain the explosive
situation at present building up in southern Africa. We have
seen the various manoeuvres of the racists at Pretoria and
Salisbury. They have attempted to destroy the birthright of
millions of Africans in the process of granting sham
independence to homelands. They have employed arm
twisting tactics and international blackmail againstLesotho,
and now it is obvious that they have organized themselves
into a band of international terrorists with the purpose of
harassing independent African States and inflicting untold
hardship on the innocent and defenceless peoples of those
African States.
88. At the level of human dignity, the performance of the
international community leaves much to be desired. We
appear to go for technicalities when the problem is
practical; we go for legality when the problem is political;
we go for expediency when the problem is basic. The
United Nations cannot afford to compromise on human
values. When individual States, in particular, fail to reflect
their national policies and compromise them in their
international relations, they make a total mockery of their
own national values and their own national moral positions.
89. It is the wish of Nigeria that we not commence the
new year by limiting our perspectives to the crucial, but
parochial, problem of Botswana, a front-line partial enclave
State and an old kingdom, involved in today’s debate. We
must take another comprehensive look at the issues and the
situation in southern Africa. We cannot sit by while, on an
almost daily basis, some of the brutal, oppressive, suppressive and gangster-like military adventures in human history
continue to be undertaken by racist white minority regimes
in southern Africa. We cannot sit by while people are
hanged in prisons on a daily basis and exterminated without
a second thought. The racist r+imes defy all the principles
of international relations while we debate technicalities in
the Security Council about the applicability of Chapter VII
of the Charter. Some members of the Council cannot afford
much longer to put behind them the issues of southern
Africa-issues that impinge on their very way of life-in
favour of issues of profit and loss and economic gain at the
expense of the black continent.

91, Complaints
are being brought to the attention of the
Council: first, it was Zambia; next Lesotho; today, it is
Botswana. Let us nip this wild bud while it is still YOUng
because, if it is allowed to burst, no one can really foretell
the conseqUenCeS

a

92, I have gone to such length and into such detail because
we can no longer compartmentalize the issues of southern
Af&a, It is obvious that the life-line of the Smith regime is
provided by the racists at Pretoria.
For their survival those
rebels at Salisbury are, to a large extent, dependent on
South Africa. Therefore, Stern international aCtiOn must be
taken by the world community, or we shall continue to
have Rhodesia on our hands; we shall continue to have
Namibia as an embarrassment t0 the COUIEil.
93, The time will soon come to take up this general matter
in the Security Council, as we decided in the General
Assembly, when we come to discuss the question of South
Africa and apartheid. My delegation, like many others, still
has faith in the Council. The situation in southern Africa is
critical, and time is running out.
94. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jhm Russian): I
thank the representative of Nigeria for his kind words about
my country and about me.
95. Like the previous speakers, the representatives of
France and the Federal Republic of Germany, the representative of Nigeria has spoken of the good relations existing
between his country and the Soviet IJnion, and I should
like to stress that we, for our part, whole-heartedly share
that view.
96. The next speaker is the representative of the German
Democratic Republic, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
97. Mr. NEUGEBAUER (German Democratic Republic):
Mr. President, permit me to thank you for the opportunity
given to the delegation of the German Democratic Republic
to explain its position on the item on the agenda.
98. It is a particular pleasure for my delegation to
congratulate you, the newly appointed Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the
United Nations and in the Security Council, on taking over
the high function of President of the Council for the month
of January. Between the German Democratic Republic and
the Soviet Union there exist close, unbreakable bonds of
deep friendship and all-sided co-operation, which are
steadily being further developed and deepened on the basis
of our common aims.

90. It is true that Africa has no nuclear power, and no
outstanding economic power, and that therefore Africa is
secondary among the concerns of the Western Powers. But
how can they give up their source of chrome, dismonds and
gold? How would they protect the Cape route? How can
African leaders sustain European values, security, Chrlstianity and democracy in black Africa and keep out
communism-and, obviously, Cuba? As we have warned
before, the more we go for the ephemeral and lose sight of
the long-term developments in southern Africa, the more
we circumscribe the options available to the blacks of
southern Africa in the political, ideological, economic and
other fields. As the Bishop of Umtali said after the
bombardment by the rebel Rhodesian Air Force of that
city to which I referred earlier:

99. The position taken by the Soviet Union in the
Security Council has always been characterized by a striving
to strengthen peace and international security, in accordancewith the principles of Leninist foreign policy, Mr. President) in Your introductory address a few days ago /1983rd
meetinglj You reaffirmed that the delegation of the USSR,
under Your leadership, would continue to work with that
noble aima In this struggle for the implementation of our
common cause, the strengthening of peace, the elimination
Of SoUrces of conflict, the termination of the arms race, the

“Far from your policies defending Christianity and
Western civilization, as you claim, they mock the law of
Christ and make communism attractive to the African
people.”
10

full implementation of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and the liquidation of the remnants of racism
and apartheid, we whole-heartedly wish you much success.
100. The Security Council, now with a changed composition, is facing the task, this year, of taking significant and
effective decisions for the strengthening of peace and
security. This requires a clear engagement and political will
on the part of all the members of the Council for the
elimination of the last strongholds of colonialism and
racism in southern Africa-and the complaint of Botswana
being on the agenda at present is a first test for it. The
delegation of the German Democratic Republic would like
to extend to the old and new members of the Council
sincere wishes for success in exercising the mandate
entrusted to them by the Charter.
101, The German Democratic Republic has always consistently advocated the liquidation of colonialism and
racism and has expressed active solidarity with the peoples
fighting for the implementation of their right to selfdetermination and independence. It has therefore repeatedly spoken in the Security Council. As a member of the
Special Committee against Apartheid, it has always advocated the revelation of the crimes of the regime of
apartheid at Pretoria and its appendage at Salisbury,
unmasking its protectors, increasing the protests of world
public against the racist regimes and supporting the national
liberation movements of militant Africa. It is that position
which moves my delegation also to state the views of the
German Democratic Republic on the agendaitem.

mailing Lesotho by arbitrary measures into recognizing the
so-called independent Transkei. Such attempted extortions
are a clear interference in the internal affairs of States.
They contradict the purposes of the Charter and the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
105. There is ever new proof of the fact that the constant
escalation of the aggressive policy of apartheid against free,
independent African States, including the manoeuvres of
bantustanization, can only fan the flames of the tensions
and increase the danger of the peace-threatening policy
pursued by the racist regimes in southern Africa.
106. The troops of the Smith regime at Salisbury do not
lag behind in heeding such “illustrative lessons” of their
Pretoria masters. Regularly we hear of new acts and threats
of aggression against Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana.
By all means of extortion and diversion, including the
broadcasting of hostile propaganda, they try to achieve
neo-colonialist interests.
107. The Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, His
Excellency Mr. Archibald Mogwe, in a matter-of-fact way,
gave an illustrative picture of the provocations and acts of
aggression which are being directed against his country
[ibid.]. He informed us of constant provocations and
violations of the State borders of his country, of repeated
provocative infringements of those borders by uniformed
persons of the Salisbury clique, of murders of nationals
which remain unpunished, and of acts of sabotage, theft
and arson. All that is typical of the policy of the illegal
Smith regime-but that is not an invention of Mr. Smith.
We always come across that when imperialist, dyed-in-thewool reactionary forces, hostile to detente and failing to
recognize the actual situation, try to interfere in the
internal affairs of other States, in contravention of the
principles of international law, and when they believe in
influencing the policy of other States by attempts at
extortion in order to hinder the peoples in their sovereign
development.

102. At its recent session, the General Assembly, by the
votes of an overwhelming majority of the States Members,
adopted clear-cut resolutions of principle, proceeding from
the requirements of the present situation, on intensifying
the struggle for the liquidation of the last strongholds of
colonialism, racism and apartheid in South Africa, Zimbabwe and Namibia. They reflect the great advance of the
peoples’ struggle in southern Africa. It has become evident
to everyone that the day is not far when those peoples,
united in the non-aligned movement and firmly supported
by their natural ally, the socialist States, will definitively
implement their right to self-determination, thus making a
significant contribution to the strengthening of peace and
international security.

108. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
fully shares the determined condemnation of these aggressive practices committed by the illegal Smith regime as
outlined by the Foreign Minister of Botswana. It is our view
that the fact that the Government of Botswana, in the light
of the aforementioned facts, is taking steps to secure and
protect its State borders in the interest of the independent,
sovereign development of that country, is not only Iegitimate but also springs from a sense of responsibility and a
concern for the maintenance of peace. That undertaking
serves the strengthening of peace and international security
in southern Africa and in the whole world. It is therefore
fully legitimate that a request be made for support for
Botswana by determined and effective measures which are
necessary, owing to the aggressive acts of the Smith regime.

103. In view of this change in the international balance of
forces, the fascist rulers in southern Africa, often supported
by their protectors and henchmen, make desperate
attempts and manoeuvres to avert their inevitable end. In
doing so they do not shrink from provocations threatening
peace and acts of aggression against peaceful, independent
African States.
104. Last year, the Security Council condemned the
armed intervention by the regime of apartheid against the
young People’s Republic of Angola. In contravention of
unambiguous resolutions of the United Nations, the troops
of the racist Vorster regime are still illegitimately occupying
Namibia. The Council has also had to deal with acts of
armed aggression by the regime of apartheid against
Zambia, It was only a few weeks ago that the Council
condemned the Pretoria regime for its attempts at black-

109. In this connexion, the question arises as to how the
Smith regime at Salisbury is able and for how long it will
remain able to disregard world public opinion and, as an
international trouble-maker, to jeopardize independent
African States and impede their progress on the road of
development by pursuing a policy in line with the sovereign
decision of their peoples.
11

strongholds of racism and apartheid, and not through
imperialist machinations and diversionary manoeuvres,
phony promises and schemes to split the nationaI liberation
movement.

110. IS it not strange that in the General Assembly and
elsewhere we hear statements which give the impression
that almost all States strictly comply with the sanctions
imposed on the minority regime at Salisbury and observe
the arms embargo against Pretoria? In reality, however,
certain States oppose the imposition of a mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa, and new facts constantly
come to light about the large military build-up of the racist
rdgimes in southern Africa. Thus, it has been reported that
the illegal Smith regime has, over the last two Years, more
than doubled its armaments budget and allocated more
than $102 million for 1975/76 to equip its army of 24,000
men with even more powerful weapons. And, according to
The New York ‘Times, Mr. Smith has expressed “his belief
that Rhodesia would get more sympathy and aid from the
free world, including military supplies”. Does he refer, in
mentioning the “free world”, to those who are so free as
not to hinder the recruitment of mercenaries for the Smith
rCgime? Brigadier Derry McIntyre, one of the leading
military planners of the Smith regime, openly said the
following to a Western correspondent:

115. The situation requires clear and unambiguous measures by the Security Council against the racists at Pretoria
and Salisbury: strict implementation and extension of
sanctions; imposition of a mandatory arms embargo against
South Africa; world-wide political isolation of the racist
regimes, including termination of diplomatic, consular ancl
other relations; and clear recognition of and support for the
national liberation movement.
116. Just as the representatives of the German working
class have always done, the German Democratic Republic,
as a socialist State, will continue to side firmly and
undauntedly with the African peoples in their hard struggle.
That was reaffirmed only a few days ago by the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the German Socialist
Unity Party and Chairman of the Council of State of the
German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, when he
stressed the following at the New Year’s reception for the
heads of diplomatic missions in the capital of the German
Democratic Republic, Berlin:

“This war cannot be waged defensively; we have to
strike back. I would need more helicopters, modern
fighter aircraft and rockets. If I had them, I would be able
to crush the advance of the Communists within 24 hours
and to conquer the logistic port of Beira.”

“Our country will uphold its solidarity with and
support for the nationally liberated States of Asia, Africa
and Latin America fighting for peace and social progress
and against neo-colonialism, racism and apartheid . . . The
peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa fighting
for national liberation must be granted independence and
self-determination at long last.”

Thus, under the pretext of fighting communism, that which
is at stake is openly stated, namely, aggression against
independent African States.
111. In view of those facts, we share the concern of the
African States at the continued activities of certain imperialist military interests in southern Africa and we call for
the strict implementation by ah States, including all the
members of the Security Council, of the unambiguous
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session.

117. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
expresses its hope that the Security Council will take
decisions on the present agenda item, taking fully into
account the serious peace-threatening situation and will
support the peoples of Africa in their struggle to achieve
peace and security also in the southern part of the African
continent.

112. It is high time that those forces and States which
have, so far, backed the racist rCglmes in southern Africa,
put an end at last to their policy of delay, If they did that,
within a short time peace and security could be achieved
also in that reglon of the world. For that purpose, what is
required is the political will to discontinue regarding
southern Africa, its peoples and its natural resources as
cheap objects of exploitation. To that end it is necessary,
among other things, to implement the demand for the
termination of investments made by the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session, at the initiative of Sweden.

118. We assure the brave people of Botswana of the firm
solidarity of the people of the German Democratic Republic.
119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Ru&n):
The
representative of the German Democratic Republic spoke
of the fraternal relations existing between our two countries. We completely endorse what he said.
120. The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

113. Those who, in view of the situation endangering
peace and security in southern Africa, pay lip service to the
right of the peoples to independence and self-determination
but who, at the same time, extend their economic and
other co-operation to the racist regimes, bear the responsibility for a situation arising from a further delay in the
granting to the peoples of southern Africa of their right to
independence and self-determination.

121, Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): Before I begin my statement, I wish to express our
appreciation to the members of the Security Council for
having granted our request to participate in this debate.
122. I should like to point out a unique coincidence,
Mr. President. You have begun your work at the United
Nations-assuming the important responsibility of presiding
over the Security Council-in the month of-January, at ihe

114. The lessons of history prove that the road to
freedom independence, peace and progress in southern
Africa can only lead through the elimination of the last
12

6

beginning’ of a year which will mark the celebration by the
entire world of the sixtieth anniversary of a most important
event for our Country, the October Revolution, which not
only constituted the end of the Czarist oppression of your
people, but &O opened up for all mankind a new era that
saw the beginning of the end of the oppression of all
peoples. Furthermore, it is a matter of satisfaction to us to
participate in this debate under your presidency, because of
the deep ties of solidarity, friendship and fraternal cooperation between the Soviet Union and Cuba, ties which
constitute one of the basic pillars of my country’s foreign
policy.
123. We wished to participate in this debate in order to
demonstrate our solidarity with the people and Government of Botswana, victims of aggression by racist regimes
-in the specific case before the Council, the illegal Smith
r&me.
124. Botswana is a small country that recently obtained
independence. It is almost surrounded by hostile regimes
and since its accession to independence, as was so eloquently explained by the Foreign Minister of that country,
[1983rd meeting/, has been the victim of attacks, provocation and almost constant harassment from its border with
Southern Rhodesia.
125. It is also obvious, as the Foreign Minister stated to
the Council, that these acts of provocation by the Ian
Smith regime have been increasing recently in proportion to
the growing bankruptcy
of colonialism and racism in
southern Africa. It is appropriate to emphasize that this
policy of provocation on the part of the racist minority in
Rhodesia is proof of the hypocrisy of its manoeuvres for
seeking a so-called peaceful solution to the Rhodesian
problem, While, on the one hand, the spokesmen of the
Smith regime participate in negotiations supposed to
culminate inthe establishment of a free and democratic
regime in Rhodesia, on the other hand, its soldiers are
almost constantly violating the territorial borders of Botswana, committing murder, destroying property and engaging in armed acts of provocation against a peaceful
population.
126. Botswana, its Government and people face a particularly difficult si’tuation in view of the circumstances of the
country, which were so clearly explained by the Minister
for External Affairs. Nevertheless, that Government and
that people are maintaining an attitude of dignity in
supporting the principles of justice in Africa; they are
maintaining an attitude of decorum by participating in the
common struggle of the front-line States in Africa. That
country has thereby earned the gratitude of all those who
are struggling against imperialism, colonialism and racism.
That gratitude was very clearly expressed in the agreements
of the Fifth Summit Conference of the Non-Aligned
Countries, which was held at Colombo last year and at
which the non-aligned countries, besides expressing their
solidarity with and support for the people and the
Government of Botswana, selected that country to be a
member of the Coordinating Committee of the NonAligned Countries, thereby recognizing the important role
Botswana is playing in Africa and its decisive contribution
to the objectives and ideals of all non-aligned countries.

127. My delegation trusts that the Council will prove its
ability to adopt decisions in keeping with the gravity of the
situation as submitted to it for consideration and will find a
solution that will provide the necessary assistance for
Botswana in order to enable it better to meet the difficult
conditions entailed by its independent and peaceful policy
in the midst of a hostile environment.
128. But it is also fitting to indicate that it is the Council’s
duty to go to the root of the problems that have given rise
to the situation being faced today by Botswana, which is
none other than the persistence of the colonialist and racist
regimes in southern Africa and their perpetually aggressive
policy against the African continent. A glance at the
Council’s work last year clearly demonstrates that all the
African States of the southern part of that continent came
one by one before the Council to denounce the crimes and
the attacks of which they had been victims. In all cases, the
Council had to recognize that the aggressors were the racist
regimes which survived in that part of the world.
129. As long as this situation continues, as long as the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole are not able to apply concrete measuresto put an
end to the aggressionof the racist cliques of southern
Africa and as long as the Council is not in a position to
respond appropriately to the constant appeals of the
GeneralAssembly, this body will unfortunately have to go
on meetingto receive complaintsfrom independent African
States. The Council will have to meet to hear complaints
about violations by the racist regimesand will continue to
prove by experience that those regimes are not only an
affront to the principles and purposesof the Charter, are
not only violating the rights of the populations they
oppresswithin their territories, but are alsoa clear threat to
international peaceand security.
130. In expressingour support for Botswanaand our hope
that the Council will find itself in a position to respondto
the appealmade by its delegation,my delegationtoo wishes
to expressits conviction that we must redoubleour activity
aseffectively as possiblein the future so as to get to the
roots of the problems which continue to affect southern
Africa. In this respect, it is up to the Council fully to
shoulderits responsibility.
131. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian]: I
thank the representativeof Cuba for the kind words he said
about my country and for what he said about relations
betweenour two countries.
132. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf of
the delegationof Pakistan, I extend to you our very warm
felicitations on your assumptionof the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. May I alsowelcome you,
AmbassadorTroyanovsky, asthe PermanentRepresentative
to the United Nations of our great friend and neighbour,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. I am certain that,
with your wide experience and your high professionaland
human qualities, of which the renown has preceded you,
you will direct the work of the Council with successand
dispatch, The delegation of Pakistan looks forward to
continuing the close co-operation which has existed be.
tween it and that of the Soviet Union under your
13

tion. One of the fundamental aimsof the United Nations
enshrinedin the Charteris to put an end to colonialismand
racismwherever they exist. The General Assembly has
adoptedresolutionsspecifically K.COgniZing
the legitimacy
of liberation movementsand enjoining Member States to
]lelp and assistthose engagedin a struggleagainstcolonialism and racism. Thus, Botswana,by giving refuge and
assistance
to those who are persecutedand oppressedin
Southern Rhodesia, is furthering the causeswhich are
fundamentalto the United Nationsand dear and sacredto
all peoplesand countriesthat have sufferedat the handsof
imperialismand colonialism.The Government and people
of Botswanadeserveour appreciationand the international
community must respond positively to its Government’s
appealfor help.

distinguished predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Yakov Malik,
to whom I would request you to convey the good wishes of
our delegation.
133. I should also like to express my delegation’s aPPreci*
tion of the skilful manner in which Ambassador Datcu of
Romania, as President of the Council, conducted our
deliberations in the month of December. It was Proof of
both his diplomatic skill and the respect in which his
country is held in the international community, that the
Council’s important deliberations in that month were
conducted and concluded successfully and to the Satisfaction of all concerned.

134. I also join the previous speakers in extending a very
warm welcome to the new members of the Security
139. The Foreign Minister of BotswanaapprisedUS of the
Council: Canada,the FederalRepublicof Germany,India,
Mauritius and Venezuela.Welook forward to workingin as difficulties faced by his country in meeting the military
close co-operationwith them as with their predecessors: threat from the Smith rigime. Botswana is a small
developingcountry now being forced to divert its limited
AmbassadorJackson of Guyana, AmbassadorVinci of
resourcesfrom economicdevelopmentto defence and to
Italy, AmbassadorAbe of Japan,Ambassador
Rydbeck of
the provision of succour for the victims of the racist and
Swedenand AmbassadorSalimof the United Republicof
Tanzania, who contributed so much to the successful colonialist persecutionin Southern Rhodesia. In the cirwe considerit to be the responsibility of the
working of the Councilduringtheir periodof membership. cumstances,
United Nationsand its specializedagenciesto provide all
135. Soonwe shallbe losinga highly respectedcolleague, possiblehelp and assistanceto the Government of BotGovernor Scranton, whoseassociationwith US, though swana.
short, wasnoteworthy in manyways.Hisperceptionof the
140. Can anyone doubt that the tension in the area will
human element in the problemswhich came before the
Council, his forthright mannerof dealingwith complex not subsideand that the conflict will continue to worsen
issuesand his ready wit will be missedby us and never unlessand until the illegal regimein Southern Rhodesiais
forgotten. I requestthe United Statesdelegationto convey dislodgedand majority rule brought to that country? All
to him our bestwishesfor all success
and happiness
in the
efforts to that end, in the Security Council and elsewhere,
yearsto come.
in particular in the Conference at Geneva, should be
intensified in order to achieve that objective. We were
136. On 12 January[1983rd meeting],the Councilheard heartenedwhen the Genevatalks on the future of Southern
the Minister for External Affairs of Botswanadescribe,in
Rhodesiacommenced.However, the lack of progressin
an objective manner,the actsof intervention and violence thosetalks has been a discouragingdevelopment.Legally,
-in brief, aggression-towhich his country has been morally and politically, the Government of the United
subjectedby the illegalSmithregimein SouthernRhodesia. Kingdomcontinuesto bear the responsibility for finding a
The security forces of the Smith regimehave repeatedly solution for the Rhodesianproblem and we hope that it
violated the sanctity of the bordersof Botswana,and acts will do all in its power to that end. We continue to expect
of provocation, intimidation and outright intervention positive resultsfrom the Genevatalks andwish Ambassador
committed againstBotswanaby the Smith regimehave Ivor Richardspeedysuccess
in his endeavours.Meanwhile,
been increasing,both in number and in intensity. The the Council must, in our view, remain seized of this
people of Botswanaand the refugeesfrom Southern problem, which posesa potential threat to peace in the
Rhodesiacontinue to suffer from the depredationsof the
region.
security forcesof the SmithrCgime.The seriousness
of the
situation is clearly evident from the fact that the illegal 141. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
regime in Southern Rhodesiahas declared the entire thank the representativeof Pakistanfor his kind words
Botswana-Southern
Rhodesiaborderareaa war zone. Thus, about my country and I shouldlike to say that I will take
in fact, the Smith r6gimehasimposedupon Botswanaan great pleasurein conveying his complimentsto my predeillegalstateof war.
cessor.
137. This is a challengenot only to Botswanabut to the
142. The next speakeris the representativeof Equatorial
United Nationsasa whole.It is the view of the delegation Guinea.I invite him to take a seatat the Council table and
of Pakistanthat the Security Councilshouldcondemnthe
to makehisstatement.
acts of intervention andviolation of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Botswana.Furthermore, the Council 143. Mr. ECUA MIKO (EquatorialGuinea)(interpretation
shoulddemandthat suchactsceaseforthwith.
from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me, first of all, to
welcomeYOU and wish you a pleasantstay in New York
138. The basiccauseof the presentunsettledandworsen- andalsoto expressthe happiness
of my delegationat seeing
ing situation
in southernAfrica is the persistence
there of
the representativeof a great country, the Soviet Union,
the doctrine andpracticeof colonialistand racistdoming. with which the Governmentof the Republic of Equatorial
14

Guinea maintains excellent relations of friendship and
co-operation, presiding over the Security Council in so
effective a manner, having only just arrived at the United
Nations. We wish you success in your new mission.
144. The brazen attitude of the illegal, racist rigime of
Pretoria and Salisbury has gone beyond the normal-and
indeed even abnormal-limits. In spite of the fact that those
inhuman actions of Vorster and Smith enjoy the full
support of a group of imperialist States, there is still
complete justification for the inalienable right of the people
of Zimbabwe to independence and freedom, in accordance
with the provisions of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV).
145. Unfortunately, all the efforts of the freedom fighters
and of the international community have failed to achieve a
peaceful solution, based on the establishment of majority
rule, to the problem prevailing in Southern Rhodesia. It is
for this reason that the General Assembly and the Security
Council, compelled by the illegal Salisbury rkgime’s disregard of their appeals, have not hesitated to support and
recognlze the legitimacy of the armed struggle which, as a
last resort, the people of Zimbabwe have undertaken
against the oppressive forces of the Ian Smith clique.
146. As I said at the outset, Ian Smith’s attitude, which,
in my delegation’s view, should be on the conscience of the
international community, most particularly at a time when
the Geneva Conference on Zimbabwe is being held, has
gone beyond all limits and can but prejudice the results of
that Conference. The victims, the fighters for a just cause,
have no right to refuge, and when they do find one, the Ian
Smith clique and its agents, which they direct by remote
control, do not hesitate, like the apartheid rhgime, in
violating the territorial integrity of the States of the region,
committing murders and abductions, bombings and arson,
and attacks against security forces and innocent, defenceIess civilians. The archives of the Security Council bear
witness to these acts and can also reveal, if they have not
already done so, Ian Smith’s persistent defiance of all the
resolutions by the United Nations on the subject.
147. On 12 January [1983rd meeting], His Excellency the
Minister for External Affairs of Botswana lucidly and
eloquently submitted to this Council the complaint of his
Government over the acts of aggression and violation to
which his country had been subjected by the illegal racist
regime of the British colony of Southern Rhodesia, acts
which, ever since his country’s accession to independence in
1966, according to yet incomplete data, amount to 36
violations of Botswana’s territorial integrity.
14X. Those who, on the one hand, know the geographical
location of Botswana and the peaceful policy of its
Government, and, on the other hand, are familiar with the
illegal and bloodthirsty regimes which surround it, might
wonder how Botswana had succeeded in remaining, for
almost 11 years, a sovereign and respected State of the
international community. That is why my delegation
believes that, merely because of that unfortunate geographic situation, quite apart from other considerations,
and in accordance with the purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the relevant resolutions, the Govern-

ment of Botswana deserves the financial, economic and
moral support of the international community, to enable it
not only to meet its requirements arising out of the present
circumstances but also to remain a sovereign State with the
same qualities of respectability which have characterized it
for almost 11 years.
149. The Minister for External Affairs of Botswana
reiterated and reaffirmed the inalterable and unequivocal
policy of his Government to grant refuge and assistance to
the victims of the minority regimes of Pretoria and
Salisbury. That statement deserves a tribute from the
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea and
from all struggling Africans, since it honours the United
FIations by its demonstration of willingness to implement
the resolutions on the situation prevailing in southern
Africa.
150. In joining my delegation’s voice to those of others
which have declared themselves in favour of financial and
economic support for the Government of Botswana from
the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as well as
from the international community in general, in order to
prevent the execution of its development projects from
being brought to a halt by the need to implement an
unforeseen security programme, my delegation similarly
wishes to endorse the appeal addressed to the Security
Council by the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana,
to the effect that:
“The unprovoked aggression against Botswana by the
Smith regime stems from a more fundamental problem,
namely, the denial of the right of self-determination to
the vast majority of the people of Southern Rhodesia. If
it were not for this problem, I should not be here today.
The Security Council should therefore also use this
opportunity to reaffirm its belief in the inalienable right
of all the people of Southern Rhodesia to self-determination and independence on the basis of majority rule.”
[Ibid., para. 42.1
151. I wish, on this occasion, to reiterate our firm
conviction that Zimbabwe will be independent, since the
attacks against Mozambique and Botswana and the threats
against Zambia are clear messages announcing the catastrophic end of the illegal minority rCgime of Ian Smith. The
victories of Angola, Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam are
typical illustrations of the fact that not even military might
can silence the cry of freedom.
152. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to thank you
and, through you, all the other members of the Security
Council for having given me the opportunity to participate
in this important debate.
153. Last but not least, on behalf of my delegation, I
congratulate the new members of the Council: Canada,
Mauritius, India, the Federal Republic of Germany and
Venezuela, The policies of their respective Governments in
favour of the restoration of international peace and security
are well known to us, and we trust that during their term of
office in the Council, they will contribute to the peaceful
solution of the problems which this important United
Nations body will have to face.

handful of white racists-has been defying it. We therefore
turn once again to the United Kingdom, the administering
Power, which bears the full responsibility, for Ian Smith
and his clique are not subject to international law.

1.54. Similarly, we wish full success to the representatives
of the outgoing members of the Council: Guyana, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Sweden, Italy and Japan. We
appreciate the work they have done in the Council and we
hope that they will continue to co-operate with its
members even though absent from the Council table.

159. Not only do the insecurity and grave tension created
and maintained in southern Africa by the white racists of
Salisbury and Pretoria constitute flagrant violations of
international peace and security; above all, unless we are
vigilant, they may lead to a bloody racial confrontation,
with all the tragic consequences that would ensue for the
fragile balance that we strive to maintain in the world. The
state of war is no longer potential: it already exists because
the Salisbury racists have declared the 640 kilometre
frontier between Botswana and Southern Rhodesia to be a
zone of war and an operational zone.

155. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Equatorial Guinea for his kind
words about my country and about me personally.
156. The next speaker is the representative of Mali, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
157. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (interpretation jkm French):
Allow me first of all, on behalf of the delegation of Mali, to
welcome you, Sir, to New York and to the United Nations
and to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council. We are all the more pleased
because you are an eminent personality of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the cradle of the great Lenin,
which has made an exceptional contribution to the Iiberation of oppressed peoples and to the qualitative transformation of world society. History will also record that your
country initiated the celebrated General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV) which contains the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. I cannot fail to mention here the excellent
relations existing between our two countries since mine
acceded to independence. The fact that the Security
Council is starting its work in 1977 by a review of the
decolonization of the British colony of Southern Rhodesia,
and that under your presidency, is more than symbolic for
us, because you are the worthy representative of a country
which, since the Great October Revolution of 1917 has,
with unswerving consistency, given its moral, political,
diplomatic and material support to all national liberation
movements throughout the world. The cause of the
liberation of Africa, and particularly that of the decolonization of the British colony of Southern Rhodesiajwhich
concerns us today, cannot therefore be better served, Your
lengthy diplomatic experience, your political commitment
and your great competence confirm that conviction. ‘I:,

160. The repeated aggressions of those who uphold
apartheid in Southern Rhodesia and southern Africa against
Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola and Lesotho
are but the acts of despair of illegal regimes in the throes of
death. Indeed, rejected as they are by the international
community, fought against and harassed from within their
countries by the nationalists and the progressive wing of the
white minorities, they have resorted to armed aggression
against the neighbouring independent States so as to hasten
conflagration and thus give vent to their hatred of mankind.
In Botswana alone, from 1966 to date, there have been 38
frontier violations. ,The sinister “scorched earth” policy is
therefore already under way in southern Africa.
161. What other explanation or justification could there
be for the raids of the armed troops of the rebel Ian Smith
against Botswana? One certainly cannot say that that
country, which does not have even an army, has warlike
intentions, Botswana has nothing but a police force to
maintain order within its borders. It is a peaceful country
with no warlike ambitions, whose people rally round its
Government and devote all their time and resources to
programmes of national construction. AI1 the evidence
brought here to this Council confirms that.
162. But Botswana’s crime is that, in conformity with
international law, it gave asylum on its territory to
Rhodesian, Namibian and South African nationalists who
had been persecuted and hunted by the mercenaries of Ian
Smith and Vorster. What an irony of fate: the international
community is at this very time meeting at the Palais des
Nations at Geneva, to prepare a draft convention on
territorial asylum. Botswana’s crime is having applied and
strictly observed the relevant resolutions adopted by the
United Nations to bring the rebels Ian Smith and Vorster to
heel. Botswana’s crime is being a peace- and freedom-loving
country and an intransigent defender of the Charter and the
noble ideals of the Organization. Botswana’s crime, finally,
is having become a front-line State in the struggle which the
international community has been waging for 11 years
against the rebel Salisbury regime.

158. As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
complaint of the Government of Botswana against the rebel
regime at Salisbury once again raises the problem of the
decolonization of the British colony of Southern Rhodesia
and of the elimination of apartheid in southern Africa. On
12 January [1983rd meeting], we followed with deep
feeling and great interest the concise, clear and poignant
statement by His Excellency the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana, our brother Archibald Mogwe, on the
repeated criminal aggressions by the armed troops of the
racist Ian Smith regime against his country. We shall not
repeat the sorry account of abductions, murderous raids on
peaceful, defenceless villages, incursions, surprise attacks,
bombings and harassment which the soldiers of Ian Smith
are guilty of committing on Botswana’s territory. We shall
say only that it is high time the international community
brought to heel the rebel regime of Southern Rhodesia
which, since 11 November 1965-the date of the illegal
proclamation of independence of the Territory by a

163. The Government of Sir Seretse Khama has certainly
not come here to request the generous assistance of the
Organization. It is here, confident in its right, to demand
that the law be applied. This is a question of compensation
for injury suffered by his country and people because they

16

have remained faithful to the Charter and the lofty values it
enshrines. The Government of Botswana has not come to
seek favours but to claim what is due. The delegations
which have preceded me have been unanimous in recogniz.
ing that.

humour and is prepared to engage in dialogue. In diplomatic circles at the United Nations, Governor Scranton gave
his country a respectable image, felicitously combining
power, objectivity and courtesy. That is certainly the
feeling among all the anonymous observers who worked
with him every day. We are sure that he will have the
happiest memories of his stay at the United Nations, which,
despite the vicissitudes punctuating its life, remains the best
multinational, integrated, democratic society in the world.
We have no doubt that, in the future, he will remember
nostalgically the pollution caused by the smokers who
surrounded him at the Security Council table, causing him
some inconvenience. Nevertheless, this is one of the
pleasant aspects of our work in this house. Indeed, Governor
Scranton said so yesterday evening-with great friendship, I
must add. We express our best wishes to Mrs. Scranton, his gracious wife, whose assistance and support,
although discreet, have certainly contributed greatly to his
success.

164. With the resumption of violence and armed aggressions on the frontiers of freedom in southern Africa, the
elimination of racist and minority r@imes prevailing there
becomes an imperative for the international community.
We should not allow ourselves to be distracted by the
Geneva Conference on the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia, which in any case was blocked from the outset
because of the intransigence of the rebel Smith. The
international community should strengthen the isolation of
those regimes SO as to hasten their collapse, which is still a
prerequisite for the return of peace to that long-suffering
region of southern Africa.
165. My delegation remains convinced that the insidious
campaign undertaken by certain impenitent imperialist
circles, which have completely misunderstood the trend of
history, to try to give a certain credibility and respectability
to the rebels Smith and Vorster, will have no effect on
international public opinion nor any impact on our ardour
in the combat we are waging in Africa in the name of
freedom and peace, the very ideals for which this Organization was created.

170. In conclusion, I should like, through you, Mr. President, to thank the members of the Security Council for
having authorized my delegation to participate in this
important debate.
171. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Mali for the appreciation that
he expressed for my country’s policy.

166. For its part, my delegation greets the courage of the
people and Government of Botswana, for they are in the
vanguard of the struggle that we are waging against the
white Powers in Southern Africa. It solemnly reaffirms,
through me, the total solidarity and militant support of the
people and Government of Mali for the brother people of
Botswana and its Government, unyielding bulwarks of
freedom in the very centre of the closed world of apartheid.

172. I should now like to make a statement as representative of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
173. It is very noteworthy that the Security Council has
begun its work in 1977 with a discussion of a problem
relating to southern Africa. This demonstrates the high
degree of topicality of these problems that have been
constantly on the agenda of the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies, as well as of various international
meetings. On the other hand, it confirms the alarming fact
that the racist regimes of southern Africa still have no
intention of renouncing their criminal aggressive policies
towards neighbouring African States. This means that the
young, independent States which, by an accident of
geography, happen to be in the immediate proximity of the
last bulwarks of anachronistic colonialism and racism, are
not at all insured against acts of open aggression, acts of
aggression that flagrantly violate their sovereignty and
territorial integrity and cause them economic and other
kinds of damage.

167. The victory of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Azania and
Namibia is inevitable because, in the struggle they are
waging for their independence, they have justice and right
on their side.
168. The decisions that will be taken by the Council at the
end of this series of meetings are crucial for the evolution
of the situation prevailing today in southern Africa, In
endorsing the legitimate claims of the Government of
Botswana, the Council will accelerate the collapse of the
rebel Ian Smith regime and at the same time will deal a
serious blow to apartheid, that shameful blot on mankind’s
escutcheon.

174, The new chain of criminal actions of this kind by the
Southern Rhodesian racists was brought to the Security
Council’s attention in a letter from the Permanent Representative of Botswana dated 22 December 1976 [S/12262/,
and was set forth in detail in the statement made by the
Minister for External Affairs of that country [1983rd
meeting].

169. In conclusion, I should like to join all those who have
preceded me in extending to Governor Scranton, the
Permanent Representative of the United States of America,
who bid the Council farewell yesterday, our best wishes for
success in the new functions which he will be assuming. I
wouId ask the delegation of the United States to transmit
those wishes to Governor Scranton. My delegation is duty
bound to recognize that, as an accomplished statesman,
Governor Scranton WIIS able, during his stay at the United
Nations, to reconcile the complex requirements of his lofty
mission with the generosity of the American people. He is a
sincere, energetic, serious person who has a sense of

17.5. The position of the Soviet Union with regard to the
explosive problems of southern Africa has been and remains
clear-cut and well-defined. As Mr. Gromyko, the Foreign
Minister of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, pointed
17

out in his statement during the general debate at the
thirty-first session of the General Assembly:
“Today, as always, the Soviet Union stands firmly by
the side of the fighting peoples of southern Africa. We are
in favour of the unconditional ending of the policy of
apar&eid and racism in South Africa, of the immediate
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia, of the unreserved transfer of all power to the people of Zimbabwe.
No one will ever see the Soviet Union failing to oppose
attempts to prolong colonial and racist oppressionunder
whatever guise.“4
176. Today the independent State of Botswana has
becomethe target of aggressive
actionsby the colonialists
and racists.The guilty party in this caseis the ihegalracist
rggimeof the white minority in Salisbury,which haslong
been defying the whole world, the entire international
community. That rtQime, repeatedly condemnedin so
many resolutions and decisionsof the GeneralAssembly
and the Security Council, hasnot given ear to the voice of
reason,nor hasit heededthe legitimate demandsof world
public opinion, It has becomeheavily involved in crimes
against the peace-lovingpeople of Zimbabwe and other
African nations. Its purposeis quite clear. The racistsof
Salisbury are attempting in this way to stave off the
historically inevitable collapseof the shamefulsystemof
colonialismin Zimbabwe and to impedethe estabiishment
in that country of majority rule. But we are sure that the
remorseless
course of events, the very facts of political life,
will eventually put everything in its proper place.
177. The very fact that the Security Councilis considering
the complaint of Botswanawith regardto violations of its
territorial sovereignty testifies eloquently to the fact that
neither for that country nor for southernAfrica asa whole
can there be any genuine peace or security so long as
hotbeds of colonialism,racismand apartheidare allowedto
persistin the area. Only by the elimination, once and for
all, of the illegal racist regimeswill the peoplesof southern
Africa seethe opening up of any reliable prospectsfor a
free and independent national development in circumstancesof security and peace. That has beenpointe.d out
here by the representativesof a numberof African States
membersof the Security Council and alsoby the representatives of States invited to participate in our discussion.
Thus, at the Council’s meeting on 12 January, the
representativeof Benin quite correctly statedthat:
‘<The acts of aggressionand provocation, aswell asall
the other indescribablyinhumanacts committed daily by
the Smith clique againstindependentAfrican States of
the area, constitute a genuineand constant threat which
we would be wrong to minimize,” [Ibid., para. 81.1

“The United Nations and, indeed, the international
community as a whole should not losesight of the fact
that the underlying causeof the southernAfrican conflict
pars.252.

Thirty-first

Session, Plenary Meetings, 7th

178. Military raids and acts of provocation on the part of
the Rhodesianarmy againstMozambique,actsof aggression
againstBotswana,violations of the sovereignty of Zambia,
the stepping up of repression:these are the methodsby
which the ruling circles in Salisbury are attempting to
maintain the domination by the white minority in that
country.
179. The struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for its
liberation is being steppedup. It is enjoying the legitimate
backingof peace-lovingforcesthroughout the world which
support the immediate liberation of the enslavedcolonial
peoplesand the elimination of the sickeningpracticesof
racismandapartheid.
180. This is the background againstwhich the Security
Councilis now consideringa specificitem, the complaintof
Botswanaabout the aggressiveactions of the Southern
Rhodesianregime against that independent and peaceloving African State.
181. We have always followed with sympathy the struggle
of that country against all manifestationsof racism and
very much appreciateits contribution to everything that is
being done to eliminate colonialismon the African continent.
lX2. The Soviet Union viewsthe aggressive
actions of the
Southern Rhodesianracist regimeagainstthe independent
and sovereignState of Botswanaasone more crime on the
part of the racists and asa most flagrant violation of the
principlesof international law. Such actions on the part of
the Southern Rhodesianracistsat the sametime makeit
more difficult for that country to overcomeits economic
backwardnessand impede the economic progressof the
peopleof Botswana.
183. Of course,responsibilityfor the situation belongsnot
only to those who are acting as the direct arms of
aggression;
that responsibility is alsosharedby those who
connive at the racists and encouragethem by violating
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia imposed by the
Security Council and those who are providing the racist
regimesin southern Africa with political, military, economic and moral support and are doing everything in their
power to keep them there in the south of the African
continent.
184. In the circumstances,the material responsibilityfor
providing compensationfor the injury causedto Botswana
and other African countries by the racist regime of
Southern Rhodesiashouldbe borne by that regimeand also
by those States and monopolieswhich support it and
maintain economicand other ties with it.

We agreealso with the statement made yesterday by the
Foreign Minister of Zambia,who stressedthat:

4 Ibid,,

is the existenceof the illegalracist minority regimes.The
surestguaranteeagainst the repetition of acts of aggression against Botswana and other independent African
countriesis majority rule andindependencefor the whole
of southernAfrica.” (1984th meeting,para. 20.1

185. On the basisof the foregoing,the Soviet delegation
supports the draft resolution submitted to the Security
Council, condemning the aggressive actions of the

meeting,
18

Rhodesian racists and providing for measures in support of
the Government and the people of Botswana, We have no
doubt that such a decision by the Council would be in
keeping with the legitimate interests and aspirations of
African countries and would serve the cause of the
maintenance and strengthening of international peace and
security on the African continent and throughout the
world.
186. Speaking now as PRESIDENT of the Council, I
should like to inform the members of the Council that the
sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document
S/12276 have expressed the wish that the voting on the
draft resolution be held in the course of this meeting of the
Council. If there is no objection, the Council will now, in
accordance with the wish expressed by the sponsors,
proceed to a vote on that draft resolution. Certain
delegations have asked to speak before the vote in
explanation of vote and I shall call on them now,
187. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): This is the first
occasion on which my delegation has spoken in the Council
this year. Despite the lateness of the hour, I should like to
follow the agreeable tradition of welcoming the five new
members of the Council. I shall not attempt to follow those
of my colleagues around this table who have already
ascribed to them the admirable qualities which we all
confidently expect to see displayed over the next two
years. I shall content myself with saying that I, personally,
am delighted to have the opportunity of working with them
and with expressing my confidence that we shall strike up a
harmonious relationship with them in addressing ourselves
to the work of the Council.
188. I also wish to add the United Kingdom delegation’s
voice to the chorus which has paid well-earned praise to the
five members who have left the Council: Ambassador
Jackson of Guyana, Ambassador Vinci of Italy, Ambassador Abe of Japan, Ambassador Rydbeck of Sweden and
Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania. I
can think of no more complete compliment than that we
shall miss them greatly. They all demonstrated their high
ability to serve as representatives of their country and, at
the same time, as conscientious and effective members of
the Council.
189, It is also my duty and pleasure to welcome YOU, Sir,
asthe new Permanent Representativeof your country to
the United Nations and as our Presidentfor this month.
You comewith a formidable reputation for diplomaticskill
and you have already, during your brief tenure of the
presidency, demonstrated that that reputation is well
earned.

by the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, His
Excellency Mr. Archibald Mogwe /1983rd meeting]. It
must be plain to everyonein this room that the increasing
frequency and severity of thoseincidentsposevery serious
problemsfor Botswana.We know that Botswanais an
admirablypeacefulStateand hasresistedspendingon arms
the money which could be spent on economicdevelopment. The growing tension along the border inevitably
forces the Government of Botswanato abandon that
admirablepolicy andto divert to the purposeof expanding
its security forces funds which might otherwisehave been
availablefor developmentprojects.
192. I must makeit clearthat we fully endorsethe appeal
made in the draft resolution,that the international community shouldmake availableadditionaleconomicassistance for Botswana.We ourselvesalready contribute substantial economic aid to Botswana. Indeed, we have
traditionally been a major aid donor. In the first six years
of Botswana’sindependence,up to 1972, the United
Kingdomprovided budgetinggrantstotalling 27.39 million.
In the period 1967-1976,we providedcapitalaidof 211.25
million and technical assistanceamounting to 0.06
million. In the current triennium 1976.1979-our capital
aid commitmentamountsto 210 million, of which 40 per
cent will be provided on grant termsand 60 per cent asan
interest-freeloan. In addition, the BotswanaGovernment
employsmore than 400 United Kingdomstaff whoselocal
salariesare supplemented
by the British Governmentat an
annualcostof about L2.4 million. And we shallcontinueto
assistBotswana.
193. The incidentsalong the border, as many speakers
have alrearly pointed out, are really a facet of the
continuing problem of Rhodesia.Along with a numberof
other incidentsthat the Council has debated,they would
soon ceaseif we could achievea negotiatedsettlementto
the Rhodesianproblem. And it is preciselythis that my
Governmentis trying to achieveat present.Membersof the
Countiilwill be awarethat my Government,last October,
took the initiative of summoning
a conferenceat Genevato
which it invited the leadersof the maintrendsof opinion in
Rhodesia.As Chairmanof that Conference,we devoted
considerableefforts, in its first phase,to trying to make
progresstowards achievingearly establishment
of a transitional governmentwhich would lead to independenceon
the basisof majority rule. But that first phasemadeclear
the gulf of suspicionand mistrust between the African
nationalistsand the illegalwhite minority which still holds
defacto power.

194. Accordingly, my Government indicated its willing
nessto assume
a direct role in the transitionalgovernment,
in an effort to bridgethe gulf. The extent to which a direct
British role is acceptedby the two sidesmay well be the
190. It would be wrong for me to end my overture crucial factor in decidingwhether or not a settlementis
achieved.In assumingthat role, Britain would attempt to
without referring to AmbassadorDatcu of Romania,the
meet the generalconcernthat the processof transition to
Presidentof the Council during December.I shouldlike to
addmy voice to those of the speakerswho have already independenceshouldbe rapid, guaranteedand orderly. It
complimentedhim on his efficient, friendly and energetic follows that a proposedBritish presencehasto be acceptable to both sidesand, in the presentdelicate stageof
leadership
during that busy month.
Mr. Ivor Richard’snegotiationsin southernAfrica, we need
191. I now turn to the businessbefore the Council.We to be particularly carefulabout action that might diminish
haveheard a clear and effective exposition of recentevents the prospectsof achievingacceptanceof sucha role.

195. In these circumstances, my Government believes that
the right course is for the United Kingdom delegation to
abstain on the draft resolution before us. The decision
should not come as a surprise since our problems are well
known.
I take this opportunity to thank those round this
table who have wished my colleague, Mr. Ivor Richard, well
in his difficult endeavours.

202. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): We
can now proceed to the vote. I am putting to the’vote draft
resolution S/l 2276.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany,.
Federal Republic of, India, Libyan Arab Republic,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Venezuela.

196. I must emphasize that our abstention should not be
taken as meaning that we are in any way indifferent to
infringements of the territorial integrity of Botswana, a
country with which-particularly
as fellow members of the
Commonwealth-w’.
rlave, as I have stressed, the closest and
most cordial relations. It is the intention of my Government that Mr, Richard, when he is next in touch with
Mr, Smith and his colleagues, should underline the importance we attach to scrupulous respect for the territorial
sovereignty of Botswana and to there being an end to these
incidents.

Against: None.
Abstaining: United Kingdom of Great Britain and North.
ern Ireland, United States of’ America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none
with 2 abstentions.5
203. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
Secretary-General has expressed the wish to be allowed to
speak and I take pleasure in calling on him.

197. Since this is the last meeting of the Security
Council-maybe-while
Governor Scranton is still the representative of his country, I do not wish to end without
mentioning him. Both in my official capacity as a colleague
and in what I hope I may correctly describe as my personal
capacity as a friend, I regret his departure. Though WC may
be divided by our usage of the English language and by a
colonial rebellion that took place 200 years ago, we have
enjoyed the privilege of working with Governor Scranton
and have the highest regard for his fair-mindedness and his
ability. I shall particularly miss the touches of humour that
he has from time to time lent to our proceedings. I wish
him well in whatever he decides to do next. He tells me that
he hopes to spend his time walking in the woods of
Pennsylvania with his devoted wife. I beg to think and,
indeed, to hope that, despite the very great charm of
Mrs. Scranton, whose admirers we all are, the woods of
Pennsylvania will not keep the Governor fully occupied for
very long.

204. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have followed very
closely the proceedings of the Security Council 011 the
question before us. My interest is all the more intense
because, as I have warned before, the present situation in
southern Africa raises dangers not only or the States
directly involved but for Africa as a whole and, indeed, for
even wider areas, In this context, it is clear that the specific
situation that has been the subject of the Council’s
attention is not only serious in itself but is symptomatic of
the unresolved problem of Southern Rhodesia and a
warning of even greater dangers unless a lasting solution is
promptly achieved. As I have said on many occasions in the
past, the onIy basis for such a solution is the realization of
the inalienable rights of the people of Southern Rhodesia to
self-determination, independence and majority rule.
205. His Excellency the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana has set forth [1983rd meetingJ with great clarity
the social and economic consequences created by the
unexpected need of his country to divert scarce resources
required for development in order to defend its territory
and people from hostile acts. I have had an opportunity to
discuss this situation with him since his arrival in New
York, and I shall have further discussions with him in the
light of the action just taken by the Council.

198. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fru172 Russian): I
thank the representative of the United Kingdom for his
good wishes to me.
199. Mr. SI-IERER [United States of America): The views
of the United States on the substance of the matter before
US were set forth yesterday by Governor Scranton (1984th
meeting]. Our abhorrence of the illegal use of force and our
commitment to majority rule are fundamental United
States positions.

206. I have taken note of the request of the Council that I
organize, as soon as possible, financial and other forms of
assistance to Botswana and dispatch a mission to assess the
needs of Botswana. I shall certainly carry out this responsibility in close co-operation with the appropriate organizations of the United Nations system. Members will recall
that last month the Council adopted resolution 402 (1976)
by which I was requested to organize an international
assistance programme for Lesotho. The Mission which I
have arranged to send to Lesotho to ascertain the situation
will be assigned the additional duty of visiting Botswana, in
line with the Council’s request. This will make it possible to
meet the deadline of 31 March established in the resolution.

200. We only wish to add that we recognize the efforts of
the sponsors of the draft resolution in seeking to meet the
views of a wide number of members of the Council.
201. MY Government has played a particular role in
seeking to bring all sides together in the search for a
peaceful solution of the underlying problem, We believe
that our ability to continue to contribute in this way is best
served by joining the United Kingdom, which has a very
special role in the current effort to find a peaceful
settlement of the Rhodesian problem. For these reasons we
shall abstain.

5 See resolution 403 (1977).
20

As soon as the report of that Mission is available, I shall be
in

CoInnlunicatioIl

with

dl

States

and

that the generous assistaucealready being given by his
Government to Botswanawill be further increased.

intergovernInenta1

organizations, to CIlliSt their co-operation
xld
meet the needs determined by that Mission.

support to

216. We expressour thanks to all delegationswhich took
the trouble of consulting with usin a spirit of co-operation.
I was particularly impressedby the convincing power of a
most charming representativeof Canada. To be charmedis
always very agreeable;to be always convinced can sometimes be dangerous.I would ask my African brothers to
heed my warning.

207. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fronz Russiall): I
thank the SeCretary-GeIleral
for the explanations he has
given with regard to the forthcoming measures to ilnple.
ment the resolution just adopted.
208. Mr. BARTON (Canada): I ask you to forgive me for
your
patience, but I have received instructions to
make a short statement.

trying

209. When I spoke yesterday [ 1984th meeting], I stressed
that this Council’s major objective in the debate should be
to contribute to a conclusion which conveys our best
judgement as to the means of stopping the violations of the
territorial
sovereignty
of Botswana. To that end, I elllp]lasized the necessity of reaching a decision, the terms of
which would reinforce Ambassador Richard’s efforts in
seeking a negotiated settlement and a peaceful transition to
majority rule in Rhodesia.
210. It was to be expected that the need to express firmly
and clearly our demand that the violation of Botswana’s
sovereignty must ccasc and, at the same time, to do out
best to further the S~~CCCSS~U~
conclusionof the negotiations
at Genevacould give rise to problems,particularly for some
delegations.In our view, the resolution that we have
adopted has taken a halancednpproachto these requirements,and for thesereasonswe supportedit.
211. ln this respect, 1 shouldsaythat, asa country with a
very substantialinvolvcmcnt in developmentprogrammes
in
Botswana,we should wish to considervery carefully the
impact of any proposalsarisingout of paragraph6 of the
resolution, and that in the meantimeour support of the
resolution is without prejudice to the position we might
take on suchproposals.
212. In conclusion, we were most appreciative of the
consideration given by authors in taking into account
certain suggestionswe madeand of the spirit of co-operation and compromise that has been demonstratedin
bringingtogether a text which wasable to draw suchwide
support.
213. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Allow me, on behalf of
the sponsors,to thank all delegationswhich voted in favour
of our draft. Weare particularly happy to havereceivedthe
unanimoussupport of the Council.

217. Finally, while 1 am speaking,I should like to express
my sadnessat the imminent departure from our midst of
the eminent Governor Scranton. During his too brief stay
with US, Governor Scranton as a man, as a great human
being, has impressedus enormousiy with his nobility, his
sensibility, his integrity, his credibility and his civility. It
can be true to say that he hasearnedthe respectof all of us
at the United Nations. 1 hope he leavesus convinced that
the third world countriesat the United Nations do not vote
againstany country as such, but rather on issues,and that
at the United Nations there is no tyranny of the majority
but that in Africa there is the tyranny of two. We wish
Governor Scranton well. 1 hope that when Ambassador
Murray was speaking oi a rebellion that took place 200
years ago, he wasnot trying to upgradeanother rebel to the
status or to the level of’ AmbassadorScranton. We should
have resentedthat very much. I should be grateful to my
colleagueAmbassadorShererif he would be kind enoughto
convey my sinceresentimentsto Governor Scranton.
218. I thank all delegationswhich have welcomed Mauritius as a new memberof the Council for their kind words.
219. Mr. President, your great and proud country, the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, has always fully
supported the causesof Africa. It is therefore perhaps
fitting that, at the very start of your assumptionof the
duties of PermanentRepresentativeof the USSR, which has
coincided with your high office of President of this
Council, you have been called upon to help a small,
deservingand defencelesscountry of Africa. You have clone
so with courtesy, patience and effectiveness.We congratulate you and we thank you.
220. The PRESIDENT (itz terpretution from Russian): I
thank the representativeof Mauritius for his kind words.
221. The representativeof Botswana has askedto makea
statement, I call on the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana.

214. We are not surprisedthat the United Kingclomcould
not go along with us and vote affirmatively, given the
timing of our meeting 011 the agendaitem in relation to the
extremely delicate negotiations which are in progress,in
which our colleague,AmbassadorRichard,the Permanent
Representativeof the United Kingdom, isplaying a positive
and crucial role. We understandand acceptthe positionof
the United Kingdom, Nor are we surprisedat the position
of the United Statesin this matter.
215. We are encouragedby the assurancegiven by the
representativeof the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Murray,
21

222. Mr. MOGWE (Botswana): After listening to all the
statements made in this debate since Wednesday, 12
January, I can only express,on behalf of my delegationand
myself, and more particularly on behalf of the Government
and people of Batswana,my sinceregratitude and appreciation for the objective and dispassionatemanner in which
the subject before the Security Council hasbeen debated. I
wish to thank those Statesmembersof this Council, aswell
as, and in particular, those non-memberswhich, moved by
the outrageousand aberrant behaviour of the illegal regime
in Salisbury, subscribedtheir names and contributed in
substantial fashion to the deliberations of the Council. We

ference and the Richard mission in southern Africa wea
not Botswana, nor Botswana the Richard mission.

do not consider it necessary to mention them by name or
to recount the telling points they made, for we are sure
they were seeking no publicity for themselves, but were
merely prompted to take their respective positions by their
abhorrence of racism, oppression and aggression, and by
their belief in and love for fundamental freedoms. Again we
‘hank them for their eloquent expressions of their convictiirns.

225. To fail to condemn political repression, the denis %,!
the fundamental rights and freedoms of the people . f
Southern Rhodesia, or even the collaboration and collu~~~:~
of those States which sustain illegality in order to propi~u~:~
some Rhodesian godhood, would have the effect r,:
encouraging the continued callous violation of l3otswa~e’r
territorial integrity and the harassment of its pcuple 14,
Rhodesian security forces.

223. My delegation thanks the Council for adopting this
resolution.
224. The people and Government of Botswana will fail to
understand any justification of what, on the face of it, is an
apparent, subordination of the security of their country and
themselves to the success of the Richard mission. Botswana
has consistently supported meaningful negotiations as part
of the decolonization strategy in Southern Rhodesia. For
this reason, my country has been represented at the Geneva
Conference on Rhodesia by me, its Foreign Minister.
Together with colleagues from other front-line States, the
Organization of African Unity and the Commonwealth, we
have worked tirelessly to enhance its success, So dose were
consultations amongst ourselves and the chairmanship of
the Conference that they resulted in a spirit of mutual trust
and confidence. Eut we assisted in the way we did in the
full knowledge and understanding that the Geneva Con-

226. Naturally, we regret the abstentions by the L,‘nrr::
Kingdom and United States delegations. However, w
fervently hope that their abstentions will being nbr~: t
change of heart on the part of the minority rbgirur: i
Salisbury. If they succeed, their caution will be well nr:
truly vindicated; but if they fail to achieve that, then 11r~
reticence will not be worth the unhappiness that lhm:
abstentions will surely engender among the harassecl pcqZ!
of my country.
227. In conclusion, may I be allowed once more tn tha~*-b
the Security Council for having agreed to consider the LJ#~:
of Botswana,
The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

52
_I.
Litho

In United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

70013-May 197’?-7.2%.%
