General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

264

3. Requests the Special Committee at its next session:
(a) To accord priority to its work on the proposals
regarding the question of the maintenance of international peace and security, with a view to listing and examining all proposals, including those relating to the
functioning of the Security Council;
(b) To consider proposals made by Member States
on the question of rationalization of existing procedures of the United Nations and, subsequently, any
proposals under other topics;
4. Further requests the Special Committee, in the
l~ght of the progress it has achieved concerning the ques~1on of the peaceful settlement of disputes, to continue
its work on this question with a view to developing and
recommending a means of bringing the work to an appropriate conclusion on the basis of the list prepared by
the Committee in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 33/94;
5. Also requests the Special Committee to continue
the elaboration of the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes with a view
to submitting it for consideration to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of
the i!llportai:ice_ ?f reaching general agreement whenever 1t has s1gntf1cance for the outcome of its work:
7. Urges members of the Special Committee to participate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to it;
8. _Invites Governments to submit or to bring up to
date, 1f they deem it necessary, their observations and
proposals in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
a~sistance to the Special Committee, including the provis10n of summary records; 14
_10.. Requests the Secretary-General to give high
pnonty to the preparation and publication of the suppleme~ts to the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security
Council _and the Repertory of Practice of United Nations
Or$ans m order_ to bring those publications up to date as
quickly as possible and to submit a progress report on
the _matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session;
11. Requests the Special Committee to submit a
r~port on_its work to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
. 12.. De~ides to \nclude in the provisional agenda of
its t~1rty-s1xth ~ess1on the item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization".

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December 1980

35/165.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country,"

Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations 30 and the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United
Nations, n
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the
safety of their personnel are of great importance and
concern to the Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the host country,
Having noted with deep concern the recent increase in
acts of terrorism against the premises and personnel of
missions accredited to the United Nations, noting the
assurances given by the competent authorities of the
host country and recognizing that effective measures
should be taken in view of recent developments, in particular to avoid any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Expressing its sympathy for the victims of the acts of
terrorism perpetrated against accredited missions and
their personnel,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in
paragraph 31 of its report; i;
2. Strongly condemns the acts of terrorism perpetrated against missions accredited to the United Nations
and their personnel:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of host country relations
with the United Nat ions, in particular with regard to
the need for effective measures to be taken by the host
country in view of recent developments, and to follow
deve_lopments in these areas in co-operation with the
Chairman of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country;
4. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to continue its work, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 28 I9 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
_5. pecides t~ include !n the provisional agenda of its
th1rty-s1xth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / I 66.

Consolidation and progressive development of
the principles and norms of international economic law relatin~ in particular to the legal
aspects of the new mternational economic order

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter
of the U_ni_t~d Natio~s, the General Assembly is called
upon to m1tiate studies and make recommendations for
the purp_ose of ~ncouraging the progressive development of mternat1onal law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic

"See sect. VIII, resolution 35/10 B. para. 2 (e).

'' Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirty-fijih Session.
Supplement No. 26 (A/35/26).
·

"' Resolution 22 A (I).
·· Resolution 169 (II).
