S/PV.8831

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8831st meeting

Friday, 6 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tirumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-21770 (E)
*2121770*

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Afghanistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Deborah
Lyons, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar,
Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Lyons.
Ms. Lyons: I am extremely grateful for the
opportunity of this special meeting on Afghanistan and
the opportunity to brief the Security Council today. It
is particularly important because Afghanistan is now at
a dangerous turning point. Ahead lies either a genuine
peace negotiation or a tragically intertwined set of
crises: an increasingly brutal conflict combined with
an acute humanitarian situation and multiplying human
rights abuses.
Today we have an opportunity — an opportunity to
demonstrate the commitment of the Security Council
and the regional and international community that it
represents to prevent Afghanistan from descending
into a situation of catastrophe so serious that it would
have few, if any, parallels in this century. Let me
assure the Council that such a catastrophe would have
consequences far beyond the borders of Afghanistan.
I believe that the Security Council and the broader
international community can help prevent the direst
scenarios. But that will require acting in unity and
acting quickly. It will require acting.
In the past weeks, the war in Afghanistan has
entered a new, deadlier and more destructive phase.
The Taliban campaign during June and July to capture
rural areas has achieved significant territorial gains.
2/19

06/08/2021

From that strengthened position they have begun to
attack the larger cities. The provincial capitals of
Kandahar, Herat and Lashkar Gah in particular have
come under significant pressure. That is a clear attempt
by the Taliban to seize urban centres with the force
of arms. The human toll of that strategy is extremely
distressing, and the political message is even more
deeply disturbing.
Regarding the human toll, let me provide some
evidence. Fighting has been especially severe in
Lashkar Gah, the capital of Helmand province. Since
28 July, just a mere 10 days ago, at least 104 civilians
have been killed and 403 wounded, as registered by the
two main hospitals. Ground engagements and air strikes
are causing most of the civilian harm. All roads leading
to and going out of the city are closed by the Taliban.
Hospitals have nearly reached full capacity and can no
longer accept patients. The available food supply in the
city is fast diminishing, which raises the possibility
of an acute food shortage in the coming days as well
as a shortage of medical supplies. In Kandahar, since
the start of the offensive there, on 9 July, a month ago,
more than 460 civilian casualties have been registered.
Further to the west, in and around Herat, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has credible reports of more than 135 civilian casualties
from the onset of the Taliban offensive. Let me quickly
summarize that just in these three cases, I am talking of
more than 1,000 casualties just in this last month.
In addition, homes, hospitals, shops, bridges and
other infrastructure are being destroyed. In that dire
situation, the United Nations and humanitarian partners
continue to be present to assess, of course, the needs
and, where possible, to deliver assistance where we have
the access. But that is becoming increasingly difficult.
This is now a different kind of war, reminiscent of
Syria recently or Sarajevo in the not-so-distant past. To
attack urban areas is to knowingly inflict enormous harm
and cause massive civilian casualties. Nonetheless, the
threatening of large urban areas appears to be a strategic
decision by the Taliban, who have accepted the likely
carnage that will ensue. The Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces are defending those cities. But that
defence will also undoubtedly cause civilian casualties.
Urban warfare will also inflict daily miseries when basic
infrastructure such as electricity and water networks
are damaged. These tactics may amount to a serious
violation of international humanitarian law for which
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8831

individuals can be held accountable and may quickly
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.

received by many countries were in fact predicated on
a commitment to, and progress in, the peace process.

The suffering caused by war comes on top of an
already increasing humanitarian crisis, with severe
drought affecting the country. Indeed, 18.5 million
people, or nearly half of the country’s population, are
in need of humanitarian assistance. And yet, in the
meantime, attacks on aid workers continue, with more
than 25 aid workers killed and more than 60 injured in
just the first six months of this year.

What is reportedly happening in areas under
Taliban control is also of great concern to us. It is
heartbreaking to hear, for example, reports of summary
executions, beatings and a clampdown on media. Radio
stations in particular have stopped broadcasting. We
also hear the fears voiced to UNAMA by many Afghan
women. They tell us that they fear they will be killed
if the Taliban return to power simply because they
worked for the Government or a non-governmental
organization. They fear they will not be able to access
medical or educational services. These are the real
concerns of people who are close to the edges of the
Taliban advance.

For the past three years, the members of the
international community, including members of the
Council and UNAMA, have dealt with the Taliban as
a potential partner for peace. We have had numerous
discussions with their political representatives in Doha
aimed at ending the conflict and finding a true political
consensus. Many of us have done this with some
reservations but with relentless hope for the Afghan
people. We have accepted this in the name of the peace
that ordinary Afghans desperately need.
The Council will remember that there had been an
expectation when the United States-Taliban deal was
signed in February 2020 that we would see a reduction
of violence. We did not. When the talks between the
Afghan Republic and the Taliban began in September
of last year, there had been an expectation that we
would see a reduction in violence. We have not. There
had been an expectation that, when international
troops left, we would see a reduction in violence. We
did not. Instead, despite significant concessions for
peace, we have seen a 50 per cent increase in civilian
casualties, with the certainty of many more as cities
are attacked. There is a striking contrast between the
activity on the battlefield and the quiet stalemate at the
negotiating table in Doha, where we should be seeing
the opposite — quiet on the battlefield and engagement
around the negotiating table.
I have focused today on the war against cities
because a party that was genuinely committed to a
negotiated settlement would not risk so many civilian
casualties, because it would understand that the process
of reconciliation will be more challenging the more
blood is shed. It would also recognize that it cannot
risk the destruction of infrastructure that would be
badly needed to rebuild the country once an agreement
was reached. It should be made clear to the Taliban
Political Commission that the exemptions to the travel
ban and the high protocol with which they have been

Let me be clear, because I know that the Taliban also
pay attention to what we say in these meetings — I am
reporting comments that have been expressed directly
to us, not incidents we have been able to fully confirm.
We have also seen Taliban denials. But these reports
that we are receiving from ordinary Afghans throughout
the country are so consistent, uniform and urgent that
we simply cannot wait for them to be proven before
bringing them to the Council’s attention. I would add
that these fears seem also to be corroborated by the
large numbers of people seeking to leave Afghanistan.
We expect both irregular and legal migration numbers
to double this year. This increase, logically, must either
be a response to the prospect of greater conflict or the
desire to not live under Taliban governance.
In speaking to Afghans, the impression I have
now is of a population waiting apprehensively for a
dark shadow to pass over the bright futures they once
imagined. It is difficult for me to describe the mood of
dread we are faced with every day. As one Afghan put
it to us recently,
“We are no longer talking about preserving the
progress and the rights we have gained; we are
talking about mere survival.”
Another woman told us that she sometimes regrets
that she had educated her daughter, as that had put her
daughter in a more vulnerable position. For all of us
who are parents of daughters, I can hardly think of a
more despondent comment.
Afghans face this coming darkness with a sense
of being abandoned by the regional and international
communities. They expect far greater engagement and

21-217703/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

visible support from the Council, which is mandated
to maintain international peace and security. In that
regard, the 3 August Security Council press statement
(SC/14592) condemning the attack against the United
Nations office in Herat was greatly appreciated by
us for the show of support for UNAMA but, more
important, for calling again for an end to the violence
and a resumption of a meaningful peace process. This
solidarity matters to Afghans. They need to see and
hear more of it in actions and in words.
But there are also several important opportunities
in the near future where our words and actions
could help bring an end to this war. Next week there
will be meetings in Doha of a number of the Special
Representatives of key countries, including a meeting
of the extended troika. And we, of course, will meet
here again on 10 September for the regularly scheduled
Security Council briefing on Afghanistan.
How can we use these opportunities to address the
deteriorating situation that we face?
First, the Security Council must issue an
unambiguous statement that attacks against cities must
stop now.
Secondly, those countries that meet with the Taliban
Political Commission should insist in those meetings on
a general ceasefire and a resumption of the negotiations
and should reiterate the position of the Security
Council and that of the regional and international
communities — that a Government imposed by force in
Afghanistan will not be recognized.
Thirdly, as I already mentioned, the travel ban
exemption on Taliban members exists in order to allow
them to travel for the sole purpose of peace negotiations.
The exemption is to be renewed on 20 September. Any
further extension must be predicated on real progress
on peace.
Fourthly, if the Taliban will not agree to the general
ceasefire that the Afghans truly require, the Council
and those States that meet with them must urge them
to grant humanitarian access to areas they control and
commit to humanitarian ceasefires in contested areas.
At the same time, Member States should contribute
to the severely underfunded humanitarian appeal for
Afghanistan, which is currently only 30 per cent funded.
Fifthly, we need to put on notice the architects
and perpetrators of the most serious violations of
human rights. UNAMA strongly supports greater
4/19

06/08/2021

efforts by the United Nations and the regional and
international communities to find ways to hold the
perpetrators accountable.
Sixthly, the Council should give serious
consideration to providing the United Nations with a
mandate that allows it to play — if requested by both
parties — a greater role in facilitating the negotiations.
We will meet again to discuss Afghanistan in a little
over a month. But we cannot wait. These next weeks will
be decisive, but I am absolutely convinced that whatever
happens on the battlefield — whether the Taliban take
additional cities or whether the Government regains
districts — the result will only prolong Afghanistan’s
agony. We, as the members of the regional and
international communities so well represented here by
the Council, must put aside our own differences on the
question of Afghanistan and send a strong signal — not
only in our public statements but also in our bilateral
communications to both parties — that it is essential
to stop fighting and negotiate, in that order. Otherwise,
there may be nothing left to win.
I again thank the Council for this opportunity. The
people of Afghanistan are listening.
The President: I thank Ms. Lyons for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Akbar.
Ms. Akbar: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Security
Council. I would like to thank India, the President of
the Security Council, and the Permanent Mission of
Afghanistan for inviting me to provide a briefing about
the ongoing conflict and the violations of international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan. I know many
Afghans across Afghanistan are waiting to hear the
message and outcome of today’s special meeting of the
Council, as Afghan cities and villages burn in conflict;
civilians experience extreme levels of harm and tens of
thousands of families are displaced.
Since June 2019, this is the third time I have had
the honour of addressing the Council. Each time, the
situation in Afghanistan is more critical than before.
The situation today could not be more urgent. The first
six months of 2021 were the bloodiest six months for
Afghan civilians since the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission started recording in 2009.
Some 1,677 civilians, including women and children,
were killed and 3,644 injured during that period. If the
current rates of violence continue, I am heartbroken to
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

note that there might be a grim new record of civilian
harm by the end of this year. With districts and now
a provincial city falling to the Taliban, millions of
Afghans are waiting in terror to see what comes next.
Women, in particular, remember the past and present
abuses of the Taliban against their freedoms and their
persons, and dread what is to come. As the Council
knows, many are joining the ranks of those trying to
flee the worsening storm.
Taliban advances and an escalation of violence
have meant that we in the Commission are verifying
details of horrific war crimes on a daily basis. Let me
give three examples from our work in recent weeks.
In Spin Boldak, Kandahar, our findings confirm that
the Taliban dragged out and killed at least 40 civilians
associated with the Government in a campaign of
targeted, extrajudicial killings. Following media and
human rights reporting, the Taliban imposed strict
restrictions and would investigate people traveling to
and from Spin Boldak to prevent full documentation of
those atrocities.
In Malistan, Ghazni province, we can confirm that
at least 27 civilians have been murdered in targeted
killings by the Taliban. In one instance, the Taliban
sought the help of an unarmed guard to move the bodies
of civilians and then killed the guard in an attempt to
remove eyewitnesses.
Meanwhile, in Helmand, as I speak to the Council
now, residents of Lashkar Gah are stuck between
Taliban attacks and Government air strikes, fearing for
their lives every minute and deprived of access to their
basic rights.
Again, as I speak to the Council today, I am
mourning another attack on Afghanistan’s young
people. Dawa Khan Menapal, a Government official
working on communications and a man known for
his poetry, humour and generosity, was shot in broad
daylight in Kabul today. That served as a chilling
reminder to all civilian Government employees, as
well as journalists and human rights defenders, of the
frequency of targeted killings in the midst of the raging
war. It is also a brutal reminder of the Taliban’s refusal
to acknowledge Government employees as civilians,
as they continue to target and kill them in Kabul,
Kandahar and Ghazni and across Afghanistan.

S/PV. 8831

The ongoing storm of atrocities has already cost
lives and has spread widespread terror and uncertainty,
taking us further away from the possibility of peace.
In addition to daily violations of the laws of
conflict, Afghanistan’s human rights gains are under
attack and rapidly shrinking as the conflict expands.
One major and deeply concerning example is the rights
of women and girls in areas captured by the Taliban.
Women’s access to education, markets and basic health
services is limited and shrinking. Their basic human
rights are being denied and repressed. Afghan women
across Afghanistan are either reliving the nightmare
of the Taliban era or living in the fear and trauma of
soon reliving it if the tide does not turn and we do not
get the opportunity to hold negotiations and participate
meaningfully in them.
The situation is equally concerning regarding
access to information and freedom of expression.
With the media under pressure from both sides to the
conflict, independent media in different provinces are
shutting down as more districts fall to the Taliban. In
that context, it is important to reiterate to the Afghan
Government its obligations to protect independent
media, freedom of expression and all fundamental
human rights. As I said earlier, if the violence continues,
much worse is to come for Afghans and, subsequently,
for the region and the world.
But the violence need not continue. The Council
and its members still have the leverage to stop the
bloodshed of Afghans and prevent catastrophes. The
Council can save lives. We will need the Council to
utilize the full range of political, diplomatic, human
rights and humanitarian tools and interventions at
its disposal to save lives and prevent further horrific
atrocities. We urge the Council, the United Nations
and international human rights mechanisms to respond
with a greater sense of urgency to the Afghan calls for
civilian protection, a ceasefire, an end to the violence
and a meaningful and inclusive political process.
Following the horrific attack on a girls’ school
in Kabul on 8 May, the Commission called for a factfinding mission to investigate the targeted killings of
civilians in Afghanistan. In July, international and
national human rights organizations urged the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, to take action to support that call.
In her public statement to the Human Rights Council,
the High Commissioner noted the deterioration of the

21-217705/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

situation and called for a preventive mechanism to be
established. The European Parliament also expressed
its support. The Afghan Government has now called
for a special session of the Human Rights Council
and a fact-finding mission. We support that request to
recognize the urgency of the situation and to act now.
Some of the most important things that a factfinding mission would offer the Afghan people include
acting as a preventive mechanism and highlighting the
urgency of the threat to civilians, including femicide,
massacres of religious and ethnic minorities, threats to
girls’ education and targeted killings of human rights
defenders. It would also keep victims and civilians
centre-stage as Afghanistan heads towards a human
rights and humanitarian crisis post-withdrawal,
while establishing the facts, identifying perpetrators
and preserving evidence with a view to ensuring
accountability. A fact-finding mission could also
propose remedies for victims, as well as effective
prevention mechanisms.
My family and I sought refuge in Pakistan when
I was a child, escaping the conflict and the Taliban’s
repressive regime. Some 24 years later, millions of
Afghans are looking for a way out of Afghanistan
as they do not see a future there. We cannot wait
and watch as history repeats itself. I apologize if my
remarks today were lengthy, repetitive or less than
coherent, as I address the Council exhausted and in
mourning, hoping that this time, speaking to this forum
will make a difference. Afghans are watching, amid
fear and despair, to see whether the Council and the
international community will do all they can to revive
our hope in peace.
The President: I thank Ms. Akbar for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Isaczai (Afghanistan): I am honoured to make
this statement on behalf of my Foreign Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Mohammad Haneef Atmar, who very
much wanted to be here with everyone but could not
travel to New York, owing to such short notice.
Allow me first to congratulate India on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and to commend
France for successfully completing its term. I would
also like to thank the Governments of India and of
Norway and Estonia, as the co-penholders, and the
rest of the Security Council members in responding
6/19

06/08/2021

positively to our request to brief the Council about the
alarming developments in Afghanistan.
This meeting also highlights the Security Council’s
commitment to ensuring that the people of Afghanistan
are able to live in peace, security and dignity, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In that
regard, I should like to welcome the Security Council
press statement of 3 August (SC/14592), condemning
the terrorist attack on the United Nations compound in
Herat and the recent increase in the level of violence in
the country. Let me also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Lyons for her thorough
briefing and for highlighting the alarming threat and
serious concern about the situation in Afghanistan.
We were compelled to ask for this urgent meeting,
as the situation in Afghanistan has been rapidly
deteriorating owing to the recent escalation of violence
by the Taliban and its brutal military offensives
on major cities and population centres in several
provinces. In gross contravention of the Doha peace
agreement, resolution 2513 (2020) and the regional and
international consensus embodied in the joint statement
of the extended troika of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process Ministerial Meeting, the Taliban have launched
brutal military offensives that have already caused
mass death, destruction, displacement and instability
in Afghanistan and beyond.
Even more alarming are their attacks on cities,
including Kandahar, Herat, Lashkar Gah, Ghazni,
Sheberghan and Zaranj yesterday, as was just confirmed
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Millions of people are now vulnerable to indiscriminate
shelling, death, injuries, destruction and displacement.
Our cities and public infrastructure, which we have
rebuilt with the Council’s support over the past two
decades, are now exposed to unimaginable levels of
Taliban destruction.
In that deliberate act of barbarism, the Taliban are
not alone. They are assisted by foreign fighters from
transnational terrorist networks. Together, they are
threatening peace, security and stability not only in
Afghanistan but also our region and beyond. It is our
collective responsibility to stop them from destroying
Afghanistan and threatening the world community.
The scale, scope and timing of the Taliban’s
military offensive has taken on the dimensions of an
invasion unprecedented in the past 30 years of the
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

conflict. Since mid-April, the Taliban and its affiliate
foreign terrorist groups have launched more than 5,500
attacks in 31 of the 34 provinces of Afghanistan. The
attacks have been launched with the direct support
of more than 10,000 foreign fighters representing
20 groups, including Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan, the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
which entered our country and are fighting alongside
the Taliban against our population and security forces.
There is mounting evidence that the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement and the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, which have pledged allegiance to ISIL,
fought alongside the Taliban in Faryab, Jowzjan, Takhar
and Badakhshan provinces, where they are currently
present with their families under the Taliban control.
The link between the Taliban and those transnational
terrorist groups is stronger today than at any point in
recent times. Just as indicated numerous times by the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban, the
Taliban, contrary to their commitments under the Doha
agreement, has not broken its ties with regional and
international terrorist organizations.
In fact, those links are unbreakable, as they have
been cultivated and built on shared ideology, interests,
goals and intermarriage that have been translated into
joint attacks and logistical and material support. The
implications of allowing that network to continue to
grow inside the country carry great security risks not
only for Afghanistan but also for the wider region and
even the world. It is a shared risk and concern for all of us.
This is not the Taliban of the twentieth century coming
from the isolated madrasas, but the manifestation of
the nexus between transnational terrorist networks and
transnational criminal organizations.
Their links to drugs, smuggling and the plunder of
our natural resources are unprecedented, and those who
encourage and participate with them, of course, are the
beneficiaries. Therefore, this is not a civil war, but a
war of criminalized and terrorist networks fought on the
backs of Afghans. Importantly, the Taliban continues to
enjoy a safe haven in, and a supply and logistics line
extended to its war machine from, Pakistan.
Graphic reports and videos of Taliban fighters
congregating close to the Durand Line to enter

S/PV. 8831

Afghanistan, fundraising events, the transfer of dead
bodies for mass burial and the treatment of injured
Taliban members in Pakistani hospitals are emerging
and are widely available. This is not only a flagrant
violation of the sanctions regime pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), but also leads to the further erosion of trust
and confidence towards establishing a collaborative
relationship with Pakistan to end the war in our country.
In keeping with the agreement of the leadership of
Afghanistan and Pakistan in Tashkent last month, we
urge Pakistan to help with removing and dismantling
Taliban sanctuaries and supply lines and establish
with us a joint monitoring and verification mechanism
to make the fight against terrorism and international
efforts for peace effective and credible. Let me reiterate
that Afghanistan desires nothing but friendly relations
and peaceful coexistence with Pakistan based on
mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty.
We are alarmed by reports and incidents of gross
human rights violations by the Taliban and its foreign
terrorist associates in almost half of our country. We
are extremely concerned about the safety and security
of people in cities under Taliban attacks and about the
brutality that awaits them. I am glad that Ms. Shaharzad
Akbar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, shed further light on
that. But shocking and heart-wrenching images and
videos of the Taliban’s brutality and cruelty against the
civilian population and people suspected of working for
the Government and international forces are emerging
through social media, which are too graphic to even
describe in my statement here.
Suicide bombings, summary executions revenge
killings, death by stoning, the chopping of hands,
the flogging of children, forced marriages and the
restriction of the movement of women and girls are a
common occurrence in areas under Taliban control,
and are sanctioned by Taliban religious fatwas. Sadly,
earlier today, Taliban terrorists killed one of our bravest
sons of Afghanistan, Mr. Dawa Khan, who was the head
of the Afghan media and communications centre. That
is in sharp contrast to the Taliban’s claim of moderation
and respect for international law and even Sharia law.
Yes, the Taliban has changed, but for the worst.
The members of the group have become more violent in
their actions, cruel in the treatment of local population,
more extremist in their thinking and revengeful against
sympathizers of the Government. The imposition of

21-217707/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

the Taliban’s draconian rule has portrayed no positive
change from the ideologies that dominated the thinking
of the so-called Islamic Emirate of the 1990s and what
is espoused by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
and other extremist groups today.
The indiscriminate level of violence exhibited
by the Taliban has exacerbated the already dire
humanitarian situation in the country, caused by
drought and the pandemic. Since the start of their
offensive, more than 5,300 civilians, including 1,960
women and children, have been killed or injured,
while thousands of others have been displaced. That
adds to the burden of approximately 4.8 million people
displaced in a country and 18.4 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance. Those numbers could easily
increase exponentially if attacks against big population
centres and cities continue unabated. Therefore, the
Council must act and prevent a catastrophic situation.
The fall of 10 border crossings to the Taliban has led
to the suspension of trade and a surge in the prices of
primary goods, which is further adding to the misery of
the population, affected by decades of conflict.
Taliban attacks have also come at a great cost to
public infrastructure, signifying losses of millions of
dollars and years of development investments. During
this period, the Taliban has destroyed more than 260
public buildings, including schools, hospitals, bridges
and communications towers. The Taliban’s destruction
of public and private infrastructure has deprived more
than 13 million people of public services and has
amounted to more than $500 million in damage.
We are confident in the bravery and professionalism
of our national defence and security forces to defend
the Republic, which is the manifestation of our values
and determination to fight for our homeland and for the
future of our children. In recent days, we have witnessed
an immense demonstration of support from Afghans,
within and outside the country, for our security forces.
Our defence of the Islamic Republic has turned into
a national resistance movement and our people have
loudly declared that they do not want to go back to the
Taliban’s dark era of 1990s.
Peace has been the most urgent need and demand
of the Afghan people and achieving peace is the highest
priority for the Afghan Government. To realize that,
President Ghani has repeatedly called on the Taliban
to adhere to a ceasefire and engage in meaningful
negotiations. To support the peace talks, my Government
8/19

06/08/2021

has offered a peace plan and made painful concessions,
including the release of more than 6,000 prisoners,
most of whom have returned to battlefields. However,
the Taliban continues to defy and ignore the call of the
international community and, more specifically, of the
Council to cease hostilities towards our people and
engage in meaningful peaceful talks.
As the departure of foreign troops from Afghanistan
has almost been completed, it clearly shows that the
Taliban and its foreign associates are fighting for power
to turn our country once again into a safe haven for
transnational terrorism, which will, no doubt, pose a
threat to the region and the global community.
Against that grim and disturbing situation
unfolding in my country, it is high time for the Council
to use every means at its disposal to compel the Taliban
to end its campaign of violence and terror against our
people, prevent further bloodshed and urge the group to
return to talks. We ask the Council to use existing tools,
including the effective implementation of the sanction’s
regime under resolution 1988 (2011) and resolution 2513
(2020), to pressure the Taliban to engage in meaningful
peace talks with the Government negotiating team. We
request the Council to discharge its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and to take all
necessary measures to stop the Taliban’s attacks on big
cities and population centres.
Currently, the six cities of Herat, Lashkar Gah,
Kandahar, Ghazni, Zaranj and Sheberghan are under
Taliban attack and soon other cities, including Kabul,
will be targeted. We ask the Council and call on the
international community to take preventive measures,
including the convening of a special session of the
Security Council and the Human Rights Council, to
avert a catastrophic situation of human rights violations
and the large-scale displacement of the civilian
population, which we have witnessed in the Middle
East and in other conflicts around the world.
We have an opportunity to stop this now. We would
like to request the Council and the Secretary-General
to provide support to the ongoing peace talks in Doha
and the regional and international meetings planned
next week in Doha to achieve the goals of preventing
Taliban attacks on cities and of reaching a political
settlement and ceasefire.
We appreciate and support the role of the SecretaryGeneral’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan, Mr. Jean
Arnault, and Special Representative of the Secretary21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, Ms. Deborah Lyons.
We call on our friends and partners to support our
Government’s new security plan to stabilize Afghanistan
and protect the region and the international community
against the scourge of international terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation for the steadfast support of the members
of the Security Council and their principled positions
in difficult times for Afghanistan. I hope that today’s
discussions will not only contribute to the peace efforts
under way in Doha but also send a strong message to
the Taliban about the Council’s determination to hold
them accountable to their commitment and promises in
finding a peaceful solution to the current conflict.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): We are appalled by the
assassination today of the Director of Afghanistan’s
media and information centre and express our
condolences to his loved ones. There should be no
impunity for that horrendous crime.
It is indeed timely that we meet today, and we
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting. I also
thank Ambassador Isaczai, Ms. Akbar and Special
Representative Lyons for their comprehensive and, I
must say, deeply worrying briefings.
Let me express our appreciation for all United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
staff as they continue their difficult and dangerous
work. The Council condemns the deplorable attack on
the UNAMA offices in Herat on 30 July. We remain
extremely concerned by the significant and increased
loss of life, injury and displacement across Afghanistan
in recent weeks.
Let me be clear — the worrying deterioration of
the situation has come about largely as a result of the
Taliban’s military offensive against district capitals
and, more recently, against three provincial capitals
in the west and south of the country. Those attacks
are completely unacceptable. The Taliban must
immediately end their ongoing military offensive. The
recently reported abuses by the Taliban, including the
execution of civilians in so-called revenge killings and
the execution of prisoners of war, must stop. Some
of those abuses may constitute war crimes and we
condemn such acts unequivocally.

S/PV. 8831

We are also seriously concerned by reported
violations by members of the Afghan national security
and defence forces. The importance of ending all
violence and protecting civilians, especially children,
cannot be overemphasized. Moreover, the targeting
of human rights defenders and media workers is
unacceptable and must stop. All parties must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law. Safe and unhindered humanitarian access
remains crucial to protect and assist people in need.
All allegations of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law must be investigated
and perpetrators brought to justice.
There is no acceptable alternative to an inclusive,
just and realistic political settlement, as the Council
underscored in its press statement of 3 August. We
all share a responsibility to put effective political
and diplomatic pressure on the Taliban to engage in
negotiations. We must make it clear that the pursuit
of victory and establishment of a new Government
by military force will not be accepted and that no one
in the international community would support such a
Government. Any political solution acceptable to the
international community must uphold human rights for
all, in particular women and girls.
While there is positive complementarity between
the different formats supporting the peace process,
including the United States and Europe meetings and
what is known as the extended troika, it could also make
a significant positive difference if the key international
and regional stakeholders all joined together in one
format to coordinate efforts and align messages. We
encourage greater flexibility from the relevant capitals
to make that possible.
In conclusion, let me say that Norway continues
to support a strong role for the United Nations. We
see the appointment by the Secretary-General of a
Personal Envoy for Afghanistan and Regional Issues as
a positive step. As we near the renewal of UNAMA’s
mandate, we look forward to consulting with all on how
we, together, can enable the United Nations to play an
even stronger role in supporting the Afghan people’s
pursuit of a political settlement.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I would like to start with
by expressing our special thanks to Ms. Akbar and the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
for their courageous work despite the current situation
in Afghanistan. Hearing today about the deliberate

21-217709/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

killings of civilians, including Dawa Khan Menapal,
and the mounting civilian casualties was most troubling.
I would also like to thank Special Representative Lyons
for all her tireless work, in particular on supporting
peace talks and on the humanitarian response. Attacks
against United Nations personnel and compounds,
such as the recent incident in Herat, are utterly
reprehensible and may constitute war crimes, the
perpetrators of which must be brought to justice. I also
welcome the participation today of Ambassador Isaczai
of Afghanistan.
Since the start of the ongoing Taliban offensive,
in particular the assaults on population centres, the
number of civilians killed or injured has reached the
highest on record, with the Taliban responsible for
the largest share of casualties. Half the population in
Afghanistan is now in need of humanitarian aid; yet
humanitarian access is shrinking, and humanitarian
aid providers are being killed at an alarming rate. That
worsening humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan, which
has been described in detail today, is human-made and
could have been averted. Estonia reiterates the call, in
particular on the Taliban, for an immediate ceasefire
to save the Afghan people from more meaningless
suffering. Only a negotiated political solution can lead
to a sustainable peace in the country, as well as stability
in the region.
The Security Council has been clear in its messaging.
The Taliban and the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
must meaningfully engage in a comprehensive and
inclusive peace process in Doha. Parties must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilians. There is no
military solution to this conflict, and we do not support
the restoration of an Islamic emirate.
I would like to reiterate that Estonia’s commitment
to the people of Afghanistan remains steadfast. We
emphasize the importance of the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in the peace process
and wish to see that the outcome of the peace process
preserves constitutional protections for the rights of
women and minorities. We will continue our political
and financial support, conditional upon the preservation
of the country’s human rights and democratic
achievements. Any easing or lifting of sanctions must
be in line with resolution 2513 (2020). The Taliban must
first demonstrate a credible commitment to peace.
10/19

06/08/2021

Estonia also welcomes the diplomatic efforts in
Doha by Afghanistan’s neighbours and regional Powers.
We encourage intensified coordinated efforts that
contribute to a lasting peace in support of the people
of Afghanistan. Peace and stability in Afghanistan will
provide new opportunities for development and growth
for the entire region.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Lyons and Ms. Shaharzad
Akbar for their briefings, which were particularly
sobering and important to hear. We also thank
Ambassador Isaczai for participating today and for
his comments.
The United States strongly condemns the increase
in violent attacks in Afghanistan, in particular last
week’s attack on the compound in Herat of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
suicide bombing targeting the home of Afghanistan’s
Acting Defence Minister in Kabul. We express our
deepest sympathy and condolences to those affected by
those heinous attacks. In addition, there are credible
reports of attacks and retaliation against civilians in
other Taliban-controlled areas.
The alarming rise in violence and civilian casualties
caused by the ongoing Taliban military offensives
further erodes the advances that the Afghan people
made in democracy and the rule of law over the past
20 years. The Taliban must hear from the international
community that we will not accept a military takeover of
Afghanistan or a return of the Taliban’s Islamic emirate.
The Taliban will be isolated and an international pariah
if they choose that path, which would most certainly
push the country to further violence and destruction. To
echo the Council’s press statement SC/14592, released
earlier this week, and the United States-Europe group’s
23 July statement, there is no military solution in
Afghanistan, and a negotiated, inclusive political
settlement through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
process is the only way forward for lasting peace and
stability in the country. That process must include the
full and meaningful participation of women.
We also recall resolution 2513 (2020), which states
that Taliban lack of action to further reduce violence,
make sustained efforts to advance intra-Afghan
negotiations and otherwise cease to engage in, or
support, activities that threaten the peace, stability
and security of Afghanistan, will affect the Council’s
review of the status of designations of individuals,
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8831

groups, undertakings and entities on the list established
and maintained pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

peace. We urge the Afghans to remain resolute and to
know that the international community is behind them.

We urge the Taliban to immediately halt its
offensive, pursue a comprehensive and sustainable
political settlement and uphold its commitments
to protecting Afghanistan’s infrastructure and its
people, especially women, girls and other vulnerable
populations. We also call on the Taliban to permit
humanitarian organizations to continue their vital work
in Afghanistan, particularly as the Afghan people suffer
acutely from the effects of the coronavirus disease and
drought, in addition to the violence.

Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the
A3+1, namely, Kenya, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, and the Niger.

Let me reiterate that we express our full support
for an inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace
process, with the full and meaningful participation
of women, that leads to a just and durable political
settlement. A just and durable political settlement
must be based, at a minimum, on the following five
principles: first, inclusive governance; secondly, the
right of Afghans to elect political leaders; thirdly,
protections for human rights, including the rights
of women, young people and minorities; fourthly,
committing to counter-terrorism, including to ensure
that Afghanistan does not again serve as a safe haven
for international terrorists; and, fifthly, adherence to
international law, including international humanitarian
law. We emphasize that international support to any
future Government will depend, at least in part, on
adherence to those five elements.
It is in the interest of all of Afghanistan’s neighbours
to renew support for a negotiated settlement that brings
the Afghan people the peace that they so urgently
deserve and that creates a stable region. We welcome
the role that the Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy,
Jean Arnault, is playing in support of that objective.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation for the efforts taken by partners and
allies to maintain international civilian and diplomatic
operations in Afghanistan. We are thankful to those that
have stepped up in that critical role. As we continue with
our military withdrawal from Afghanistan, we want all
Afghans to know, as President Biden has stated, that
we remain committed to a strong partnership with the
country and its people.
United States security assistance continues
to Afghan forces, as does our development and
humanitarian aid to the Afghan people. We will
continue our diplomatic engagement in support of

At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Deborah
Lyons, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar,
Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission, for their briefings on the latest
developments in Afghanistan.
The A3+1 reiterates its support for the stabilization
efforts and good offices deployed in the quest for a
solution to the Afghan crisis, which has been developing
in a particularly concerning way recently. I would also
like to take this opportunity to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan and thank him for
his statement.
Following decades of war, destruction and
desolation, the Afghan people today yearn for
peace. That yearning is deep-seated, and Afghans
demonstrated it by welcoming with great hope the start
of the intra-Afghan peace talks in September 2020 in
Doha. Unfortunately, those talks are at a standstill, and
hostilities are raging throughout the country. The A3+1
stresses that the military option will not lead to a lasting
solution acceptable to all Afghan parties. We therefore
call on the Taliban and the Afghan Government to
immediately cease hostilities in order to give the Doha
talks a better chance of success. Moreover, we must
redouble our diplomatic efforts at the regional and
international levels to help facilitate the restart of the
intra-Afghan peace negotiations.
The A3+1 deplores the loss of life and suffering
endured by the civilian population as a result of the
latest outbreak of violence following the decision of
the international forces to leave the country by the end
of September. The already precarious humanitarian
situation could further worsen with the displacement of
populations fleeing the ongoing fighting between the
Taliban and Government forces in several provinces of
the country, including Kandahar, Helmand and Herat.
We reiterate our condemnation of the attack against
the United Nations compound in Herat on 30 July.
We also condemn the suicide attacks committed on

21-2177011/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

4 August in Kabul and call on the warring parties to
ensure the protection of civilians and above all put an
end to hostilities and accord priority to dialogue.
Afghanistan now more than ever needs the support
of the entire international community to help it through
this critical period in its history. Afghanistan must
not fall back into a full-blown civil war, at the risk
of losing all the democratic, social and development
gains achieved in recent years. While achieving peace
requires a settlement between the parties, we must
ensure that the peace process does not legitimize the
resort to military interventions or an association with
terrorist organizations through political recognition.
As we near the twentieth anniversary of the
11 September attacks, we would recall how the Taliban
were removed from power because of their support for
Al-Qaida. The Council must now prioritize the creation
of incentives and red lines that would compel the
Taliban to cease using terrorism for political ends.
We would recall the Council’s decision to split
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions list in response to
the efforts of the Afghan Government to negotiate a
peace process with the Taliban and establish national
reconciliation in Afghanistan. The goal was to provide
a lifeline for those members of the Taliban who
renounce violence and disassociate themselves from
Al-Qaida. The Council must therefore demand that the
Taliban embrace peace, cut its ties with Al-Qaida and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and engage in
a peace process that will transform Afghanistan into a
peaceful country.
The A3+1 welcomes and fully support the good
offices of the United Nations and of the United States,
Russia, China and Pakistan troika, as well as the other
diplomatic efforts made by neighbouring countries to
reduce tensions in order to reach a negotiated solution
to the crisis. Furthermore, it is important to emphasize
that the quest for peace must not be at the expense of
the rights of Afghans, in particular those of women and
children and Afghan ethnic and religious minorities.
At a time when attention is focused on the
deteriorating security situation, the A3+1 would also
like to highlight the importance of finding an urgent
and sustainable solution to the serious humanitarian
crisis that already exists in the country. The effects of
decades of conflict, combined with those of climate
change and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, have created a situation where more than
12/19

06/08/2021

a third of the population is now food-insecure, with a
large percentage of those affected being children. It is
therefore crucial to mobilize the additional resources
necessary to address the situation and call on donors to
honour the pledges they made in the framework of the
Afghan humanitarian plan.
Similarly, the A3+1 is concerned at the fact that
the growing insecurity in Afghanistan could hinder the
Government’s efforts and divert its attention from the
fight against the COVID-19 pandemic at a time when
more contagious variants of the virus are circulating
around the world. We would like to emphasize here
that the timely delivery and deployment of vaccines
is urgently needed to protect the Afghan population
during these challenging times.
In conclusion, the A3+1 suggest that we ask
ourselves the following question: what message are we
sending if we abandon Afghanistan at a time when the
country is on the brink of the abyss? Simply put, letting
Afghanistan fall back into chaos could send a signal to
terrorists and insurgent groups there and in other parts
of the world that they can gain legitimacy and power
through the use of force.
We believe that if the Security Council is to truly
fulfil its mission of maintaining international peace
and security, all possible efforts should be made now
to ensure that the main perpetrators of the violence
immediately put an end to their offensive and engage
resolutely in the quest for a negotiated, inclusive and
lasting political solution.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We express our gratitude for the briefings
delivered by Ms. Lyons and Ms. Akbar and for the
statement made by the representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Ghulam M. Isaczai.
As we have heard, the situation in Afghanistan is
critical. The recent military advances of the Taliban
have had a very serious impact on the people and
have made increasing numbers of Afghans wish to
flee their country in the face of a future that is, quite
frankly, grim.
Mexico deplores the deliberate attacks perpetrated
against human rights defenders, humanitarian workers,
health-care personnel, the media and minority groups.
For that reason, Mexico notes with grave concern
the stagnation of the intra-Afghan dialogue in Doha.
We express our support for the efforts undertaken
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

by the international community at the bilateral and
multilateral levels to lend new momentum to the peace
process and encourage parties to resume dialogue. We
will closely follow the outcome of the meeting of the
extended troika to be held in the coming days, as well as
the efforts of Mr. Jean Arnault, the Secretary-General’s
Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues.
The international community cannot and must not
allow the gains of the past two decades to be lost. The
common position must be clear — the rejection of a
return to an Islamic emirate that could be a sanctuary
once again for terrorist groups and the refusal to accept
a territory in which the rights of women, children and
minorities are not respected. The future of Afghanistan
must be decided democratically by all Afghans and not
imposed unilaterally by force.
Mexico recognizes the challenges faced by the
Afghan Government, which is tenaciously defending its
national project. The resilience of the Afghan people,
who continue to fight for an inclusive, democratic and
peaceful Afghanistan in the most adverse conditions,
is admirable. We recognize the difficulty of achieving
dialogue under such adverse circumstances and in a
context of severely deteriorating security.
I conclude by acknowledging the delicate and
complex work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. I express our support to the Mission
in its efforts to coordinate and facilitate humanitarian
assistance and to protect and promote the human rights
of children affected by the conflict, in particular with
respect to the progress made on advancing the women
and peace and security agenda, the impacts of which on
the empowerment of Afghan women must be preserved.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for her thoughts and views.
We believe that UNAMA plays an important role in
coordinating international efforts in Afghanistan. We
listened carefully to the statement and assessment
of Ambassador Ghulam M. Isaczai, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations.
We also thank Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, Chairperson of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for her briefing.
The deteriorating situation in Afghanistan is a
matter of increasing concern. Against the background

S/PV. 8831

of the withdrawal of foreign troops, the balance of
power is cause for concern. We have received horrific
reports of an escalation of violence. Civilians, including
women and children, are victims of the ongoing
conflict on an almost daily basis. Today we learned
about the murder of the Head of the Government media
and information centre. We would like to express our
sincere condolences to the families and the friends of
all the innocent civilians killed in Afghanistan.
Domestic political instability in recent years has
contributed to the persistent terrorist threat in the
country. During this period, Afghanistan saw the
emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the LevantKhorasan Province, whose terrorist attacks continue to
roil the country. The militants maintain sleeper cells in
the north and east and are bolstering their capacity to
increase their influence in the country and to spread
their terrorist activities from Afghanistan to the Central
Asian region. The production of illicit drugs is also
growing at a record pace.
The risk of militants infiltrating the region,
including under the guise of being refugees, must cause
concern for our Central Asian neighbours. We are
in regular contact with all five Central Asian States.
As never before, cooperation is proceeding in the
framework of regional organizations — the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), including the CSTO
Working Group on Afghanistan and the renewed
mechanism of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group.
It is clear that there is no military solution to the
Afghan situation, but given the lack of progress on the
negotiation track, the prospect of Afghanistan sliding
into a full-scale and protracted civil war is unfortunately
very real. The most important task today, therefore, is
the expeditious launch of substantive negotiations.
Russia has done a great deal to launch the process
of national reconciliation and direct intra-Afghan
dialogue. We continue to work with both sides to that
end. On 2 July, we held talks in Moscow with the Afghan
delegation, headed by Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, National
Security Adviser to the President of Afghanistan,
and on 8 and 9 July, we met with a delegation from
the Taliban Political Commission. We trust that the
upcoming meeting in Doha on 11 August in the troika
plus Pakistan format will give an additional impetus to
the peace process.

21-2177013/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

We are convinced that the consolidation of all
international and regional efforts is more important than
ever. We must do all we can to find sensible compromise
solutions that take into account the interests of all
ethnic and religious minorities. However, the question
of the country’s future political composition can be
decided only by the Afghan people. In any case, the
call to continue to show flexibility — not in words but
in deeds — should be directed to all parties. We believe
that insisting on mutual recrimination will hardly help
achieve that goal.
A united and stable Afghanistan, free from
terrorism and illicit drugs, is necessary — not only for
the Afghans but also for the entire region. It is the key
to Afghanistan’s economic development and prosperity.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Representative
Deborah Lyons and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar for their
comprehensive briefings. I welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan and thank
him for his statement. I would like to focus today on
four points.
First, we are deeply concerned about the situation
on the ground. Violence and civilian casualties have
reached the highest levels since the beginning of the year,
while intra-Afghan peace negotiations have shown very
limited progress. We would like to reiterate our position
that there can be no military solution to the current crisis.
Sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan can be
achieved only through a comprehensive and durable
political settlement. In that regard, it is crucial that
the relevant parties achieve a permanent ceasefire as
soon as possible, thereby putting an end to the ongoing
violence and creating an environment conducive to the
current peace negotiations.
We also call on the relevant parties to continue to
set aside their differences, build confidence and reach a
timely political settlement to the conflict, with the full
and meaningful participation of Afghan women and
youth. We note with appreciation the joint operation
between the parties on 18 July to accelerate high-level
engagement in order to find a timely solution, and we
look forward to seeing practical progress.
Secondly, we strongly condemn the attacks
on civilians, including women, children, students,
humanitarian workers, civil servants and United
Nations personnel, over the past month. Those attacks
are unacceptable. We express our deep condolences
to the families of the victims and to the Government
14/19

06/08/2021

and the people of Afghanistan. It is imperative
that all relevant parties fully respect international
humanitarian law and immediately stop targeting
civilians and civilian objects, particularly those that are
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
We strongly condemn the attack on the United Nations
compound in Herat on 30 July. The safety and security
of United Nations personnel and compounds must be
ensured. We also share the concern about the increasing
negative impact of the conflict in Afghanistan on the
security situation in the region, especially the countries
neighbouring Afghanistan. It is therefore equally
important to prevent the further exacerbation of that
impact and address the related challenges for the sake
of peace and stability in the region.
Thirdly, we share the deep concern about the
increasingly dire humanitarian situation in the country,
which has reached a critical level of food insecurity
that affects more than 50 per cent of the population of
Afghanistan. We call on the United Nations and regional
and international partners to continue to strengthen
their humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan in that
regard in order to ensure its projected needs are met.
At the same time, the international community should
continue to support the Government of Afghanistan
in promoting socioeconomic development and the
reconstruction of the country.
We commend the efforts to improve economic
development, livelihood assistance and the health-care
system of Afghanistan during these difficult times
marked by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We are
waiting to see further support for the country in its
fight against the pandemic, including with regard to
the vaccination process. We also commend the Mine
Action Service and its partners for their continued
efforts to facilitate mine clearance and risk education
activities in Afghanistan.
Fourthly, the support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and of
regional and international partners will remain critical
to promoting tangible progress in peace talks. We look
forward to the outcome of the upcoming meeting of the
extended troika to be held in Doha on 11 August. We
also wish to see further collaboration between UNAMA
and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan and Regional Issues in supporting the
peace process.
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reiterate
its full support for the pursuit of peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan. We reaffirm our support
for the work of the United Nations, UNAMA and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Deborah Lyons for her deeply
worrisome but very important briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Ghulam M. Isaczai of Afghanistan for his
participation here today. I would like to express my
appreciation to Ms. Shaharzad Akbar for addressing the
Security Council once again and for her sobering words.
I want to begin by joining others in condemning in
the strongest terms the recent attacks in Afghanistan,
including on the United Nations compound in Herat
last Friday. We also join others in condemning the
assassination of Dawa Khan Menapal. Our thoughts are
with the families of those killed. We wish those injured
a swift recovery.
There is a real urgency to our discussion today.
As attested to so powerfully by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Lyons, the Council needs to
come together and needs to act. The Afghan people are
suffering devastating levels of violence. Afghanistan
has been the most dangerous country in the world for
civilians and children for some years, but the mid-year
report of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) on the protection of civilians
has documented record levels of civilian casualties,
as Ms. Akbar also highlighted. The scale of the recent
violence we have seen against civilians is truly shocking.
The Taliban must end its military offensive, which
is causing such suffering, commit to a comprehensive
ceasefire and engage constructively in peace
negotiations to reach a just and inclusive political
settlement. The Doha process has the support of the
international community and remains our best hope for
achieving the peace that the Afghan people so clearly
demand and deserve. We deeply regret the failure of the
Taliban to engage meaningfully in talks. We reiterate
that there can be no military solution. Violence begets
only violence. Nowhere have we seen that more than
in Afghanistan.
Both sides must commit to a better future for
Afghanistan and a negotiated settlement that guarantees
inclusive governance; human rights protections,
especially for women, young people and minorities; and
adherence to international law, including international

S/PV. 8831

humanitarian law. Afghanistan must never again
become a haven for international terrorism.
We know that, in order to succeed, Afghanistan’s
peace process must also be inclusive and led and
owned by Afghans. In order to achieve that, all
Afghans — men, women, young people, minorities and
civil society — must be allowed to participate equally
and meaningfully in shaping their future. Ireland stands
by resolution 2513 (2020), on Afghanistan. Together
with our European Union partners, our position on
current and future support for the Afghan Government
requires adherence to the principles set out in the 2020
Afghanistan Partnership Framework.
We strongly encourage Afghanistan’s neighbours
and regional States to support the Afghan people
and use their influence to promote a lasting peace
that benefits all. We welcome the engagement of the
Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan
and Regional Issues in building a regional consensus.
Let us be clear. The deliberate targeting of civilians
constitutes a war crime, and it must end. All parties
must uphold their responsibility to protect civilians,
especially children. The perpetrators of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights abuses
and violations must be brought to justice. We share the
deep concern expressed by others about the troubling
human rights situation. The past two decades have seen
the emergence of a vibrant Afghan civil society, which
is now under threat from deliberate and disturbing
attacks. Ireland unequivocally condemns those attacks,
which target the very fabric of Afghan society.
Violence and intimidation against women and girls
is threatening their ability to participate in all aspects of
Afghan society. The Security Council must stand with
them. Ireland and Mexico will host a meeting of the
Informal Experts Group on Women, Peace and Security
on Afghanistan this month to advance the efforts of the
Council to address the situation facing Afghan women.
The surge in violence is increasing the number
of internally displaced persons, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General noted, and is
exacerbating the profound challenges faced by the more
than 18 million people who are in need of humanitarian
aid in Afghanistan and were already grappling with
devastating food insecurity and the effects of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Humanitarian actors
need access and protection.

21-2177015/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

06/08/2021

In conclusion, I would like to say to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons, that I
pay tribute to UNAMA’s work in such extremely difficult
circumstances. The United Nations commitment to hold
firm and serve the people of Afghanistan is unstinting.
We look forward to working with Council members on
the UNAMA mandate renewal over the coming weeks.

commitments and we expect it to honour them, be they
to reduce violence or to sever all ties with terrorist
groups. I recall that the list of individuals and entities
subject to the measures imposed by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) can be
modified only in light of a genuine commitment to
peace on the part of all those on the list.

We, the international community, must continue to
stand with the people of Afghanistan to collectively and
urgently find a way forward that meets their aspirations
for peace and protects their rights.

The worsening situation compounds an extremely
worrisome humanitarian context. The impact of
the coronavirus disease epidemic, as well as that of
drought, continues to be felt in Afghanistan. Attention
must be paid to the suffering of the Afghan people and
assistance must be provided. To that end, access for
medical and humanitarian personnel to all those in need,
as well as their protection, must be guaranteed. Respect
for international humanitarian law, human rights and
freedom of the press by all parties is non-negotiable.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting
at a particularly critical time for Afghanistan. I thank
Deborah Lyons and Shaharzad Akbar for their especially
poignant briefings. I also welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan among us.
France condemns in the strongest terms the recent
and increasing number of attacks that have plunged
into mourning Afghans and the United Nations,
whose compound in Herat was affected last week. The
assassination of the Head of the Afghan Government’s
media and information centre has just been added to the
long list of abhorrent crimes that have been committed
over the past weeks. We heard from Ms. Lyons,
Ms. Akbar and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan about the gravity of the situation.
As we have said many times in this Chamber,
the current level of violence is unacceptable. Peace
cannot be achieved in the midst of chaos, violence and
barbarity. With every new attack, the chances for peace
are weakened. We therefore call on those responsible
for the violence — the Taliban — to end their military
offensive and immediately halt the violence, as they
pledged to do. Peace will not be possible without a
ceasefire already in place to ensure peaceful discussions.
Recent reports, in particular those of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, whose
truly outstanding work I commend, show an increase in
attacks against civilians and the level of brutality. The
protection of civilians, especially women and children,
and civilian infrastructure are an absolute priority.
I reiterate that we cannot allow those responsible for
those violations to go unpunished. They must be held
accountable for their crimes. There can be no impunity
for gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We know who is responsible for
the barbarism — the Taliban. The group has made
16/19

Finally, I would like to recall that lasting peace is
not possible without respect for certain conditions. Talks
must take place in a calm and trusting environment,
in the presence of all those concerned and based on
the democratic gains of the past 20 years. Women, in
particular, have their place in the process and we expect
that all negotiation formats convened allow for their
full participation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that France
is determined to walk with Afghanistan and all its
partners on the road to peace.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Representative Lyons and Ms. Akbar for
their briefings. I welcome the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan.
First, it is clear that the Taliban’s military offensive
has entered a new and more dangerous phase, with the
risk of civil war and implications for Afghanistan’s
neighbours. There is evidence of summary killings,
Government officials dragged from their homes and
assassination, including, tragically, yesterday of Dawa
Khan Menapal, the director of Afghanistan’s media and
information centre. We send our condolences to all the
bereaved families.
We are also concerned about evidence of Taliban
human rights abuses, including of minority groups
and women, forced marriage, using civilians as human
shields and attacks on United Nations buildings. Those
acts could constitute war crimes and we will work with
international partners to hold the Taliban to account.
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

The Security Council, therefore, should leave the
Taliban in no doubt that there will be consequences
for the group if it continues to pursue this military
offensive. There can be no military solution to this
conflict. For our part, the United Kingdom will not
recognize a Taliban Government that comes to power
by force. If the Taliban wants political power, it needs to
engage meaningfully in a peace process. We are clear,
too, about the standards we expect any Government to
adhere to.
As Prime Minister Johnson made clear on 8 July,
we continue to support the Government of the Republic
of Afghanistan and the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces and to provide humanitarian assistance
to the people of Afghanistan. But the United Kingdom
will not provide aid to a Government that does not
respect and uphold human rights, including the rights
of women and minority groups. The Taliban should
understand that. We also recall resolution 2513 (2020)
agreed by the Council, which stated that any easing of
sanctions will depend on the Taliban making sustained
efforts to embrace peace.
Against that background, the opportunity to lift
peace talks out of the stalemate in Doha, next week, is
critical. We encourage all parties, including the Taliban
and the Government of Afghanistan, other parties,
neighbours and the international community, to engage
and support, in good faith, an Afghan-led and Afghanowned search for peace. Afghanistan’s neighbours and
the regional organizations to which they belong have
an important supporting role to play in the process, as
does the Council.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Lyons for her briefing. I
listened attentively to Ms. Akbar, Chairperson of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.
I also welcome Ambassador Isaczai, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and thank him for
his statement.
Afghanistan is at a historic conjuncture of war
and peace. With the hasty withdrawal of United States
and NATO forces, Afghanistan has seen an escalation
of violence, a rising number of civilian casualties and
an even more severe security situation. Two decades
of war in Afghanistan have caused the death of tens of
thousands of civilians and the displacement of tens of
millions. However, peace has remained elusive. Facts
have once again demonstrated that there is no military

S/PV. 8831

solution to the situation in Afghanistan. Any external
interference in Afghanistan is doomed to fail.
In the light of the current situation, China believes
that there are three pressing tasks.
First, we must prevent extensive fighting and an
all-out civil war. The greatest aspirations of the Afghan
people are the cessation of hostilities and peace. The
countries of the region and the international community
also share those aspirations. China condemns the violent
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure and
calls on all parties in Afghanistan to exercise restraint,
stop military confrontation and reach a comprehensive
ceasefire as soon as possible. Foreign troops should
consult fully with the Afghan Government on postwithdrawal arrangements so as to ensure a smooth and
responsible transition in Afghanistan. They should
be more transparent with the countries of the region
and avoid leaving a host of problems behind them.
The United States has recently expressed its intention
to assist Afghanistan in maintaining stability. We
hope that it can earnestly fulfil that commitment and
intensify its efforts.
Secondly, we must work together to help advance
the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. A
political solution is only way forward for Afghanistan.
No Government should be established in Afghanistan
by force. China welcomes the recent resumption of
dialogue between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban in Doha and the agreement to continue highlevel talks and accelerate the negotiation process. We
hope that the parties can show flexibility, seek common
ground while managing differences and develop a
road map and a timetable for reconciliation as soon
as possible.
We look forward to the rebirth of Afghanistan and
the establishment of a broad and inclusive political
structure, in pursuit of a moderate and steady Muslim
policy, with a commitment to friendly relations with
all neighbouring countries. China is willing to host the
intra-Afghan dialogue and negotiations, in due course,
to support and facilitate the peace and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, we must prevent terrorist forces from
gaining strength. Terrorism remains a grave challenge
for Afghanistan and the countries of the region.
Terrorist organizations listed by the Council, such
as the Islamic State, Al-Qaida, the Eastern Turkistan
Islamic Movement and the Pakistan Taliban, continue

21-2177017/19

S/PV.8831

The situation in Afghanistan

to launch frequent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan. The
international community must not allow Afghanistan
to again become a place where terrorists assemble
and should continue to support the Afghan National
Defence and Security forces in strengthening their
counter-terrorism capacity. The Taliban should
set the goal of peace and make a clean break with
terrorist organizations. All countries should fulfil
their obligations under international law and Security
Council resolutions, strengthen cooperation and jointly
combat terrorism.
The international community should respect the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned principle, strengthen
coordination efforts and contribute positive energy
to the Afghan peace and reconciliation process.
China will continue to coordinate closely with all
relevant parties through such mechanisms as the
extended troika — the Russian Federation, China
the United States and Pakistan — and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization Afghanistan Contact Group
to foster synergies.
The international community should continue to
support Afghanistan’s development and reconstruction
and assist the country in pursuing regional cooperation,
building interconnectivity and enhancing its
independent development capacities. Developed
countries should honour their commitments and
continue to provide development and humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan, especially in terms of
urgently needed pandemic assistance. China has
actively supported the Afghan Government in fighting
the pandemic, with 700,000 doses of coronavirus
disease vaccines, ventilators and anaesthesia machines
and other medical supplies arriving in Kabul not long
ago. We will provide an additional 1 million vaccine
doses in the near future.
China appreciates the important role played by
Special Representative Lyons and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
supporting peace, reconciliation and economic
reconstruction in Afghanistan. UNAMA is working
in a very challenging environment under the current
circumstances. China strongly condemns the attack
on the United Nations compound in Herat on 30 July
and calls on all parties to abide by international law
and protect the safety and security of United Nations
personnel.
18/19

06/08/2021

The Security Council should give early
consideration to the form of the United Nations presence
in Afghanistan in the next phase and to how it can safely
perform its duties, and make proper arrangements in
that regard.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Deborah Lyons, for
her detailed briefing. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement and
Ms. Shaharzad Akbar for her briefing.
As a neighbour of Afghanistan, the current situation
prevailing in the country is of great concern to us. The
violence shows no signs of abating. Reports from the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
make it clear that civilian casualties and targeted
killings have reached record levels. There have been
targeted attacks on religious and ethnic minorities, girl
students, the Afghan security forces, ulemas, women
occupying positions of responsibility, journalists, civil
rights activists and young people.
As we saw recently, not even the United Nations
compound has been spared. The residence of the
Minister for Defence of Afghanistan has been attacked.
An Indian journalist was murdered while he was
reporting. The fighting continues in Helmand, Herat
and elsewhere. More than 100 Afghan civilians were
mercilessly killed in Spin Boldak.
The rapid deterioration of the security situation
in Afghanistan constitutes a serious threat to regional
peace and stability. It is therefore time for the
international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to take stock of the situation and decide
on actions that would help to bring about a permanent
and comprehensive ceasefire and ensure an immediate
cessation of violence. Anything short of that will
constitute a serious threat to regional peace and security.
I would like to recall here what our Minister
for External Affairs said to the Council in June (see
S/2021/601), namely, that a durable peace in Afghanistan
requires a genuine double peace, that is, peace within
Afghanistan and peace around Afghanistan. It requires
harmonizing the interests of all, both within and
around the country. India has been supportive of all
efforts being made to accelerate the dialogue between
21-21770

06/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8831

the Afghan Government and the Taliban, including the
intra-Afghan negotiations.

acceptable compromise, reflecting the Doha process,
the Moscow format and the Istanbul process.

If the peace process is to be successful, then
it is necessary to ensure that the Taliban engages
in negotiations in good faith, eschews the path of
violence, severs ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist
organizations and fully commits itself to reaching a
political solution. Violence and military threat cannot
be used to strengthen the negotiating position. A
tangible demonstration of that commitment is required.

For enduring peace in Afghanistan, terrorist safe
havens and sanctuaries in the region must be dismantled
immediately and terrorist supply chains disrupted. It
needs to be ensured that Afghanistan’s neighbours and
the region are not threatened by terrorism, separatism
or extremism. There needs to be zero tolerance for
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. It is equally
important to ensure that the territory of Afghanistan is
not used by terrorist groups to threaten or attack any
other country. Those providing material and financial
support to terrorist entities must be held accountable.

India wishes to see an independent, peaceful,
sovereign, democratic, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. I would like to reiterate our support for
an inclusive Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghancontrolled peace process. Any political arrangement or
settlement in Afghanistan must ensure that the gains
of the past two decades are protected and not reversed.
Those gains are non-negotiable. It should therefore
preserve the constitutional democratic framework and
ensure the protection of the rights of women, children
and minorities.
Any regime devoid of legitimacy in Afghanistan
will find it difficult to garner the much-needed
humanitarian and development assistance from the
international donor community. As the international
community, we cannot afford to set the clock back. The
future of Afghanistan cannot be its past.
We support a leading role for the United Nations
and call on the Secretary-General to take an initiative
towards finding a lasting and durable outcome.
We welcome any move towards a genuine political
settlement that leads to those objectives. The only
way forward is via negotiations that will provide an

We, as the international community, must ensure
that our commitments to Afghanistan, including to
its various institutions, are maintained. On India’s
part, we will continue to stand with Afghanistan in
ensuring that peace and stability are restored through a
legitimate and transparent democratic process, which is
essential for the long-term stability of Afghanistan and
the region. We will continue to provide all support to
Afghanistan in realizing its aspirations for a peaceful,
democratic and prosperous future free from terror,
where the rights and interests of all sectors of Afghan
society are promoted and protected.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the
list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

21-2177019/19
