S/2018/163

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 February 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering
the period from 15 November 2017 to 16 February 2018)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2392
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 March 2018, and in accordance with prior
resolutions in which the Council requested me to report on the implementation of the
mandate every 90 days. It covers political and security developments from
15 November 2017 to 16 February 2018, the humanitarian situation, and progress in
the implementation of the Mission mandate. It also provides a review of progress
made by the parties in ceasing hostilities, returning to the path of dialogue and
achieving inclusiveness within the Government.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
The period under review saw the revival of the political process with the holding
of two sessions of the high-level revitalization forum of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the signing of the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access. Meanwhile, inside
South Sudan, the national dialogue that the Government launched in May 2017 has
continued with further grass-roots consultations. The economy has remained stagnant,
with few signs of the improvements in the public and private sectors that are needed
to ease the chronic poverty and hardship that affect the majority of the South Sudanese
population.
Peace agreement revitalization forum
3.
On 28 November, the IGAD Council of Ministers issued a communiqué in the
run-up to the first session of the IGAD revitalization forum, in which it endorsed the
report of the IGAD Special Envoy for South Sudan, Ismail Wais, on his pre -forum
consultations with South Sudanese stakeholders. The report of the I GAD Special
Envoy summarized potential options to address contentious issues, such as
transitional government arrangements, state administrative restructuring and the
legislature. On 17 December, the Government restated its view that the forum should
not be a renegotiation of the 2015 peace agreement. In a press release issued on
18 December, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in
Opposition repeated its view that the peace agreement had collapsed following the
events in Juba in July 2016.

18-02688 (E)

010318

*1802688*

S/2018/163

4.
On 18 December, the IGAD Council of Ministers opened the forum, urging the
parties to commit to immediately silencing the guns through agreement on a cessation
of hostilities. From 18 to 21 December in Addis Ababa, IGAD convened the first
phase of the high-level forum on the revitalization of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan of August 2015 (hereinafter referred
to as the peace agreement). On 21 December, 14 parties signed the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access, with
representatives of South Sudanese stakeholders, IGAD and the African Union signing
as guarantors and the IGAD mediators and international partners as witnesses. The
signatory parties included the Transitional Government of National Unity, SPLM/A
in Opposition, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) “Former
Detainees”, the National Salvation Front and 10 other opposition movements and
parties.
5.
Since the new cessation of hostilities agreeme nt came into force on
24 December, it has been subject to a number of verified and claimed violations. On
15 January, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism reported to the IGAD Council of Ministers and the Joint Monitori ng and
Evaluation Commission that Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) forces south of
Mundri had violated the agreement by way of actions carried out between
22 December 2017 and 8 January 2018, and that pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
forces had violated the agreement by way of actions carried out in Koch on
24 December. Reports of alleged violations have continued up to the time of
reporting, indicating that key parties are not fulfilling their commitments under the
agreement. Meanwhile, the parties themselves have made claims and counterclaims
of alleged violations, adding further pressure on the Mechanism’s monitoring and
verification teams to verify reported violations.
6.
On 12 January, the Chair of the African Union Commission and I issued a joint
statement condemning violations of the cessation of hostilities agreement and voicing
our firm view that there must be consequences for parties violating the agreement.
The troika of Norway, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America similarly issued a statement on 12 January condemning
the continuing pattern of violations and stating their readiness to hold those
responsible to account and to impose measures on those who violated the agreement.
On 25 January, the IGAD Council of Ministers requested all parties to investigate and
report within one month on violations and cases of sexual and gender-based violence
and recruitment and use of children, and to identify the individuals responsible.
Concern about the issue was echoed in statements by the European Union and the
troika on 26 and 29 January, respectively. On 27 January, the African Union, IGAD
and the United Nations jointly condemned and called for accountability for violations
of the cessation of hostilities agreement and rejected threats directed towards the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. On the
same day, the IGAD Council of Ministers issued a communiqué in which it endorsed
the Mechanism’s verified violation reports and reaffirmed its commitment to take
appropriate action, including targeted sanctions, against those violating the
agreement.
7.
The second session of the forum began in Addis Ababa on 5 February, with
participation from all South Sudanese parties and stakeholder groups. Discussions
were focused on measures to revitalize chapter I (on the Transitional Government of
National Unity) and chapter II (on the permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangements) of the peace agreement. The second session of the forum concluded on
16 February with limited progress towards achieving the objectives set out by the
IGAD mediation and with no date agreed for the next phase. However, the South
Sudanese parties issued statements reiterating their commitment to the process and
2/17

18-02688

S/2018/163

initialled the revised articles in chapters I and II, on which they had reached
consensus. Prior to the start of the forum, a coalition of 44 women ’s organizations
called for a comprehensive increase in women’s participation in peace processes and
governance and security leadership positions in South Sudan.
National political developments
8.
Notwithstanding the ongoing revitalization efforts, progress in implementing
the 2015 peace agreement has been limited. In a position paper submitted t o IGAD
on 17 December, the Government stated that implementation of the peace agreement
was “in progress” and that shortcomings in timely implementation were mainly “due
to lack of funding”. On 13 January, the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee reported that it was considering submissions from political parties and
others on two political parties and election bills. The draft bill outlining amendments
required to align the 2011 Transitional Constitution with the peace agreement has yet
to be tabled before the parliament for ratification.
9.
The subnational phase of the national dialogue continued, including efforts to
consult with the internally displaced and refugee populations. During the second half
of November, consultations concluded in Northern Bahr el-Ghazal and Upper Nile,
including one consultation held in a protection of civilians site. In November and
December, public consultations were held with South Sudanese refugees in Kenya
and Uganda. During December, subcommittees concluded consultations in Central
Equatoria, the Abyei Administrative Area and Western Bahr el -Ghazal.
Subcommittees began consultations in Eastern Equatoria, Lakes, Pibor and Western
Equatoria in December and in Warrap in early January. Consultations in Juba
continued in November and December with civil society, youth groups, community
elders, religious leaders, academics and parliamentarians.
10. In general, many of the subcommittee consultations appear to have been
relatively open with broadly representative local participation. However, political,
financial, logistical and access constraints have limited the reach of the consultations
to largely Government-controlled locations. On 18 January, the national dialogue
secretariat convened a round-table event in Juba on the subject of freedom of
expression, access to information and the creation of an environment conducive to
dialogue.
11. From 14 to 16 November, a meeting of the SPLM in Government and the SPLM
“Former Detainees” was held in Cairo under the sponsorship of the Presidents of
Egypt and Uganda. The meeting produced a new declaration on reunification of
SPLM, and a further meeting held in Entebbe, Uganda, produced, on 15 December,
an implementation plan for reunification. A reunification agreement for SPLM was
first signed in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, in January 2015.
12. In late January and mid-February 2018, the President, Salva Kiir, dismissed and
appointed new Governors in Terekeka, Eastern Lakes, Latjoor, Boma, Yei River and
Tonj, bringing the number of Governors replaced to more than 14 since the issuance
of the presidential decree of 14 January 2017 establishing a 32 -state system. On
16 February, the President decreed the reshuffle of the Governors of Yei River and
Tonj. In late January and early February, the President also appointed new Deputy
Ministers of Labour and of Information. On 19 January, the pro -Machar Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition appointed new Governors for Central
Equatoria and Wau.
13. On 2 February, the United States Department of State announced restrictions on
the export of defence articles and defence services to South Sudan. Protests in favour
of and against the arms embargo were organized across the country. Also on
2 February, the European Union added the former Chief of General Staff of SPLA,
18-02688

3/17

S/2018/163

Paul Malong, the former Assistant Chief of Defence Forces of SPLA, Malek Reuben
Riak, and Minister of Information and Government spokesperson, Michael Makuei
Leuth, to the list of individuals subject to a travel ban and an asset freeze.
Economic developments
14. The economy has remained stagnant, with few signs of stabilization and little
prospect of sustained recovery. The depreciation of the South Sudanese pound has
continued; its value against the United States dollar fell from an average of around
175 pounds per dollar in November to 230 pounds per dollar in February. Consumer
price inflation slowed slightly, but was still estimated to have been at 118 per cent in
2017, according to the South Sudan National Bureau of Statistics. As a consequence,
the public have faced large rises in the prices of commodities, public transport and
services.

III. Security situation
15. Violent clashes involving SPLA, SPLA in Opposition and other armed groups
continued to occur across the country. As in previous reporting periods, incidents
were particularly concentrated in parts of the greater Upper Nile and greater Equatoria
regions. During December and January, violations of the cessation of hostilities
agreement verified by the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism were mainly of low intensity. However, violations reported
in February indicated planning by the parties for further offensives and an increased
intensity in the fighting. Furthermore, the parties did not comply fully with provisions
of the agreement, in particular the requirements to promulgate the agreement to all
their units in the field, adhere to the principles of freezing forces in place and
disengaging when they are in close proximity, and inform the Mechanism of any
planned military movement.
Greater Upper Nile region
16. The security situation in greater Upper Nile remained volatil e, with reports of
fighting between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition. In Jonglei, the two
forces clashed on 17 and 18 November in the Wau and Mogok districts in Ayod
County; SPLA remained in control of Wau and surrounding areas, while SPLA in
Opposition was reportedly stationed near Mogok. SPLA allegedly attacked
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces near Yuai on 29 December and in Wunbil
village near Waat on 31 December. Starting on 7 January, the First Vice -President,
Taban Deng Gai, undertook a two-week visit to multiple locations in Jonglei,
including Bor, Jalle, Pajok, Panyagor and Yuai, accompanied by a large security
detail, with the stated purpose of raising awareness about the cessation of hostilities
agreement.
17. SPLA and opposition forces continued to be in close proximity in parts of Upper
Nile. Clashes broke out on 24 November in Nasir, and on 26 November an SPLA
attempt to advance towards the opposition-controlled Maiwut area on the outskirts of
Pagak was pushed back. Forces also exchanged heavy artillery fire in Atar on
7 December and on 17 December, when SPLA allegedly attacked a position of
General Johnson Olony’s Agwelek forces under the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
in Kola, Manyo County.
18. In central and southern parts of Unity, tensions continued between SPLA and
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces. According to a report issued by the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, on 20 November the
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition took control of Rubkwa y, south of Bieh, and
4/17

18-02688

S/2018/163

captured the Deputy Commissioner, who remains in opposition captivity. Intermittent
clashes were also reported in Leer town and Leer County, including heavy fighting
on 30 November in Leer town and Thonyor, which caused some damage wi thin the
UNMISS temporary operating base in Leer. Insecurity in the Rubkona area was
highlighted by an ambush carried out on a demining company contracted by the Mine
Action Service of the United Nations near Kaljak on 10 December, which SPLA
blamed on the opposition, who rejected the accusation. The pro-Machar SPLA in
Opposition claimed that on 27 December they repelled an SPLA attack in Bieh, Koch
County. Clashes were reported around Koch on 12 and 13 January, including an SPLA
attack on pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces reported by a United Nations agency
operating in Buaw, Koch County, on 12 January, as well as a confirmed clash on
12 January in Bol, between Koch and Rubkway. On 2 February, SPLA and
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces also reportedly clashed in Buoh, Mirmir,
Buaw and Koch in Koch County, and in Buaw and Rier on 10 February.
Greater Equatoria region
19. The security situation in parts of the Equatorias remained tense. On
19 November, pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces claimed to have clashed with
SPLA forces advancing towards the Iyiri area of Magwe. Following SPLA clearing
operations against pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces in and around Torit town,
several rounds of small arms fire and two rocket-propelled grenade shells were heard
on 12 December in proximity to the UNMISS base in Torit. The pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition denied involvement in the incident following claims that SPLA forces
were attempting to capture opposition soldiers hiding in Torit. There were also reports
that SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces clashed at the Lawaci River,
between Pogee and Pajok, in Magwe County on 19 January, and in Loming on
5 February. Meanwhile, ambushes were reported on the Juba-Kapoeta, Juba-Torit,
Kapoeta-Torit, Torit-Magwe and Kapoeta-Ngauro roads, resulting in several civilian
casualties.
20. Southern parts of Central Equatoria remained insecure, with reports of clashes
between SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces. On 14 December, a
convoy of United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations was robbed at a
location between Limbe and Koya, near Yei town. SPLA and pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition forces reportedly clashed in Lasu on 17 and 18 December; SPLA
reportedly took control of the centre of Lasu, while th e opposition was stationed in
the surrounding areas. On 24 December, SPLA forces allegedly attacked a
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition position in Lujulu near the border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, resulting in four civilian fatalities. On
25 December, one civilian was reportedly killed and four others were injured when
SPLA forces reportedly opened fire on civilians in Yei town. There were also reports
of clashes between the two forces in Bazi, Kaia and Morobo on 3 January. Community
leaders in Yei claimed that on 4 January, clashes between the two forces in the Iraga
area of Morobo County had led to civilian casualties. The pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition further alleged that on 9 January, SPLA forces attacked their position at
Wunaleng, approximately 12 kilometres west of Juba. However, SPLA refused to
confirm the incident.
21. Reports of insecurity persisted in Central Equatoria. On 22 November, South
Sudan National Police Service forces were deployed to the Gudele area in Juba to
disarm alleged land grabbers, resulting in the deaths of two civilians. On
25 November, armed men ambushed a civilian vehicle on the road to Yei near the
UNMISS base at United Nations House in Juba. On 4 January, there were reports of
attacks by armed groups on SPLA positions in Gudele and Kapuri, west of Juba, and

18-02688

5/17

S/2018/163

a shooting incident near the UNMISS protection of civilians site adjacent to United
Nations House.
22. In eastern parts of Western Equatoria, intermittent clashes between SPLA and
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces were reported. On 26 November, SPLA
allegedly attacked opposition positions between Mundri town and Bangolo, as well
as in Wiro, east of Lui, and Nywu, south-west of Mundri town, resulting in the killing
of three civilians. Between 30 November and 2 December, SPLA forces allegedly
launched attacks on opposition positions in Kedibo, Bangolo and Garia. However, on
1 December, the Government denied any SPLA offensive in opposition -controlled
areas. SPLA clearing operations around Mundri town led to civilian displacement,
while the Mundri-Bangolo, Mundri-Kedibo and Mundri-Lakamadi roads were
inaccessible owing to insecurity. The Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism reported a clash on 24 December at Landigwa
between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition, caused by SPLA movement
from Bari towards Garia. On 2 January, local sources reported that a heavy SPLA
deployment had been observed along the Mundri-Bangolo road.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
23. The security situation in greater Bahr el-Ghazal was also tense. In Western Bahr
el-Ghazal, armed men allegedly attacked SPLA soldiers from the Bringi checkpoint
on the Wau-Baggari road on 15 and 17 November. On 27 November, SPLA soldiers
allegedly attacked civilians between Agok and Momoi Bomas and were subsequently
arrested and detained by the National Security Service. On 17 December, fighting
allegedly broke out between pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces and a joint force
of the Justice and Equality Movement and SPLA near Yangusi village, south of Raja
town. In another incident, two civilian vehicles were attacked by an armed group near
Khor Birdi, south of Raja town, resulting in the killing of eight people.
24. In Warrap, SPLA forces started house-to-house searches as part of the civilian
disarmament process. Rising insecurity between Tonj and Lakes was also reported as
suspected armed men from Rumbek North raided cattle in Wunlit County. In Lakes,
on 9 December, two United Nations contractor trucks were fired upon by armed men
near Cueicok, Mayom Payam, in Rumbek Centre County.
Intercommunal conflict
25. Separate from the conflict between the Government and armed opposition,
intercommunal tensions continued to result in substantial numbers of civ ilian deaths
related to cattle-raiding incidents, revenge killings and disputes over land and natural
resources. In Lakes, tensions between subsections of the Dinka Agar continued, with
deadly clashes reported in Malek County on 6 December and subsequent c ounterattacks on Cueicok, Mayom Payam, and Kabur-Williams villages on 8 December,
resulting in at least 120 killed and 70 wounded. On 16 and 17 December, in Warrap,
Thiik youth attacked the Jalwa in Panjak Boma, Wunlit County, resulting in at least
43 killed and 53 injured. On 27 and 28 November, in Jonglei, Murle youth attacked
Duk Payuel County, resulting in approximately 40 civilians killed and over 50 women
and children abducted. Following the attack, the President issued an ultimatum calling
for the return of abductees and stolen cattle and summoned the local governors. On
22 December, two subgroups of the Abii community clashed near Pariak over access
to grazing land, allegedly resulting in 17 killed and at least 18 injured.

6/17

18-02688

S/2018/163

IV. Humanitarian situation
26. The humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains grave. As of February 2018,
the United Nations estimates that 1.8 million people are internally displaced in South
Sudan, and around 2.4 million are refugees in neighbouring countries — 2 million of
them having fled or left South Sudan since the eruption of conflict in December 2013.
During 2017, around 700,000 people fled the country, down only slightly from the
760,000 who fled in 2016. Women and children make up approximately 85 per cent
of the more than 1 million South Sudanese refugees in Uganda alone.
27. Food insecurity is widespread. Post-harvest gains in the fourth quarter of 2017
had been expected to reduce the number of people facing severe food insecurity.
However, it is anticipated that an earlier than normal start of the “lean” harvest season
will push the number of people classified as severely food insecure up from
4.8 million in late 2017 to 5.1 million between January and March 2018. Acute
malnutrition is prevalent, particularly among children and women. An estimated
1.1 million children are acutely malnourished, including around 280,000 children
suffering from severe acute malnutrition. Renk, Upper Nile, Twic, Warrap and the
Greater Baggari area in Wau are currently facing extremel y critical levels of acute
malnutrition, while 31 counties in Lakes, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, Unity, parts of
Jonglei, Western Bahr el-Ghazal and Eastern Equatoria are showing critical levels.
28. Armed clashes, insecurity and access incidents continue to constrain the
delivery of humanitarian aid. In 2017, 1,159 humanitarian access incidents were
reported by humanitarian aid organizations in South Sudan, the highest number of
incidents reported in a calendar year and a significant increase from the 908 in cidents
reported in 2016 and the 909 in 2015. During 2017, 54 security incidents caused the
temporary relocation of 612 humanitarian staff. Despite intensive negotiations,
humanitarian actors also continue to face instances of access being denied at
checkpoints. Contractors transporting humanitarian aid goods have reported incidents
of extortion along the 1,028-kilometre Juba-Bentiu route, along which more than
66 checkpoints have been counted. This situation has continued despite a presidential
decree in November ordering the free, unimpeded and unhindered movement of aid
organizations in the country.
29. Despite these challenges, humanitarian aid operations in South Sudan reached
some 5.4 million people in 2017 against a target of 6.2 million people assess ed to be
in need of assistance. In 2017, 5.4 million people received food and livelihood
assistance, 2.5 million people received emergency health kits, 2.1 million people were
able to access improved water sources and 1.9 million people received humanitari an
protection services. Around 900,000 people, including 160,000 children, were treated
for malnutrition.
30. The $1.6 billion Humanitarian Response Plan for 2017 was 71 per cent funded
as at the end of 2017. The Humanitarian Response Plan for 2018 require s $1.7 billion
in funding to provide assistance and protection to some 6 million people.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
31. UNMISS continued to use a three-tiered approach to its mandated task of
protection of civilians. Under the first tier, protection through dialogue and political
engagement, the Mission engaged political and other stakeholders at the highest level
through the good offices of my Special Representative. In those engagements, he
stressed the responsibility of the Government and parties to protect civilians, observe

18-02688

7/17

S/2018/163

the ceasefire and ensure unhindered access for UNMISS and humanitarian actors, in
line with the peace agreement, the December 2017 cessation of hostilities agreement
and the President’s own commitment. In January, my Special Representative also met
with the Minister of the Interior and leadership of the National Security Service to
underscore the need for greater coordination on security around the Juba protection
of civilians sites in response to recent incidents of criminality. Elsewhere, UNMISS
conducted 32 subnational workshops and activities with a total of 4,051 participants
(1,116 women) on subjects related to social cohesion, reconciliation and conflict
management. Following a workshop facilitated by UNMISS in Bor in September
2017 to bridge hostilities between Dinka Bor youth in Bor town and Nuer youth in
the Bor protection site, a follow-up “sports for peace” programme was facilitated in
December. In Wau town, UNMISS facilitated a discussion between government
officials and displaced persons on creating an environment conducive to the safe and
voluntary return of displaced populations. UNMISS and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) jointly facilitated a pre -migration conference for
Sudanese Misseriya pastoralists and Dinka Malual hosts in Aweil East to mitigate
migration-related violence. UNMISS also supported a dialogue forum with
communities east of Bentiu to manage intercommunal conflict related to the return of
displaced persons. The Mission likewise organized three dialogue forums for
communities in conflict in Apuk, Aguok, Kuac and Abiem in Gogrial to mitigate
tensions. UNMISS, in collaboration with local non-governmental organizations, also
organized dialogues in Yambio and Torit to promote trust between communities and
the organized forces.
32. Under the second tier, protection of civilians under threat of physical violence,
as at 13 February 2018 the Mission was protecting 204,247 internally displaced
persons in five UNMISS protection of civilians sites. This included 114,245 in Bentiu,
38,113 in Juba, 24,417 in Malakal, 2,296 in Bor and 25,176 in Wau. A temporary
protection area in Leer, southern Unity, provided refuge to 1,316 displaced persons.
It is worth noting a slight decline in the number of internally displaced persons in
protection sites owing to the closure of the Melut site and decongestion of the Wau
protection sites. To reinforce the civilian character of the sites, UNMISS maintained
weekly meetings with community leaders to remind them of their own responsibility
in curtailing criminality within the sites. In Juba, following the attack on humanitarian
staff of 25 October 2017, the Mission led meetings with community leaders and
humanitarian services providers to address grievances and reiterate the Mission ’s
zero-tolerance policy on violence against humanitarian partners. Regular town hall
meetings with community representatives were organized in the Wau, Malakal and
Bentiu sites to discuss the Mission’s responses to criminality.
33. UNMISS conducted 164 search operations in protection of civilians sites, which
resulted in the confiscation of prohibited items such as weapons, ammunition, illicit
drugs and stolen United Nations property. As at 12 February 2018, a total of
25 persons suspected of being responsible for serious security incidents within the
protection sites were detained in the UNMISS holding facilities in Bentiu, Juba and
Malakal. A total of 342 crime and security incidents were recorded within the
protection sites during the reporting period, with the highest incidence reported in
Bentiu (160 incidents), followed by Juba (79 incidents) and Malakal (68 incidents).
The most common security incidents recorded were assault (39), followed by theft
(25). The most serious security incident in the protection sites occurred on 1 January
in the Bentiu protection site, when four UNMISS peacekeepers sustained injur ies and
three UNMISS vehicles were damaged. On 25 January, UNMISS responded to a
security situation related to an operation conducted by national security agencies to
apprehend alleged kidnappers in the vicinity of a protection of civilians site in Juba.
UNMISS closed off the site and increased patrolling within the weapons -free zone
around the site while conducting a search operation to ensure the site was free of
8/17

18-02688

S/2018/163

suspicious persons or illicit activities. Tensions with the authorities over perceived
criminality originating from within the protection of civilians sites in Juba have flared
over several incidents in January, leading UNMISS to strengthen its patrolling and to
work towards improving coordination and information-sharing with national
authorities on the ground.
34. UNMISS continued to focus on deterring and mitigating violence against
civilians beyond its protection sites. During the rep orting period, a total of 6,124
patrols (short and long duration, dynamic air, riverine and foot) were conducted,
including regular patrols outside the protection of civilians sites in Juba, Bentiu, Bor,
Malakal and Wau. Efforts included proactive deployment and patrolling to areas
affected by or threatened by conflict, including dismounted integrated patrols to
assess the situation and facilitate engagement with host communities and displaced
persons. UNMISS increased its patrolling efforts on the west bank of the Nile River
and in the areas of Kaka, Maiwut, Nasir and Pagak. In Upper Nile, UNMISS
continued regular patrols to Aburoc, Kodok and Tonga. The Mission also conducted
patrols to SPLM/A in Opposition-held areas of Akobo, Cueibet, north-eastern Jonglei,
Kajo Kaji, Raja, the Wau triangle area and Yei. It held discussions about
re-establishing an UNMISS presence in Akobo to deter and mitigate conflict and to
create an environment conducive to humanitarian assistance and the eventual return
of internally displaced persons. On 25 January, UNMISS inaugurated a new base in
Yei, Central Equatoria, with the aim of building confidence to encourage voluntary
returns.
35. Under the third tier, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
engaged with authorities and civil society to create a more conducive environment
for displaced populations to return. In Melut, the Mission and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in collaboration with humanitarian
partners, supported the return of 255 displaced persons and the reintegration in Melut
of around 300 people. The Melut protection of civilians site was closed on
20 December. In Bor, the Mission and humanitarian aid partners facilitated the return
of 251 displaced persons to Fangak. In Wau, UNMISS and humanitarian actors
progressed in the implementation of the action plan to create a protective and enabling
environment for displaced populations to return. Concurrently, the Mission started to
implement 20 quick-impact projects aimed at supporting host communities around
the UNMISS protection of civilians sites, promoting peaceful coexistence,
strengthening national police operations around the sites and creating conditions
favourable to return and reintegration. In Bentiu, UNMISS also promoted the
expansion of the weapons-free zone concept, with humanitarian actors and the
Government agreeing to coordinate on clearing the zone around the perimeter and to
create a ring road to facilitate UNMISS patrolling.
36. The Mission continued engaging with women at the subnational level on the
prevention of sexual- and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, and enhancing women’s participation in peace processes. As at the end of
December, 21 dialogue processes and forums had been organized with women leaders
in civil society and community-based organizations on the above-mentioned themes.
Building on a joint study conducted with UNDP on capacities within the national
justice system, the Mission has been collecting information and data on the
prosecution of conflict-related crimes against women and children. This is part of
efforts to establish a special unit focused on conflict-related crimes, in particular
sexual and gender-based violence.

18-02688

9/17

S/2018/163

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
37. The human rights environment in South Sudan remained poor. Human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, including killings, conflict related sexual violence and civilian displacement, continued throughout the country.
During the reporting period, UNMISS verified the killing of at least 148 civilians,
including 9 women, and at least 41 injury cases, including 11 women. There are strong
indications that actual numbers are much higher, but insecurity and denials of access
continue to hamper investigations of alleged human rights violations and abuses.
During the reporting period, UNMISS human rights officers encountered delays and
denials of access by SPLA, SPLA in Opposition forces and a county commissioner.
UNMISS documented 19 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence affecting a total
of 24 female victims, including 11 children. Incidents comprised 10 cases of rape,
8 cases of gang rape and 1 attempted rape. Ten incidents were attributed to SPLA, six
to the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition, two to unidentified gunmen and one to the
National Security Service.
38. Amid growing insecurity, on 11 December the President issued Republican
Order No. 35/2017 declaring a three-month state of emergency in Western Lakes, Gok
and Eastern Lakes and authorizing the use of force in disarming armed youth.
UNMISS notes that the procedural requirements for the state of emergency appear
not to have been met under South Sudanese law. The implementation of the state of
emergency in Gogrial, Tonj, Wau and Aweil East, which had been extended through
Republican Order No. 28/2017 on 9 November, continued during the reporting period.
Concerns arose over reports of increased powers of arrest and detention of civilians
given to SPLA, in particular in Gogrial and Aweil East, despite such authority not
being authorized by law. During a public speech delivered on 26 January in Cueibet,
Lakes, the Governor of Gok announced that under the state of emergency, crimes
committed by civilians before and after the declaration of the state of emergency, such
as murder, theft and looting, would be tried by the military tribunal. Furthermore, he
warned that the army had received orders to disarm by force and to “shoot” in the
event of refusal to comply. However, under the 2011 Transitional Constitution of
South Sudan, the rights to life and to fair trial should not be suspended during a state
of emergency.
39. Conditions of detention and prison facilities remain extremely poor, in
contravention of international standards, with cases of prolonged, arbitrary and proxy
detention. For example, on 20 November, during monitoring activities at Aweil
Central Prison, UNMISS recorded 86 cases of prolonged and arbitrary detention.
Overcrowding remains a key concern inside the facility, which, as at the end of
January 2018, accommodated over 400 prisoners and detainees against a reported
capacity of 150. On 22 December, in Torit Prison, UNMISS identified 65 pretrial
detainees, including 8 male minors and 2 adult women, 9 of whose remand warrants
had expired.
40. Accountability for crimes and violations committed in connection with the
conflict and other human rights violations and abuses remains of concern. On
14 December, the President issued a decree promoting to positions within the SPLA
leadership three officials who are on the sanctions list developed pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2206 (2015). On 9 February, the Special Tribunal constituted by
the SPLA General Court Martial announced the postponement of verdicts in the trial
of 11 SPLA soldiers charged with various crimes and human rights violations at the
Terrain Hotel compound in July 2016.
41. On 12 February, the High Court in Juba sentenced James Gatdet Dak, the former
Press Secretary to the Leader of SPLM in Opposition, Riek Machar, to death by

10/17

18-02688

S/2018/163

hanging for violation of section 64 (Treason) of the South Sudan Penal Code Act
(2008), 20 years’ imprisonment for violation of section 75 (Publishing or
Communicating False Statements Prejudicial to Southern Sudan), and one year in
prison for violation of section 76 (Undermining Authority of or Insulting President).
Mr. Dak has the right to appeal against the verdict within 15 days.
42. The environment for media and journalists in South Sudan remains very
difficult, with journalists still vulnerable to unwarranted harassment, threats, arbitrary
arrest and detention by security forces. On 24 November, UNMISS voiced its
concerns to the National Security Service about censorship, incidents of which have
continued to occur, such as of the Juba Monitor newspaper on 7 December and the
Dawn newspaper on 15 December. On 7 February, the South Sudan Human Rights
Commission published an annual report covering the period from July 2016 to June
2017. In the report, it was noted that conflict-related violations, such as killings,
sexual violence and mass displacement of the civilian population, remain prevalent.
Among other recommendations, the Commission called upon the Government t o
establish transitional justice institutions envisaged in chapter V of the 2015 peace
agreement. Also in February, the UNMISS Human Rights Division and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights published a report on the
right to freedom of opinion and expression in South Sudan since the July 2016 crisis.
43. During the reporting period, UNMISS conducted seven training sessions on
human rights and international humanitarian law standards targeting 372
representatives, including 95 women, of government security organs. Public
awareness campaigns on human rights included 25 sessions on basic human rights
principles for 1,602 participants, including 1,061 women. From 25 November to
10 December, Human Rights Day, the United Nations supported outreach activities
to mark the annual campaign of global activism to end gender-based violence.
UNMISS also trained 40 National Security Service members and 30 members of State
Legislative Assemblies in Juba on the prevention and response to conflic t-related
sexual violence.
44. During the reporting period, the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting on children in armed conflict documented 92 incidents, 42
of which were verified as grave violations, affecting at least 2,154 ch ildren
(1,254 boys, 888 girls and 12 sex unknown). Almost half of the verified incidents
were attributed to SPLA.
45. UNMISS and the United Nations Children’s Fund continued supporting the
national Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission in the age
assessment screening of children associated with armed forces and groups in Western
Equatoria. The assessment identified a total of 700 children, including 218 girls, as
being associated with two armed groups. An initial group of 311 of the chil dren was
formally released on 7 February. UNMISS facilitated 50 training and sensitization
sessions on child protection for 3,457 participants (1,242 women), drawn from
UNMISS personnel, members of armed forces and groups, public authorities and
community members.

C.

Creating the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
46. UNMISS has continued to provide force protection for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance where it is sought. Examples during the reporting period
include protection for humanitarian assistance missions in Amadi, Ezo, Mundri and
Tambura in Western Equatoria, Guit and Rubkona in Unity, and Aburoc and Tonga in
Upper Nile. Engineering teams have also continued to rehabilitate and improve

18-02688

11/17

S/2018/163

sections of roads and bridges both for the benefit of the local economy and the
delivery of humanitarian aid. Examples include repairs to the 205 kilometres of road
from Malakal to Melut, begun in November; the repair of the Akoka bridge in Upper
Nile in early January; and the rehabilitation of the Bor-Pibor road, completed in
February. In December, the Mission announced plans to double the amount of road
repair and rehabilitation work carried out annually by UNMISS, with a target of
2,350 kilometres in 2018.
47. During the reporting period, the Mine Action Service of the United Nations
conducted survey and clearance activities in Aburoc, Mathiang and Urieng in Upper
Nile, as requested by humanitarian aid organizations. Additionally, the Mine Action
Service surveyed and cleared airstrips in Jangok, Malakal, Pibor and Rubkona to
support Mission and humanitarian operations. During the reporting period, 49 mine
action teams were deployed across the country, a total of 3,356,480 m 2 was surveyed
and released and a further 11,126 explosive hazards and 178,409 small arms and
ammunition were removed and destroyed.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
48. My Special Representative continued to utilize his good offices to support the
full implementation of the peace agreement and stress the importance of all parties
participating in good faith in the IGAD-led high-level revitalization forum, attending
both rounds of the talks held in Addis Ababa. He met with key opposition figures
outside the country to encourage their participation in the revitalization efforts. He
also met regularly with the President and national leaders in Juba, as well as state and
local actors, to encourage their adherence to the cessation of hostilities agreement. In
addition, he hosted regular meetings of the diplomatic community in Juba to align the
positions of international partners in support of the overall peace process.
49. UNMISS continued to support the operations of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism by providing logistical support and
force protection, facilitating the movement of the Mechanism’s 12 monitoring and
verification teams and participating in integrated patrols during field visits. Following
the signing in December 2017 of the cessation of hostilities agreement and in the light
of the Mechanism’s increased responsibilities, UNMISS has met regularly with the
Mechanism to streamline coordination and support, which has included planning to
increase pre-emptive joint patrols and improve deployment responsiveness following
ceasefire violations. From 23 to 25 January, UNMISS participated in a technical-level
workshop in Addis Ababa with the Mechanism and relevant stakeholders, including
armed groups and SPLA, to assist in the mapping of various armed group positions
around the country.
50. In support of the peace agreement’s aim of establishing Joint Integrated Police
Units, UNMISS has been implementing recommendations to address registration,
training and other issues that arose with the first batch of Joint Integrated Police.
UNMISS police personnel have been providing post-training advice to five police
divisions in Juba city and have assisted in developing the personnel records system
at the Joint Integrated Police headquarters. Registration of Joint Integrated Police
officers in the National Police Service database is ongoing.
51. Progress in establishing a Hybrid Court for South Sudan and other transitional
justice mechanisms, as specified by the peace agreement, remains limited. In
mid-December 2017, the Council of Ministers endorsed the draft statute and
memorandum of understanding for the Hybrid Court. The statute sets out the role,
structure, composition and jurisdiction of the planned court. From 12 to 14 December,
a committee tasked by the Government with establishing a commission on truth,

12/17

18-02688

S/2018/163

reconciliation and healing organized a three-day discussion in Juba about the planned
legislative basis for the commission. On 25 and 26 January, UNMISS and UNDP
convened a meeting on transitional justice with the participation of community
leaders from the protection of civilians sites in Juba and the Ministry of Justice to
solicit views about transitional justice processes and the mechanisms set out in the
2015 peace agreement. Participants agreed that transitional justice should remain a
priority area for discussion and recommended that the revita lization forum in Addis
Ababa extend the deadlines for establishing transitional justice mechanisms and
expedite the establishment of the Hybrid Court.
52. The Mission’s public radio station, Radio Miraya, has taken an active role in
raising public awareness of the December 2017 cessation of hostilities agreement. It
continues to increase its programming and explore ways to expand its coverage to
more remote parts of South Sudan. UNMISS is also developing printed information
materials about the cessation of hostilities agreement, including in local languages,
for distribution to the public. On 31 January and 1 February, the Mission supported a
workshop on enhancing women’s participation in peace processes in South Sudan.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment
53. As at 12 February 2018, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at
2,664, including 876 international staff members (228 women, 26 per cent),
1,395 national staff members (197 women, 14 per cent) and 393 United Nations
Volunteers (122 women, 31 per cent). During the reporting period, an UNMISS Focal
Point for Women was appointed.
54. The police strength as at 12 February stood at 1,643 (out of an authorized
2,101 officers), comprising 553 individual police officers (110 women, 20 per cent),
1,019 personnel in formed police units (153 women, 15 per cent) and 71 corrections
officers (20 women, 28 per cent). The arrival of a Gha naian formed police unit of
170 officers in Wau and the deployment of an all-female Rwandan formed police unit
in Juba are now expected in March 2018.
55. As at 12 February, the UNMISS troop strength stood at 12,987 military
personnel, comprising 187 military liaison officers (15 women, 8 per cent),
384 military staff officers (42 women, 11 per cent) and 12,416 military contingent
personnel (378 women, 3 per cent).
56. Out of the authorized 4,000 regional protection force troops, 1,030 have been
inducted to date, including 27 out of the 41-person headquarters element, full
complements of the Bangladesh Engineering Unit and the Nepalese High Readiness
Company, and the advance company of the Ethiopian infantry battalion. In February,
the main body of the Rwandan infantry battalion began arriving in the country and
was expected to be fully deployed by early March.
57. UNMISS continued to strengthen its conduct and discipline programme,
emphasizing the new approach of the Secretary-General as outlined in his report of
February 2017 (A/71/818 and A/71/818/Corr.1 and A/71/818/Add.1). In keeping with
the responsibilities outlined in that report, UNMISS conducted induction briefings
for all newly recruited personnel and instituted a programme of mandatory refresher
training focusing on the new approach of the Secretary-General. UNMISS has also
developed a comprehensive sexual exploitation and abuse risk assessment plan that
entails the regular conduct of risk assessments and follow-up and accountability for
implementing the recommendations of those assessments.
58. All military contingents have carried out assessments of the risk of sexual
exploitation and abuse in their respective locations. In partnership with the United
18-02688

13/17

S/2018/163

Nations task force on preventing sexual exploitation and abuse, comm unity-based
complaint mechanisms have been established in Aweil, Bentiu, Bor, Gorom, Juba,
Malakal and Yambio. The aim is to provide the local community with safe,
confidential and reliable channels for reporting any allegations of violations by
United Nations personnel. In December 2017, the United Nations Victims’ Rights
Advocate visited South Sudan to reinforce the efforts of UNMISS and the United
Nations country team to support victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. During the
reporting period, UNMISS recorded 12 allegations, bringing the current total number
of open allegations to 139.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
59. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 30 incidents involving
violations of the status-of-forces agreement. Of particular concern was an incident
that occurred in Leer on 30 November 2017 in which SPLA and pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition forces engaged in heavy fighting in close proximi ty to the UNMISS
temporary operating base. UNMISS protested the incident to the Governor of
Southern Liech, who undertook not to deploy soldiers or allow weapons to be
discharged in the vicinity of the base.
60. In total, 12 incidents involving movement restrictions that affected UNMISS
operations were recorded. Of particular concern has been the restriction of UNMISS
foot patrols in Torit since 13 December 2017. To date, the Government has not yet
provided cogent reasons for the restriction. During the reporting period, five cases
were recorded of denial of access to UNMISS human rights officers monitoring and
reporting on the human rights situation. Two new cases of arrest and detention of
UNMISS personnel were also reported. In one of the cases, the arre sted staff member
was released after being detained for four days, while in the other case the arrested
staff member was released after being detained for around six hours. The whereabouts
of two staff members arrested in 2014 remains unknown, and UNMISS h as been
denied access to them despite multiple requests directed to the highest levels of the
Government.
61. Violations of the obligation to facilitate the entry of UNMISS personnel into
South Sudan continue to occur. On 26 November 2017, five UNMISS per sonnel
holding valid entry visas were denied re-entry into the country at Juba International
Airport by officers of the Directorate of Nationality, Passports and Immigration
because they did not have exit stamps from their points of departure in their Unit ed
Nations laissez-passers. Aside from those incidents, there were two recorded cases of
UNMISS personnel being harassed or assaulted and two recorded cases of UNMISS
property being seized.
62. Six incidents involving the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition were recorded.
Four incidents in Upper Nile and one in Western Bahr el-Ghazal constituted violations
of freedom of movement, while one case recorded in Unity involved a threat to
UNMISS personnel and premises.
63. UNMISS continues to notify the Government about violations through a
monthly record of incidents and in-person meetings with relevant officials.
64. To prevent and mitigate threats to United Nations personnel, premises and
assets, the Mission continues to implement security risk management measures ,
including enhancing the physical protection of United Nations premises, the use of
alert and staff tracking systems and closer cooperation, information -sharing and
liaison with Government security agencies. UNMISS continues to use its multimedia
14/17

18-02688

S/2018/163

communications and outreach channels to promote public understanding of the
Mission’s mandate and the role of peacekeepers in building peace and protecting
civilians in South Sudan.

VIII. Financial aspects
65. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/308, appropriated the amount of
$1,071,000,000 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2017
to 30 June 2018. As at 14 February 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the
UNMISS Special Account amounted to $285.4 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to
$2,512.5 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for
the period up to 31 October 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingentowned equipment has been made for the period up to 30 September 2017, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IX. Observations and recommendations
66. The revitalization forum convened by IGAD presents an important opportunity
for the Government and parties in opposition to resume dialogue aimed at bringing
about sustainable peace. The cessation of hostilities agreement signed on
21 December was a significant achievement and gave a positive sign that the parties
could be willing to finally silence the guns and work towards peace. However, the
ensuing verified violations and the exchanges of accusations between the parties have
called into question the determination of the parties to honour the ag reements they
sign. Once again, I must remind the parties that, as emphasized in the African Union
Peace and Security Council communiqué of 8 February, the region and the
international community are watching closely, and that there will be consequences
for individual violators and spoilers of the agreement. These revitalization efforts
represent a chance for the parties to show the world — and the people of South
Sudan — that they can put aside differences for the sake of the nation and its people.
It requires that dialogue and agreements be matched by commensurate changes in the
actions of all parties and an improvement in the situation on the ground.
67. At the same time, noting the risks that may arise from disparate and
uncoordinated peace initiatives, I urge the neighbours of South Sudan, the region and
the wider international community to ensure that all efforts are well coordinated
towards reinforcing the peace process and demonstrate a unity of purpose from
regional and international stakeholders, which is critical for ending the crisis in South
Sudan.
68. Inside South Sudan, it is encouraging to observe the generally open and
relatively frank discussions during the national dialogue consultations, as well as the
expressions of positive intent from those leading the national dialogue. It is clear that
shortcomings in the coverage and inclusiveness of the dialogue exist. But I encourage
the leaders of the national dialogue to be bold, and the Government of South Sudan
to be open to views and recommendations from the dialogue. I also urge the
Government to take measures to address the worsening human rights situation in the
country, which at present is still grave.
69. In tandem with the requirements for peace, there are humanitarian requirements
for saving lives and helping the millions of South Sudanese who face poverty, food
insecurity and scarcity of basic services. I commend the efforts being made in this
regard by humanitarian aid organizations and workers. The level of threats and risks
that they face in their work, however, is unacceptable, as is attested by the number of
18-02688

15/17

S/2018/163

humanitarian workers killed in South Sudan: 28 in 2017, which is a new high. I
therefore urge all parties to abstain from actions that may disrupt the delivery of life saving humanitarian assistance and to abstain from imposing other constraints on the
delivery of assistance. Similarly, I call upon the Government to abide by its
commitments to remove obstructions to UNMISS and to facilitate its operations,
including the deployment of the regional protection force.
70. The Security Council is due to consider the extension of the UNMISS mandate
in March 2018 following the completion of the review of the Mission. I trust that the
Council will consider closely the recommendations of the review and will further
update it, taking into consideration the outcome of the high-level revitalization forum.
71. In conclusion, I wish to convey my sincere appreciation for the steadfast
commitment of UNMISS military, police and civilian personnel. Und er the leadership
of my Special Representative, David Shearer, they work courageously to protect
hundreds of thousands of civilians, safeguard human rights, facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and promote an inclusive political process. I pa rticularly
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided much-needed
uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I further commend the United Nations
country team and non-governmental organization partners for their tremendous
courage and sacrifice in providing vital humanitarian assistance to the population, in
arduous and sometimes dangerous conditions. I also thank my Special Envoy,
Nicholas Haysom, for his support to the peace process at the regional level. I
commend the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the former
President of Botswana, Festus Mogae, and the African Union High Representative for
South Sudan, the former President of Mali, Alpha Oumar Konaré, for their
commitment to addressing the plight of the civilian population of South Sudan in
partnership with the United Nations.

16/17

18-02688

18-02688

S/2018/163

17/17
