TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

st

MEETING: 8 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 13.51) , , , . . , . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . , , . . . , . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . , . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . , . , . . . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . a . . . .

S/PV. 135 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Officia1 Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 8 June 1967, at 2.50 p.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

Republic, Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order to participate
without vote in the discussion.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A, Eban (1srael),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. H.
El-Farra (Jordan), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria), Mr. S.
Chammas (Lebanon), Mr. K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T.
Benhima (Morocco), Mr. G. Al-Rachach (Saudi Arabia)?
Mr. G. A. Al-Rashid (Kuwait), Mr. M. Mestiri (Tuni&) and
Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took the places reserved for them.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l351)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

2. The PRESIDENT: At 10.40 o’clock this morning 1
received a request from the Permanent Representative of
the United States [S/7950] for an urgent meeting of the
Security Council because the fighting, in spite of the call
from the Security Council, was continuing in the area and
he intended to submit a draft resolution. Accordingly, I
consulted my colleagues on the Council and they a11agreed
to the convening of an emergency meeting for 2 o’clock
this afternoon. Later, the representative of the USSR also
requested an emergency meeting. That is the background
on which 1 have convened this meeting on short notice.

3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).
4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/79 10).

3. Yesterday afternoon the Secretary-General presented a
report to the Council on the responses received up to that
point from the parties concerned with regard to the
Council’s cal1 for a cesse-fire. Since that time the following
communications have been received and are being circulated as documents of the Council as quickly as possible: a
table dated 7 June from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Jordan to the Secretary-General [S/7943]; a letter dated 7
June from the Foreign Minister of Israel to the President
[S/79#5]; a table dated 7 June from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jordan to the Secretary-General
[S/7946]; a table dated 8 June from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jordan to the Secretary-General
[S/7947], and a table dated 8 June from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait to the Secretary-General
(S/7948].

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda NUS adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “lsrael aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

4. The Security Council Will now continue its discussion
of the three items inscribed on its agenda. 1 should like to
inform members of the Council thai two draft resolutions
were handed in to the Secretariat just a few minutes ago:
the first, submitted by the USSR [S/7951/, and the
second, subrnitted by the United States [S/7952]. Before
giving the floor to the first speaker on my list, 1 would ask
the Secretary-General to inform the Council of the latest
developments in the area.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)-

1 1 The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, 1 shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
1 received this morning
the following message from the Foreign Minister of Kuwait:
1

“Gratefully received your table concerning resolutions
of Security Council (233 (1967), 234 (1967)j for
cesse-fire. I am sorry to inform you that Government of
Kuwait Will not observe nor adhere to these resolutions
which do not condemn Israel aggressors. The resolutions
also ignored the just rights of the Palestinians in their
homeland.” [5/7948.]
6. I have received the following information
Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of UNTSO.

15. It is for this reason that my delegation has asked for
this urgent meeting of the Council today and has submitted
the draft resolution which bas been distributed to the
members of the Council. The draft resolution reads as
follows:
“The Security Council,
‘I2ecaZZing its resolutions 233 (1967) and 234 (1967),

from General

‘Recalling that in the latter resolution the Council
demanded that the Governments concerned should as a
first step cesse fire and discontinue military operatiom at
2000 heurs GMT on 7 June 1967,

7. On the morning of 8 June, General Bull received a
message from the Foreign Minister of Jordan to the effect
that, despite the cesse-fire ordered by the Security Council,
Israel troops were bombing Mafraq and that Israel forces
were also concentrating on the west side of the River
Jordan south of Damiya bridge and some troops had
crossed to the eastern bank. General Bull communicated
this information to the Israel Foreign Ministry and was
informed that Iraqi troops and aircraft were in the Mafraq
area. 1 may mention, in this regard, that the resolutions of
the Security Council were transmitted to the Government
of Iraq, in addition to the Governments which 1 had
informed previously, but no response bas been received.

“Noting that Israel and Jordan bave indicated their
mutual acceptance of the Council’s demand for a ceasefire, and that Israel has expressed with respect ta all
parties its acceptance of the cesse-fire provided the other
parties accept,
‘Noting further with deep concern that other parties to
the conflict have not yet agreed to a cesse-fire,

“1. Cafls for scrupulous compliance by Israel and
Jordan with the agreement they have reached on a
cesse-fire;

8. United Nations military observers in Tiberias reported
on the morning of 8 June that very heavy continuous air
and ground fire was taking place in the general area of the
Israel-Syrian central demilitarized zone.

“2. Insists that a11 the other parties concerned .immediately comply with the Council’s repeated demands
for a cesse-fire and cessation of a11military activity as a
first urgent step toward the establishment of a stable
peace in the Middle East;

9. The Commander of the United Nations Emergency
Force (UNEF) is continuing to concentrate UNEF troops
prior to evacuation by ship off the beaches. One ship is
already in the Gaza area awaiting clearance and two other
ships are on their way to the area and are expected to arrive
within forty-eight hours. It is hoped to resume the
evacuation of UNEF within forty-eight hours.
10. The PRESIDENT:
his statement .

“3. Ca& for discussions promptly thereafter among -the
parties concerned, using such third-party or United
Nations assistance as they may wish, looking toward ,the
establishment of viable arrangements encompassing the
withdrawal and disengagement of armed personnel, the
renunciation of force regardless of its nature, the maintenance of vital international rights and the establishment
of a stable and durable peace in the Middle East;

1 thank the Secretary-General for

11. 1 also wish to inform members of the Council that the
representative of the United Arab Republic has comrnunicated to me that he wishes to make an important statement
at this meeting of the Council.

“4. Requests the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General to take immediate steps to seek:to
assure compliance with the :ease-fire and to report to the
Council thereon within twenty-four hours;

12. The first speaker on my list is the representative of the
United States, and 1 now call on hirn.

“5. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide such
assistance as may be required in facilitating the discussions called for in paragraph 3 .” f Sf7952. /

13. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): In its
two resolutions calling for and then demanding a cesse-fire,
the Security Council in the past three days has taken the
first essential step on the road back to peace in the Middle
East. But we have not achieved our objective, as is evident
from the letter read to us by the Secretary-General and by
the oral report which he has just given to the members of
the Council.

16. It is obvious from the text of this draft resolution that
the provisions in the draft resolution fall into two distinct
parts. First, operative paragraphs 1,2 and 4 are designed to
complete the essential-and 1 emphasize “essential’‘-first
step of the cesse-fire. Fighting must stop. It must stop now.
It should have stopped before, but it certainly must stop
now. We welcome the fact that a mutual cesse-fire Ihas
aheady been accepted by Israel and Jordan. We also
welcome the fact that the Government of Israel announced
officially in a letter today to the President of the Security
Council [S/7945] that it accepts the Security Council’s caIl
for an immediate cesse-fire if the other parties accept. It is
necessary that all the other parties now agree to put into

14, The increasing gravity of the situation makes it
perfectly clear that we must take further steps in order to
rnaximize the chances of building a peace in that tormented
region, a peace which Will be stable and just to all
concerned. The cessation of hostilities and the building of
such a peace, it is obvious, cannot be done quickly. But the
steps towards it must be taken without delay.
2

effect a cesse-fire immediately,
provides.

and this draft resolution SO

times and has not changed. I wish to reaffirm, in a11
sincerity, that my country’s wish for a11the nations and
peoples of the Middle East is a true peace of justice, mutual
tolerance and creative growth.

17. It further provides, in operative paragraph 4, for the
assistance both of yourself, Mr. President, and the
Secretary-General to assure prompt compliance with the
Council’s cal1 for a cesse-fire.‘In this respect, this provision
draws on the useful idea put forward yesterday in the draft
resolution submitted by the representative of Canada

24. We want to see that region get away from the dreadful
cycle of arms races and war, and we are ready to do
anything necessary in order to achieve that essential result.
We want to see the gifted peopls of a11nations in the area
devote their talents and energies to the works of peace and
construction, the eradication of disease, ignorance, prejudice and poverty and to the building of a better life for a11
the people, since we are convinced that this is what the
people of the area truly want and seek.

[X/7941].

18. Secondly, the draft resolution, in operative paragragh 3, calls for prompt discussions after a cesse-fire has
been achieved, looking toward the establishment of viable
arrangements encompassing the withdrawal and disengagement of armed personnel, the renunciation of force
regardless of its nature, the maintenance of vital international rights and-what 1 am sure every member of this
Council hopes for-the establishment of a stable and
durable peace in the Middle East.

25. TO this end, 1 renew the pledge of the United States to
join in efforts to bring a lasting peace to the Middle East
and to lend a11our energies to achieving that aim.
26. A wise philosopher once observed that there is no
conflict which cannot be resolved if it is dealt with at a
higher level than that on which it occurred. Let us now call
on the parties to this conflict to rise to such a higher level,
one which takes fully into account both all the hard
realities of this complex situation and a11 its creative
possibilities. Now, in this moment of sad conflict and
danger, is the time for the United Nations, through this
authoritative organ, the Security Council, to point the way,
and now also is the time for a11 loyal Members of the
United Nations, inside and outside this Cou&, to put their
influence at the service of peace.

19. Paragraph 5 requests our Secretary-General to assist in
whatever way may be necessary to facilitate such discussions.
20. My Government believes that this dual approach, in
which the completion of the cesse-fire is combined with a
call for longer-range discussions, is the approach most likely
to bring progress towards real peace in the Middle East. In
simple realism, in the light of all that has occurred, we must
a11 recognize that immediately beyond the first essential
step of cesse-fire there still lie the basic poIitica1 issues
which have fed the fires of conflict in this region for two
decades. Indeed, the entire debate in the Security Council
over the last several days has emphasized this essential fact.
It would not do justice to the problem to confine our
concern exclusively to the cessation of hostilities, without
also thereafter promptly addressing ourselves to the causes
of the hostilities.

27. It is in this belief that my delegation has offered the
present draft resolution, for which 1 ask the Council’s
prompt and constructive consideration.
28. When war breaks out, it touches all of us. No one is
immune. In the last few days we have heard sad reports
about the deaths of United Nations personnel-Indian
personnel, Brazilian personnel, and Irish personnel. And
today it is with sadness that 1 report that this morning we
received information that an unarmed United States ship in
the Mediterranean had been attacked and bit by a torpedo,
with a resulting loss of life, American life. The Government
of Israel bas admitted responsibility for the incident and
has expressed apologies. 1 wish to express dismay at this
incident and to call for vigorous steps to ensure that it is
not repeated, and to inform the Council that the United
States Government has already protested against the attack
directly to the Government of Israel.

21. In order to initiate a prompt approach to the causes of
the hostilities, we have included paragraph 3 in our draft
resolution.
Our purpose is to provide for movement
towards the final settlement of a11outstanding questions
between the parties which the United Nations envisaged
nearly twenty years ago. And 1 should like to emphasize
that when we say “all outstanding questions”, we mean all.
No outstanding question should be excluded. The objective
must be a decision by the warring Powers to live in peace
and to establish normal relations, as contemplated and
pledged by the United Nations Charter.
22. Clearly, such major controversies as the one which has
plagued the Middle East for these many years cannot be
solved without difficulty, and anyone conversant with the
situation would be lacking in candeur if he did not
acknowledge that. TO minimize the obstacles to a prompt
beginning to such a discussion, we have included in
paragraph 3 the suggestion that the parties rnake use of
such United Nations or third-party assistance as they may
wiah; and in paragraph 5 we have included a particular
request to the Secretary-General, in bis unique position as
an impartial international servant, to provide such assistance in this connexion as may be required.

29. This Council has a great responsibility, and that
responsibility is to see to it that all fighting stops in the
area. Thés is the purport of our draft resolution, which 1
commend to the members of this Council.
30. THE PRESIDENT: 1 have just been informed that the
representative of the United Arab Republic does not wish
to make a statement. 1 now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, who wishes to make an important
statement .
31. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
1 have just received
the following communication from Mr. El Kony, Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic to the
United Nations. It is dated 8 June 1967:

23. Speaking for the United States, let me add that our
view on all these many problems has been stated many
3

Council. That cari be seen from the response by ,the
Covernment of Israel to the Security Council’s resolutions
of 6 and 7 June-a response in which an attempt is made to
lay the blame on the victim of the aggression. But of course
that trick is nothing new. The forces of aggression h;lve
been resorting to such tricks for centuries.

“1 have the honour to inform you, upon instructions of
my Government, that it has decided to accept the
cesse-fire call, as it has been prescribed by the resolutions
of the Council on U and 7 June 1967 (233 (1967) and
234 (1967)], on the condition that the other party cesses
the fire.” (Sf7953.1
32. The PRESIDENT:
his statement.

1 thank the Secretary-General for

41. In essence, Israel has flung a challenge at the United
Nations, the Security Council and a11peace-loving States,
and this has created a new situation which is fraught with
the most serious consequences. The Arab countries, which
have become the victims of aggression, have now been
placed in a situation in which they must take defensive
measures against Israel until such time as Israel puts an end
to its military activities not in words, not in declarations,
but in deeds, and until such time as it withdraws its troops
from the territory it has seized.

33. 1 think it is indeed encouraging that, with this
communication,
three Governments-namely,
those of
Israel, Jordan, and the United Arab Republic-have accepted the cal1 for a cesse-fire made by thisCounci1, Let us
hope that this is the beginning of more auspicious develop
ments in the troubled area of the Middle East.
34. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) .(translated froc Russian): Mr. President, at earlier
meetings of the Security Council my delegation, as you Will
of course recall, warned that the continuation and expansion of Israel’s aggression against the United Arab Republic
and other Arab States was creating an even more threatening situation in the Near East. Now the Council cari see
that the situation has indeed become one of extreme
emergency.

42. Al1 this means that the Council must at this point
severely condemn Israel as the aggressor, as a State which
has flagrantly violated the resolutions of the Security
Council. Israel has thus taken upon itself the full burden of
responsibility for the crime committed, for the consequences of its adventurist, provocative and aggressive
actions. For this it must be severely punished.
43. Even at this meeting of the Council, as we have just
heard, the United States representative uttered many
fine-sounding words, but in reality he was again shielding
the aggressor, his ally, for he completely ignored, as before,
the question of responsibility for the aggression. It is
signiflcant that in Washington, too, according to American
press reports, people in positions of great responsibility lare
proclaiming that Israel’s aggression is a victory for the West.
But are they not over-hasty in beating the drums at Tel
Aviv and in the capitals of the States that have most clos~:ly
supported the aggression?

3.5. There cari no longer be a shadow of doubt that it was
Israel that planned in advance and carried ont a treacherous
attack on the United Arab Republic and other Arab
countries. It is well known that the troops of the aggressor
not only struck surprise blows in the first heurs of the
hostilities and penetrated deep into foreign territory but
also exulted over their military victory.
36. The rampant forces of aggression are presenting
ultimatums and claims, suc11as, for example, the statement
by General Dayan that Israel Will not leave Jerusalem, and
so forth,

44. At this point, therefore, it is not enough to reitemte
the appeal for the cessation of military activities or read out
documents containing assurances, conditions and demands
of every kind. What we must do now, what constitutes our
main task, is not only to condemn the aggressor but also to
cal1 for the immediate withdrawal of the troops from the
territory they have seized in the Arab countries.

37. In Tel Aviv a war fever, a war psychosis has set in. This
ominous circumstance is extremely signifïcant in many
ways.
38. If Israel had not been thinking about aggression and
had not prepared for it, events would have taken a different
course. We now know that Israel ignored the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on 6 and 7 June 1967
(233 [1967) and 234 (1967)] concerning the cessation of
military activities and not only did not halt those aggressive
activities but used the time elapsed since the adoption of
those Council resolutions to seize additional territory of the
United Arab Republic and Jordan by force.

45. The Security Council must take a decision which will
not allow Israel to enjoy the fruits of its criminal
aggression, as they are dreaming of doing at Tel Aviv, a
decision which Will fully secure the rights of the victims of
aggression.
46. My delegation confirms the position it has repeatedly
set forth in our earlier remarks to the Council and again
draws the attention of the Council’s members to the Soviet
Government’s statements concerning the situation which
has arisen in the Near East as a result of the aggression by
Israel. We cal1 upon the members of the Council to do
everything in their power to put an end to Israel’s
aggression, to hait the armed invasion of foreign territory,
to ensure respect for the principles of the United Nations
Charter and to prevent unseemly manoeuvres by the forces
of aggression and their supporters.

39. The Council is now meeting in urgent session in
response to the Soviet delegation’s request for consideration of the item entitled “Cessation of military action by
Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts
of the terrltory of the United Arab Republic and Jordan
yvhich they have seized as the result of an aggression”.
40. The extremists in Tel Aviv are obviously intoxicated
by their temporary armed incursion into the territory of
the Arab countries and are even laying down the conditions
on which they could accept the demands of the Security

47. My delegation wishes to submit the following draft
resolution for the Security CounciSs consideration:
4

The Security Council,

“%‘oiing that Israel has disregarded the Security Council
decisions calling for the cessation of military activities
[resolutions 233 (1967) of 6June 1967 and 234 (1967)
of 7 June 19671,
“Considering that Israel not only has not halted
military activities but has made use of the time elapsed
since the adoption by the Council of the aforementioned
resolutions in order to seize additionaI territory of the
United Arab Republic and Jordan,
“Woting that even now I,sraeI is continuing miiitary
activities instead of halting its agression, thus defying the
United Nations and all peace-loving States,

“1. Vigorously condemns Israel’s aggressive activities
and its violations of the aforementioned Security Council
resolutions, of the United Nations Charter and of United
Nations principles;
“2. Demands that Israel should immediately hait its
military activities against neighbouring Arab States and
should remove a11 its troops from the territory of those
States and withdraw them behind the armistice lines.”
/S/7!H.]
48. It goes without saying that in submitting this draft
resolution we have in mind not only the withdrawal of the
forces of the aggressor behind the armistice lines but also
respect for the status of the demilitarized zones as provided
for in the General Armistice Agreements, and we intend to
submit the necessary particulars in due course. The proposa1 we have submitted is an extension of the Security
Council’s resolutions which takes into account the fact that
Israel has not taken the first step called for earlier by the
Council.
49. We appeal to the members of the Security Council to
take the necessary decision, without procrastination or
delay, SOthat the Council may fulfil its duty in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations.
50. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): None of us cari
have failed to be greatly moved by the announcement by
the Secretary-General just now, an announcement which we
trust Will be of far-reaching consequence, Will rapidly bring
the tragic conflict to an end, and Will be the start of a
return to good sense and justice.
51. Some of us who bave served in this Council before Will
go back in our minds to a similar dramatic statementwhich 1 SOwell remember-when a declaration was made
here by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan accepting the
United Nations cal1 for a cesse-fire [1244th meeting]. 1 do
not think that we cari possibly over-estimate the farreaching importance of what has been reported to us. We
believe that that statement, together with the actions
already taken by others, should and must transform the
whole situation and give us not only relief and thankfulness, but also new hope.
52. 1 might also say that 1 feel, in hearing what was said,
that this is not a victory in a conflict between Arab States

and Israel. It is certainly not a victory in the cold war. This
is a success,1 am glad to say, for the United Nations. 1 do
not think that it is necessary, in the new circumstances, to
deal in any detail with the speechesto which we have this
afternoon listened-or, indeed, with the draft resolutions
that have been presented, since the situation, SOwe trust,
has now been SOradically changed. 1 would only say that,
in referring to those speechesand, indeed, to the activities
of the Council on this or other occasions, I would apply the
test of whether the speeches and the resolutions inflame
animosities or not; whether they increase tensions or not,
whether, on the other hand, they contribute to the
possibility of peace or not; whether they contribute to the
likelihood of just settlement or not.
53. On this occasion, 1 would wish to speak for a few
minutes to the theme of international responsibility. It may
be that after the tempest and the strong wind, the stiI1 small
voice of international understanding rnight be heard.
54. 1 came here this afternoon wishing to support the
purpose of the draft resolution put to us yesterday by
Canada. It seemed to me entirely right and urgently
necessary that the question of how our call for a cesse-fire
could be put into full effect should be raised immediately
and be given top priority. My delegation, for one, regretted
that the Council did not deal with and dispose of the
matter yesterday.
55. Our actions in this Council each day this week, since
we were first summoned early on Monday morning, have
been-as they should have been-connected and continuous.
They also had to be very urgent. We were utterly against
delay on Monday. We have been utterly against delay
throughout. Indeed, had there not been delay last month,
delay in endorsing the Secretary-General’s appeal, delay
which we strenuously opposed from the first, we might
even have been able to avert and prevent the war altogether
56. 1 greatly hope that we shall not through division sink
back into the attitude that most disastrously prevailed for
two weeks amongst some members of this Council, the
attitude that the dangers were overdramatized and the
urgency artificial. No one underestimates the dangers which
remain. No one should doubt the urgency of the work
ahead of us, work which Will urgently occupy us for long to
corne,
57. But before 1 go on, 1 beg your indulgence, Mr.
President, to reflect for a minute on what lias taken place in
the Council this week. 1 do SObecause, as1 say, our actions
in this critical week have been and must remain connected
and continuous. None of us Will forget the sense of urgency
which a11 of us felt when we assembled early on Monday
morning, 5 June [1347th meeting] with the newsof a new
war in our ears. Most, if not all, of us felt then the need for
an immediate cal1 for a cesse-fire. We are not likely t0
forget our sense of exasperation and frustration as the
whole day and part of the night went by without members
of the Council being willing to take together that first
essential step.
58. We were ready to make provision in a first resolution
not only for a cesse-fire, but also for disengagement and
withdrawal. We urged throughout that long day that,

whatever else we did or did not do, we must call for a
cesse-fire at once. It was not until the next day, Tuesday,
that the Council was prepared to act, and then it acted
unanimously [1348th meeting].

Nations maintained and strengthened. It must be said ‘too
that the parties to the conflict have fallen far short of
readiness to respect and employ international authority,, In
the crisis and challenge which we now face, 1 appeal bath to
the members of the Council and to the parties to the
conflict to realize and accept tnat international authority
must be established. 1 appeal to them to realize that this
cannot be done by sitting in New York and adopting
resolutions. That is necessary, but it is not nearly enough. It
is on the ground, in the deserts and the hills and the villages
and cities of the Near East, that action is required. There
must be in the areas of conflict effective United Nations
representation to tope with all the tasks ahead of us.

59. We remain of the strong opinion that the Council
should have acted twenty-four hours earlier. The Council
should have acted as we urgently advocated on the Monday
morning. Nevertheless, we took the essential first step
together, and 1 pay my respectful tribute to ail those,
including the representative of the Soviet Union, who
contributed to making that result possible. By Tuesday
evening we had been able to achieve a unanimous ca’1 for a
cesse-fire. We realized that the next urgent step must be to
provide for the implementation of the cal1 we had made.

65. What are those tasks? They are to stop the fightingand we pray that the fighting may very soon be stopped; to
ensure and secure disengagement; to bring relief and
succour to the wounded and the homeless; and then to
move on to the greater tasks of conciliation and the
establishment of order and justice. These practical tasks ‘are
enormous. They Will occupy us for a very long time to
corne.

60. Since early Monday morning we bave worked for a
cesse-fire. But what we should have been doing yesterday
was not repetition but urgent consideration of ways and
means to put the demand into effect and how we could
then go on to the next stage of disengagement.
61. Here let me say how greatly we have admired the
efforts of General Bull and ah those who have worked with
him in conditions of confusion and danger. We renew our
tribute to him, to General Rikhye and to a11those who have
served under the United Nations flag. We honour the dead
of India and Brazil and Ireland, who gave their lives in the
cause of peace. We do not forget those who sadly have lost
their lives, as reported to us by the representative of the
United States today. But the brave United Nations rearguard is not enough. We have to find new means of
establishing an effective United Nations presence. We have
to set out on the hard uphill road back to international
authority. The draft resolution before us is a step in that
direction. It may not be a long step, but it is a first step
along the road of restoring the effectiveness of the United
Nations. And 1 trust that the purposes of the draft
resolution which was put foward by Canada [Sf7941] cari
now be promptly and effectively completed.

66. 1 most earnestly and sincerely beg ail members of the
Council, especially the permanent members, to approach
these tasks with a Will to work together, to abandon old
prejudices, to realize that the world looks to us not to
perpetuate animosities, but to heal the wounds and repair
the damage, and to give to all the peoples of the Near East
the security they need and the security they long for, to
make their lives tolerable and their future not a future of
fear, but a future of hope.
67. In all these purposes we, round this table, have an
inescapable obligation. 1 trust that we shall show that we
are determined to rise to it,
68. The PRESIDENT: 1 now invite the Foreign Minister of
Israel to tak: a place at the CJuncil table and make a
statement.

62. There are those who have been quick to declare the
failure of the United Nations. Those who have sought to
denigrate international effort rejoiced. There are somewho have never been ready to strengthen the international
Organization while there was time and opportunity to do
so-who were very ready to pronounce its impotence. There
are those who are prepared to see the efforts of the past
twenty-one years to Establish international co-operation
and international authority destroved and betrayed. Others
may be SOprepared; we cannot be.

69. Mr. EBAN (Israel): Owing to th? failure of certiîin
Arab States to comply with the C^ase-fire resolutions
adopted in recent days, fighting and bloodshed have
continued in various parts of the Middle East. This fight:ing
and this bloodshed have taken a heavy toll amongst ail the
participant States.
70. There has also been trsgic and accidental loss of life to
those not involved in the conflict. Some of these have been
the officers and servants of the ,United Nations charged
with the supervision of international agreements. Today we
have heard the painful news of the tragic and accidental
error which cost the lives of four Americans and injury to
many more ii1 Middle Eastern waters. 1 have today
conveyed to the Secretary of State of the United States my
Government’s deep regret at this tragic and accidental error,
a sincere regret accompanied by deep and respectful
condolences to the families of the dead and injured who
have become innocent victims of the tragic turmoil of war.

63. We now have the opportunity to prove such people
wrong. We now have an opportunity to show that there is
nothing wrong with an organization which includes great
nations and medium-sized nations and small nations and
rich and poor nations aliie. We now have an opportunity to
prove that there is nothing wrong with the principle that
every nation has a right to be heard, but no nation has a
right to dominate. We still have an opportunity to show
that there is nothing wrong with the Charter or the
Organization, except those who refuse to use it. The events
of this week have themselves emphasized the necessity of
using it.

71. These developments emphasize the urgency of bringing to Swift and complete fulfilment the unconditional
cesse-fïre resolutions which the Security Cou&l
has
adopted. The position when this Council meeting convened

64. We know that there are members of the Council who
have been unwilling to see the authority of the United
6

was that the only established and effective cesse-fire
agreement was that concerted between Israel and Jordan,
and 1 was glad to be able to convey to the President of the
Security Council last night the news that this agreement
had been mutually accepted and had become effective. We
have now heard the decision of the Govermnent of the
United Arab Republic to accept the cesse-fire resolutions as
formulated by the Security Council. My Government
conveyed to you, Mr. President, last night our general
acceptance of the cesse-fire resolution and its applicability
to ail the fronts and a11the sectors in which hostilities have
been going on. It seems evident, therefore, that the Council
now celebrates the real and, 1 hope, the immediate prospect
of achieving between the United Arab Republic and Israel
an effective cesse-fire agreement.

‘NO&~ that Israel has disregarded the Security Council
decisions calling for the cessation of military activities . . .” fS/79.51].
The fact is that Israel was the first of the States involved in
hostilities to pay any regard to the Security Council
decisions calling for a cesse-fire. We were the first to
indicate our acceptance of the cesse-fire, and as soon as any
other of our neighbours gave similar intimation of acceptance, the cesse-fire was concerted and rendered effective.
SO far that has been the case with Jordan.
77. The draft resolution asks the Security Council to
accept the declaration that Israel has not halted military
activities. The fact is that Israel halted military activities as
soon as a cesse-fire had been achieved with any of its
neighbours, and Will halt military activities as soon as a
cesse-fire with Egypt, Syria and Iraq is achieved, completed
and implemented faithfully on the other side.

72. This is, of course, a notable step. It is a pity that it was
not taken a day or two ago when the cesse-fire resolution
was first proposed.

78. It is not true that Israel is defying the United Nations
and a11 peace-loving States. I have been astonished and
deeply moved beyond any expectation by the fantastic
volume of applause and encouragement which has flowed in
to Israel from most peace-loving States and from vast
multitudes of people in different walks of life a11over the
world.

73. In welcoming this new development, 1 feel that it
would be candid to point out that special and accentuated
responsibility now lies on those parties which have not yet
accepted the cesse-fire resolutions. 1 refer especially to the
Government of Syria, which has not indicated its attitude
on the cesse-tire resolution. On the Syrian-Israel frontier
the fighting has indeed, according to my reports, become
intensified in recent hours. Nor have we heard of any
acceptance of the cesse-fire resolution by the Government
of Iraq, whose forces have been operating in various sectors
of the front. And the Government of Kuwait has conveyed
to the Security Council its refusa1of the cesse-fire.

79. The defiance of peace-loving principles arose from the
sudden, brutal, sustained concentration of hostility with
which the United Arab Republic and its leaders disturbed a
situation which for ten years had ensured a relative stability
upon our southern frontier. 1 have already recounted and
the Council fully knows the various phasesin this campaign
which shook and shocked and agitated the world community in the latter half of May. We all saw how the design
was unfolded: constant acts of sabotage, a vast and
intimidating
concentration of forces on our southern
frontier, the war-like act of blockade, the attempt to
strangle Israel’s commercial and maritime relations, the
issuing of Presidential announcements concerning the purpose of that campaign, namely, the total destruction of
Israel, and the issuance of appropriate operation orders to
commanders in the field.

74. Therefore, still much has to be done before the
integral structure of the cesse-fire system is established. My
Government sincerely hopes that the consent now formally
conveyed by the Governments of Israel, Jordan and the
United Arab Republic-in that order-will be swiftly followed by the other Governments concerned. Of course, the
establishment and the stabilization of the cesse-fire is the
indispensable prelude to any further progress towards the
pacification of our tormented region. Not only the Governments directly concerned, but all members of the
international
community have a responsibility in this
regard. The hand of historic responsibility lies heavy upon
this Council, which holds primary responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

80. That, then, is the background which the Soviet draft
should have addressed itself to. It is this criticism of the
Soviet draft that 1 make, namely, that it rests upon
premises that are not accurate and upon responsibilities
that are not fairly distributed. For that reason, we consider
it inconceivable that the Security Council could adopt, or
that anybody could implement, a draft such as that
presented by the Soviet Union.

75, Whether utterances made at this ta.ble are true or
distorted, whether they are balanced or unbalanced, is a
question which has its psychological and political effects
upon the events in our region. It is for that reason that we
react with deep regret and indignation to the address of the
representative of the Soviet Union, which contained many
abusive words but very few facts. 1 am sorry to say that the
same lack of balance, a totally inequitable distribution of
innocence and responsibility, marks the draft resolution
which has been submitted by the representative of the
Soviet Union. We have one overriding objection to that
draft resolution: the overriding objection to the draft is
that it is not true.

8 1. Perhaps 1 could best illustrate the real background of
the events of early June if 1 were to add certain evidence
that has corne into our hands as a result of the movement
of forces up and down the Sinai peninsula. 1 hold in my
hand, for example, Operation Order No. 67/2 of the United
Arab Republic Eastern Region Air Command of 27 May
1967, amending the previous order of 21 May 1967. It
begins:
“1, Mission of SecondAir Brigade:
“(a) 18 Squadron, comprising 12 aircraft concentrated
at 258 Air Base Will bomb Ekron (Al&) airfield and

76. The first preambular paragraph is not true. It states:
7

thereafter for holding discussions between Israel and thia
Arab States, looking to mutually acceptable arrangements
on the disposition of armed forces and a simultaneous
liquidation of a11belligerency and the establishment of a
permanent peace.

radar, on condition that it is above the target at H hour.
Armament: Rackets and cannon.
“(b) 25 Squadron with 12 aircraft located at 210 Air
Base, as first objective, Will bomb three IHawk missile
bases at”-various map references, remarkably accurate“Time above target: H hour. Armament: Rackets and
cannon.”

88. The emphasis seems to be on the need to move not
backwards to belligerency, but forward to peace; and it is in
that context of peace negotiations that the draft proposes
agreed measures of disengagement.

The operation order then details the missions of the
Twelfth Air Brigade, of the First Air Brigade, of the
Sixty-fourth Air Brigade, of the Sixty-fifth Air Brigade,
concluding with the exhortation that “a11 squadrons Will
study enemy targets in accordance with Intelligence Branch
reports and observations in tactical range from low level”
and that “the determination of bombing objectives Will be
made before takeoff”.

89. We have not, however, been able to study this text i.n
detail and, therefore, my Government Will reserve the
opportunity to make further comment when the text has
been submitted to the detailed examination which all sueh
texts require. 1 therefore would like not to comment more
substantively on this draft which has SOrecently corne to
my attention. I would, however, in the spirit of the words
uttered by the representative of the United Ringdom, jusit
say a few words about the horizon that opens out from
here.

82. And there are other elements in this background: the
Order of the Day of General Mortagi announcing that “the
hour of the final solution of the Palestine problem is near”;
the speeches by President Nasser describing the reasons for
this strangling encirclement of Israel from the south and the
north and the east; the purpose of the so-called defence
pacts which were to bring this campaign towards its
consummation; and the decisive act of blockade which, in
all previous legal and historical experience, has been
associated not with peace, but with hostility.

90. The first stage, as 1 have said, should be the completion and the effective fulfilment of the Egyptian-Israel
cesse-fire, which now becomes possible as a result of the
message that we have received. 1 have drawn attention to
the necessity to achieve similar agreements with Syria and
Iraq-in fact with a11those Governments whose troops are
officially engaged in hostilities. The phase thereafter must
be a purposeful, resolute, patient, but urgent quest for a
peace settlement.

83. Never in history have an illegal blockade and peace
coexisted. How could it be expected that they would long
coexist here?

91. 1s it not obvious, after the tragic events of recent
weeks, that positions which are intermediate between peace
and war are fragile and seldom tenable? Perhaps the very
shock that ail of our nations have received, the sacrifices
which ‘some of them have undergone, the brink upon which
we have stood-perhaps a11 of these Will have a salutary
effect in bringing the world community, and especially the
States of our area, to the realizaton that there is no
alternative to peaceful relations; that is to say, to the
acceptance of certain minimal criteria of mutual respect for
the sovereignty of States, for their peace, and for their
security. In other words, with the structure that had stood
the test of ten years SOstrangely but violently shattered,
the need is now to build a new structure of inter-State
relations in the Middle East.

84. This, then, is my Governrnent’s comment on a draft
which must surely have surprised all Members of the United
Nations by its one-sidedness and by its total refusa1 to
identify itself with the dilemma, the dangers, which Israel
faced during those tlrree nightmare weeks when SO many
throughout the world began to doubt our nation’s prospect
of security and survival. This volume of world opinion was
not artificial. This concern, this agony of anxiety were not
fomented. 1 have received, amongst SO many thousands of
letters from people in every country, a great number which
include this phrase that 1 quote from a very humble Citizen
in a fore@ land: “Don? get pushed around.” This is the
advice that Israel has been receiving SOoften in recent days.
And our Government made the decision no longer to be
“pushed around”.

92. 1 believe, as 1 have said before, that the States of the
area must build this structure mainly by themselves. Th&re
is much that others cari do to assist them in the
construction of this new edifice of relations, The emphasis
in Israel’s thinking is not SO much on the authority of
international bodies but on the sovereign responsibility of
the Governments concerned, by direct and bilateral contact, to work out the conditions and the elements for their
coexistence. This, for us, is the starting point. Mechanisms
and procedures and channels of assistance are also, of
course, an important theme.

85. That, then, was the origin and the background and the
basis of the tragic hostilities which have raged for most of
this week, and which we ardently hope Will now be brought
to an end.
86. The fact is that we turned out to be less co-operative
than some might have hoped with the plan for our
extinction.
87. It seems to me that the urgency of the cesse-fire
resolutions is SO great that we should await their implementation before detailed consideration cari be given to
other proposals. My Government Will, of course, examine
the document which has just corne to the table from the
United States of America [S/79.52]. It seems at first sight
to be a proposa1 for completing the cesse-fire, and

93. That, then, is our reaction to today’s events: satisfaction with those announcements that have been made of
acceptance of cesse-tire; deep concern at the fact that there
are some sectors in which cesse-frre agreements have net
been accepted in principle, still less carried out .in practice;
8

“1 have the honour to inform you, upon instructions of
my Government, that it has decided to accept the
cesse-fire cal], as it has been prescribed by the resolutions
of the Council on 6 and 7 June 1967 [233(1967) and
234 (1967)] on the condition that the other party cesses
the fire .‘r2 [S/7953./

and a belief that once the cesse-fire is stabilized the major
responsibility falls upon the Governments in the area to
corne face to face no longer in violence and conflict but
rather in the understanding of the compulsion of a future
to be shared in peace.
94. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): We have
taken due note of the letter from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic, Mr. El Kony, read
to us by the Secretary-General, indicating that the United
Arab Republic Government is prepared to accept the
cesse-fire called for by the Council on the condition that
the other party cessesEre. This acceptance of the Council’s
resolutions calling for a cesse-fire parallels the acceptance
made by the Government of Israel with respect to a
cesse-fire. My Government is very glad that that declaration
has been made and conveyed to the Security Council. We
hope it Will lead to similar declarations by other countries
concerned which have not yet responded affirmatively, that
it Will lead to the end of the military conflict and that it
Will be the beginning of the establishment of a stable and
durable peace in the Middle East,

99. In our intervention yesterday [135Otlz meeting] we
indicated that the United Arab Republic and its Government could not halt the resistance to aggression until the
aggression stopped. This letter is thus a confirmation of the
position we took, and which we assumed the United Arab
Republic had already taken.
100. Faced with this situation, the Security Cou&l, in its
resolutions 233 (1967) and 234 (1967) adopted on 6 and 7
June, requested the Government concemed to cesse fire
immediately and to put a stop in the area to a11military
activity connected with the Israel aggression, which is still
going on. This was an imperative call, made without
reservations and without conditions. Contrary to the
explicit and clear-tut stipulations of these resolutions, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, in his statement
yesterday to the Council and then in lis letter to the
President of the Council [S/794.5/, sought to establish
preliminary conditions for acceptance of the Security
Council’s summons. In his statement yesterday, he said:
“We . . . support . . . the resolution calling for immediate
measures to institute a cesse-fire.” [135Oth meeting,

95. Accordingly, in the light of the information received
since the circulation of our draft resolution, we have made
the following revisions in that text and have asked the
Secretariat to distribute these revisions. We have revised the
beginning of the third preambular paragraph to read:
“Aroting that Israel, Jordan and the United Arab Republit . . .“, We have revised operative paragraph 1 to read:

para. 44.1

L’C~Zls for scrupulous compliance by Israel, Jordan, and
the United Arab Republic with their agreements to a
cesse-fire”.

101. Despite repeated statements of this kind, the aggression by Israel and the invasion by its troops of the countries
that have been attacked, are still going on, We have received
no word to the effect that Israel’s aggression has ceased.
What value cari such statements have in view of the patent
fact of this continuing aggression? None, of course.

The Secretariat Will distribute these revisions,’ but 1 wished
now to cal1 them to the attention of the Council.
96.

Mr,

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated .@om
The Security Council has again been called upon
to consider the problems arising from Israel’s aggression
against the Arab States. Al1 the statements by Israel’s
representatives, including that by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of that country a few moments ago, have SO far
been made with the obvious intention of denying responsibility for the aggression; but they actually prove that the
speakers must recognize their responsibility for initiating
the attack and the aggression perpetrated by their troops.

102. Twice during the last ten years or SO, Israel has
engaged in aggression and has demonstrated the same
attitude towards a11Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. The aggressor, the one who has invaded the
territory of MS victims, is calmly laying down conditions in
the Security Council for acceptance of its cal1 for a
cesse-fire. Such an attitude, such arrogance on the part of
the aggressor cari only arouse our indignation and remind us
of the many resolutions adopted by the Security Council or
the General Assembly while Israel, the aggressor, was
engaged in military activities in violation of the provisions
of the Charter, the GeneraI Armistice Agreements and
international law. Tllose resolutions condemned Israel.
When the Government of Israel was called upon to fulfil its
obligations with regard to the cesse-fire and the irnmediate
withdrawal of its troops, the United Nations resolutions
proved ineffectual.

Trench):

97. The quotations read out by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Israel, and taken fr6m certain documents seized
by Israel, do not prove that the other party committed the
aggression or started the attack. These are demonstrations
in the void, for we have a11learned-not from press agencies
but from the admissions of officia1 Israel representatives
themselves-that
it was Israel that started the attack, the
troop movements and the aggression.

103. 1 need only recall resolution 1123 (XI),in whichthe
General Assembly:

98. A short time ago the Secretary-General read a letter
addressed to him by the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic, Mr. El Kony. In this letter, of which
1 have only the English text, he said:

“Notes with regret and concern the failure of Israel to
comply with the terms of the above-mentioned resolufions”.

1 The full text of the revised draft resolution was later circulated
as document S/7952/Rev.l.

2 Quoted in English by the speaker.

9

.,- ’

108. The Council also has before it a draft resolution
submitted by the delegation of the United States of
America. It is a rather strange text. What is strange is not
that it was submitted by the United States, but that it was
submitted to the Security Council, inasmuch as the United
States position has been known for some time. What do we
find in this draft resolution? It says, first of all, that the
Security Council:

The resolutions in auestion were General Assemblv resolutions 997 (ES-I), 998 (ES-I), 999 (ES-I), 1002 (ES-I) and
1120 (XI). TO those may also be added many Security
Council resolutions. And that is far from being an exhaustive list of the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.
104. The present situation reminds us of Israel’s attitude
towards the appeals made by the Security Council over ten
years ago.

“Calls for scrupulous compliance by Israel, Jordan an.d
the United Arab Republic with their agreements to a
cesse-ûre”[Sf 7952/Rev. 11.

105. In our statement yesterday we said: “You cannot ask
a people not to resist aggression against its own territory.”
[135Oth meeting, para. 66.1 1 do not believe there is a
single person at this table or in this room who could tel1 a
nation suffering aggression not to defend its dignity, its life,
its existence, against the foreign invader. It is the aggressor
who must effectively cesse fire and halt his military
activities. But instead, we find that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and the Government of Israel are setting conditions.
It is the agression that must stop. The resistance to that
aggression, we believe, cannot stop until the aggressorends
his attacks. This cal1 upon the aggressor is urgent and
indispensable. In condemning the premeditated aggression
which Israel has committed, the Security Council must
require the Government of that country immediately to
withdraw its troops from the territories it has invaded in
the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan. That is the
imperative, the primary, condition for the re-establishment
of peace in the Near East. Thc United Nations cannot
remain indifferent in the face of this aggression, which is a
flagrant violation of the territorial integrity of the Arab
Member States of the Organization and an imminent threat
to international peace and security.

109. If we are to ask Jordan and the United Ara.b
Republic scrupulously to fulfil their promises, the aggression of which they are the victims must corne to an end.
But the Secretary-General has just informed us that,
according to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, the
Israel aggression is still going on, despite MS country’s
acceptance of the cesse-fire. In these circumstances, cari we
expect Jordan to stop resisting Israel? Such a course of
action would bring discredit upon the Government of
Jordan, a11 authority in that country, and the Jordanian
people itself.
110. What cari the United Arab Republic do, when, two
days after the Council has adopted a resolution calling for
an immediate ceasefire, a11the news we receive reports that
the Israel advance is continuing? The Israelis are even
saying: “We are advancing and are not encountering
resistance.” What cari that mean? It clearly indicates th:at
naked aggression is still going on, despite the Security
Council’s resolutions.
111. The United States resolution, by the very fact that it
places Jordan and the United Arab Republic on the sanie
footing with the aggressor, is unacceptable, we believe, to
all the Members of the United Nations, and especially to all
the members of the Security Council.

106. The delegation of the Soviet Union has just submitted a draft resolution which, in the context of what 1 have
said, affirms that the Security Council :
“Considering that Israel not only bas not halted
military activities but has made use of the time elapsed
since the adoption by the Council of the aforementioned
resolutions in order to seize additional territory of the
United Arab Republic and Jordan,

112. Operative paragraph 3 of this draft resolution “Calls
for discussions promptly thereafter among the parties
concerned, using such third-party or United Nations
assistance as they may wish, looking toward”, in the finst
place, “the establishment of viable arrangements encompassing the withdrawal and disengagement of armed
personnel”. That means the aggressor’s armies cari remain
there as long as they wish, for it would take months, if not
years, to negotiate such arrangements. What cari such a
provision mean in view of statements in the press reporting
that the Israel authorities say they will not withdraw their
troops until they have been able to ensure that the whole of
the city of Jerusalem Will remain in Israel’s hands, until
they bave been able to secure their right of passagethrough
the Strait of Tiran and through the Suez Canal, and even
until the state of war with the United Arab Republic and
their other neighbours has ended?

“Noting that even now Israel is continuing military
activities instead of halting its aggression . . .”
-nor have we yet in fact been told that Israel has halted the
aggression“1. Vigorously condemns Israel’s aggressive activities
and its violations of the aforementioned Security Council
resolutions, . . .
“2. Demands that Israel should imrnediately
rnilitary activities . . ,“. [S/7951.]

hait its

107. We not only support this draft resolution, but, as we
have already said several times over, we believe it is an
absolutely indispensable measure if the war in the Near East
is to be brou@ to an end. A nation defending its territorial
integrity and its freedom cannot be asked to halt its
resistance while the aggressor is in its territory and is
continuing the aggression.

113. This provision of the United States draft resolution is
unacceptable, therefore, for it would mean agreeing to all
the conditions which Israel has begun laymg down for the
United Arab Republic and other neighbouring countries. It
would, in fact, enable Israel’s troops to remain in place
until they were satisfied that all Israel’s demands regarding
territorial or other concessions from the Arab States ha.d
10

been met. That would be unacceptable to the Members of
the United Nations, particularly to those who have undertaken to respect territorial integrity and ail established
rights. The aim is;in fact, to give Israel already the rights it
demands and to satisfy already its territorial claims.
114. Further on, the same operative paragraph of the
United States draft resolution speaks of ensuring “the
maintenance of vital international rights and the establishment of a stable and durable peace in the Middle East”.
That is tantamount to saying that in order to bring about a
stable and durable peace in the area, Israel must again be
given everything it wants. What is the purpose of this draft
resolution? TO place on record United Nations acceptance
of these conditions. Its aim is to enable Israel to satisfy all
its claims and bring the Arab States to their knees, thus
placing them in an impossible situation. And it is our
Organization which is being asked to do that.
115. My delegation, for its part, cannot accept this and
cannot vote for such a document. We doubt whether the
Security Council cari adopt a draft resolution like that.
Moreover, with such a text before us, we cari well wonder
what has become of ail the statements we have heard here
regarding respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the rights of a11countries in the Near East. We are indeed
baffled by these statements of the United States Government. If the United States representative really wants his
statements not to ring false, he must immediately withdraw
bis draft resolution and vote for a text requiring Israel to
cesse fire, withdraw its troops and comply with the
resolutions the Security Council has adopted.
116. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): We have asked for
the floor in order to make a few observations on the
statement addressed to the Council by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Israel.
117. In the statement, or rather, if 1 may say SO, in the
lecture, he gave us a short time ago, the Minister tried in
every way to defend Israel and whitewash its criminal
aggression; and he complained, of course, that the Soviet
Union’s position was, from his standpoint, too critical and
not sufficiently objective. He even tried to tel1 the Council
that it should not accept the draft resolution submitted by
us today. We are thus compelled to remind the speaker that
such preaching and advice are the last thing the members of
the Council seated at this table are in need of.
118. If the Minister has a great store of wisdom at his
command, he might put it at the service of the leaders at
Tel Aviv, who need wisdom more than anything else. The
Minister should not forget that, as the representative of
Israel, who has been summoned to the Council to give an
account of the aggression committed by his country, he
should try to describe the true state of affairs instead of
resorting to falsehood and shifting the responsibility to
others.
119. The irony of it is that the speaker tried not only ta
refute facts that are known to all, but also to blame the
United Nations, to shift to this Organization the responsibility for those lawless acts which were commltted, in
violation of the United Nations Charter, by the extremist

circles in Israel and which have created a dangerous hotbed
of war in the Near East,
120. We are not here to be lectured to by the representative of Tel Aviv. The members of the Council would like to
know when the Government of Israel is going to cesse its
aggressive actions against the Arab countries-actions which
we most vigorously condemn, not only because they have
created a hotbed of war in the Near East but also because
they are a threat to peace throughout the world. Yet about
this the speaker made no comment in his statement today,
ta say nothing of his earlier speeches here.
121. It is not surprising that the representative of Tel Aviv
should be displeased by the fact that in our draft of a
Council resolution things are called by their proper names.
There is not the slightest doubt that it was Israel which
launched the aggression against the Arab countries, invading
the territory of the United Arab Republic and Jordan with
its armed hordes, as many of those who addressed the
Council have convincingly shown, including, among others,
the representatives of the United Arab Republic, Syria and
Iraq.
122. Among other pieces of evidence, one which is
particularly striking is a National Broadcasting Company
dispatch from London to the effect that Israel wasthe first
to engage in military operations in the war in the Near East.
That was stated, according to the United States news
agency in question, by none other than the Israel Ambas.
sador in London, Aharon Remez. If the Israel Minister for
Foreign Affairs wants to deny or disavow anything, this is
another opportunity for him to do with the right hand
what is being done by the left. And here no tricks or
subterfuges wiI1 save the Israel aggressors from responsibility for the crimes committed-from
responsibility for
flouting a11standards governing international relations, the
principles of the sovereignty of States, and the Charter of
the United Nations.
123. We categorically reject as totally unfounded and
meaningless the arguments put before the Security Council
by the representative of Tel Aviv. They constitute a baseless
attempt to escape from responsibility and justify the war of
agression unleashed by the ruling circles in Israel.
124. My delegation, confnming the position we have
stated, expresses the hope that the members of the Council
Will demonstrate a deep senseof responsibility and support
the draft resolution which we have submitted today with
reference to this item.
125. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Tarabanov, our friend and
colleague, has addressed himself to the question of what he
terms the conditions of the cesse-fire exacted by one party
to the conflict and not present with respect to the other.
126. 1 should like to make very clear what the position of
my Government is in this regard. We welcome, as I
said-and 1 have amended my draft resolution to indicate
this-the acceptance of a cesse-fixeby a11of the parties to
the conflict. It is quite apparent from the officia1 documents before the Council that the terms in which these
acceptances have been cast are identical.

127. If we’ look at the declaration by the Foreign Minister
of Israel, which is before us in document S/7945, we find
that “the Israel Government accepts the Security Council’s
call for an immediate cesse-fire, provided that the other
parties accept”. Today we have the equally welcome
statement from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the Secretary-General,
which reads:

area to be achieved? That, therefore, seems to be an
elementary proposition. The basic elements of peace in the
area must be dealt with. In the presentation that 1 made to
the Council on behalf of my Government 1 said that ail of
the elements that lead to peace in the area should be dealt
with. 1 must repeat that now. 1 think that the representative
of Bulgaria did not fully comprehend the import of what 1
had said.

“I bave the honour to inform you, upon instructions of
my Government, that it has decided to accept the
cesse-fire call, as it has been prescribed by the resolutions
of the Council on G and 7 Jcne 1967 [233 (1967) and
234 (1967)J, on the condition that the other party cesses
the fire.” [S/7953.]

133, The PRESIDENT: 1 now invite the representative of
Jordan to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

128. It is quite apparent from the language used, and quite
understandable when we are dealing with a cesse-fire, that
to be effective a cesse-fire must be mutual. That indeed is
the context of the communications
addressed to the
members of the Security Council.

134. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): The Israel invaders continue to defy the United Nations authority. They continue
to violate the two cesse-fire decisions taken by this Council.
They continue to attack Jordan.
135. It may be very appropriate at this stage to say that
we are greatly astonished that until this minute the Council
has not attempted to establish the fact, although the fact is
very clear, that Israel committed an act of aggression. My
distinguished colleague, the representative of the Soviet
Union, referred to the admission, or let me say the
confession, uttered this morning by the Israel Ambassador
in London, Aharon Remez. The evidence is very clear, but
the Council is attempting to discuss issues which are
secondary when we consider the gravity of the crime
committed.

129. My friend, Ambassador Tarabanov, also does not, 1
fear, fully comprehend the context of operative paragraph
3 of the United States draft resolution [S’/79.52/Rev.l].
That paragraph was based upon the discussions here in the
Security Council and upon the declarations made both by
the spokesmen for the Arab countries and by the spokesmen for Israel.
130. 1 do not want to take the time of the Council at this
stage of our proceedings to go back into the Verbatim
records and read out a11that was said. But if there is any
theme that is common to all the presentations that were
made, it is the theme that the underlying causes of the
present crisis must be dealt with and solutions must be
sought. The first person who pointed that out to us in our
present debate was the Secretary-General, when he pointed
out in bis report the necessity for the Council “to deal with
the underlying causes of the present crisis and to seek
solutions” [S/7906, para. 141. That theme was repeated by
ail who spoke on all sides of this grave conflict. Therefore,
our paragraph was addressed to something known by
everybody in the world. Again, we would be burying our
heads in the sand if we did not realize that throughout the
more than twenty years that this problem has been with us,
the Security Council and the United Nations have attempted to apply adhesive patches to this grave conflict,
and that what is imperatively required is to deal with the
basic elements of peace in the area as soon as a cesse-fire is
achieved.

136. Mr. President, you called for restraint and the answer
was invasion. You made many appeals and the answer was
killing, murdering, bombing and destroying. The Israelis
found the time appropriate and convenient for further
expansion SOthat they could pass through another stage in
fulfilment of their dream, a Zionist State extending from
the Euphrates in Iraq to the Nile in Egypt. TO them this is
the right time to kil.& to murder, to destroy and to bomb
innocent civilians and use world Zionist machinery to caver
up for their crimes.
137. TO that attitude of Israel and that of its patrons and
protectors we have one simple answer: our struggle is a
struggle for liberty, a struggle for liberation. It is not
different from any struggle in Asia or Africa. Indeed, the
catastrophe that has befallen the Arabs of Palestine is not
different from that which is now being experienced by the
majority of Africans in Rhodesia. We know that the way to
liberty is not an easy one. It has its ups and downs. It may
face many set-backs. With the forces of Zionism and
imperialism working against our aspirations, we do not
expect the task of our movement to liberation to be an easy
one. But one thing is certain. Eventually liberty Will
triumph and the spirit of the Charter Will prevail because it
is the spirit of right and the spirit of the day. It is stronger
than the spirit of aggression.

131. When we propose that particular paragraph of the
draft resolution, we start with the basic concept, which
every Member of the United Nations supports, of the
obligation of the parties to address themselves to the
problems involved. That is in recognition of their sovereignty as sovereign nations and as Members of the United
Nations. The paragraph addresses itself to them and asks
them to meet together to resolve those problems, with the
assistance of the United Nations if they SOdesire, or any
third party that they may choose.

138. Let me say in all frankness that the tragedy is now
unfolding itself. Some members around this table feel that
ody
through force and humiliation cari the Arabs make
peace, that only at gunpoint would the Arabs compromise
and that only through intimidation would the Arabs enter
into negotiations. Let me, in ail sincerity, tell those patrons
and protectors of Israel that they are grossly mistaken, that
they are wrong, They do not understand the Arab mind. We

132. What better way is there to achieve peace in the
area? What greater necessity is there than for peace in the
12

do not comprotise with aggression. Jordan may not have
the means now to repel the aggressor, but this does not
make us compromise one iota of our rights.

resistance to aggression are to cesse. That is what we meant.
That was the important point we wished to stress. We
cannot accept the United States resolution because it puts
two totally different things on the same footing. That was
the first point we wanted to stress, and 1 do not wish to
dwell on it any longer because I believe it is simple and cari
be understood by everyone at this table, even though they
are not all legal experts.

139. The generous United States help given to Israel
through a11linds of tax-deductible donations, the arms, the
American Patton tanks given for defensive purposes but
used for invasion, the heavy machinery and the stronger,
aerial caver enabled Israel to acquire more of our land and
displace more of our people. But it Will not enable Israel to
conquer our strong spirit, our faith and our determination.

140. Paragraph 3 of the United States draft resolution
seems to indicate a desire to solve the problem in an
entirely detached manner. But the fact that there has been
an aggression puts an entirely different complexion on
things, and it is in the light of that aggression that an effort
is being made to settle matters. In his statement, Mr.
Goldberg even tried to bring the Secretary-General’s report
into it. True, the Secretary-General proposed that the
important problems should be dealt with. But when? When
the necessary calm has been restored, and provided an
aggression has not been committed; but not, if an aggression has been committed, in the light of and under caver of
that aggression.

140. We are losing land, we are losing more towns, we are
losîng villages and shrines, losing more territory and having
more victims, more refugees to be added to the 1 million
refugees who were displaced by Israel in 1947 and in the
years that followed. Israel, together with its accomplices,
may commit many more crimes and many more conspirscies may be planned and may be now in the making. Israel
may be encouraged to attempt to move to the Euphrates
and to the Nile to fulfil the dream of Zionism. It may even
have the ambition to move to take Amman, Baghdad, Caire
and Damascus.

147. Those are some elementary propositions to which 1
wished to draw the Security Council’s attention, propositions which we do not think the members of the Council,
the States involved, or the international community cari
accept. They must not be accepted, for, if they were, that
would in fact create a situation in which any aggression,
anywhere in the world, would, if supported by some other
great State, be at a premium. That is what we in the
Security Council do not mean to accept.

141. But there is one thing that it cannot and Will not take
away from us, and that is our determination to live and
enjoy liberty and to work for it. That is the Will of the
people, the Will of the victims, but it is a strong Will, a Will
to repel the invader at any cost and protect our homeland
at any price.
142. The PRESIDENT:
1 cal1 on the representative of
Bulgaria in exercise of his right of reply.

148. The PRESIDENT: 1 now invite the representative of
Israel to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

143. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
A few minutes ago, the representative of the
United States, Mr. Goldberg, to whom 1 am most grateful
for counting me among his friends, sought to demonstrate
that there was a misunderstanding on my part and on the
part of other delegations with regard to the proposals he
has just submitted.

French):

149. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): 1 wish to make a very brief
statement. The representative of the Soviet Union referred
to a statement attributed to the Ambassador of Israel in
London, and the representative of Jordan repeated that
statement. 1 cari say categorically that no such statement
was made by Ambassador Remez. The Israel Embassy in
London has denied these allegations and legal proceedings
have been instituted against those who have published this
false statement. There is documentary proof in Israel’s
hands that Egypt had prepared the assault on Israel in al.l its
military details.

144. Although we cannot match the United States representative-not, of course, because he is the representative of
a great country, and we must certainly acknowledge that in
ail fairness, but because he is an eminent jurist-we should
nevertheless like to point out that we are trying to
understand, as hard as we cari, the “elementary propositions” set forth in the American draft resolution. If 1 am
not mistaken, the United States representative stated that
these were “elementary propositions”, truly simple ones,
“basic concepts”, to repdat the words he used in his
statement a moment ago. That is why we should like to
understand them, and believe that everyone should understand them, in a simple way.

150. With regard to other allegations which were brought
forward and insults against the honour of my country, 1
shall deal with these matters if the President of the Council
Will give me an opportunity to do SOwhen the Council
convenes again.
151. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated j?om Russian): We have just heard
the statement which Mr. Rafael, the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations, hastened to make
in connexion with the information referred to by US and by
Mr. El-Farra, the representative of Jordan. All this reminds
one of a bad joke which the teller tries to excuse by saying
that that wasjust what it was meant to be.

145, chat did the United States representative say? If 1
am not mistaken-and these may not be his exact words-he
said that he had received identical acceptances from the
various parties: from the United Arab Republic, Jordan and
Israel. But-and this was the crux of my statement, and 1
believe he understood it-cari we place the aggressorand the
victim of aggression on the same footing? Can we ask the
same things of the aggressor and the victim? That is the
basic point. Aggression must cesse if self-defence and

152. The Israel Ambassador in London, according to none
other than United States sources, made an unequivocal
3

statement that it was indeed Israel which started the
aggression against the Arab countries. And now, as though
following a scenario, Israel’s representative to the United
Nations cornes on stage and categorically refutes what was
said-presumably
not without instructions
from Tel
Aviv-by Israel’s Ambassador in London.,Whom, then, are
we to believe? What is truth? This often happens when
people try to caver up, to obliterate the traces of their
crime. This is what has actually happened in the case of
Israel’s aggression.
153, First the aggression was started, Israel’s armed forces
invaded the territory of the neighbouring Arab States, and
then this was immediately followed by statements denying
that such a crime had been committed.
154. We do not know what the reason was-that, of
course, is for the representatives of Israel to say-but the
denial was made, not by the Israel Minister for Foreign
Affairs, who delivered his classroom lecture here, but by
the Israel representative. We did not, of course, wish to
cause any embarrassment to the exalted personage of
Israel’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, we simpIy reminded
him that here in the Security Council he was not addressing
a class and that the people sitting here in front of him were
not schoolchildren looking at their teacher’s book of rules.
Those seated here are the representatives of sovereign
States, invested with high authority not only by their own
Governments but also under the Charter of the United

Litho

in U.N.

Pri~e:

$U.S.

0.50

Nations, and bearing a special responsibility for the fate of
the world and the maintenance of international security.
We merely wished to recall this fact for the benefit of the
Israel representatives, who have apparently also yielded to
the war fever and psychosis.
155. But the crime has been comrnitted and it Will not go
unpunished. There cari be no doubt about Israel’s aggression, and although the Israel interventionists and occupiers
have temporarily succeeded in invading foreign territory
and grinding it beneath the heels of their Arnerican
hobaailed boots, no one Will save them from their
responsibility; and the blood, the righteous blood of the
Arab peoples which is now being shed on their soil Will not
be washed away by any torrents of words either from Tel
Aviv or here in the Security Council.
156. We want to make it fully clear just where the Israel
representatives are and what is expected of them, SOthat
they do not forget themselves.
157. The PRESIDENT: There are no more speakers on the
list, and if no one else wishes to speak now, 1 would suggest
that the Council adjourn until 3 p.m. tomorrow SO that
consultations on the three draft resolutions before us may
take place on the understanding that all members of the
Council Will hold themselves available in casedevelopments
should necessitate the convening of an urgent meeting.

(or equivalent

l%e meeting rose at 5.20 p.m

in other

currencies)

08778-December

1970-2,l

p0
*
