A /72/PV.71

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

71st plenary meeting

Monday, 11 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Barros Melet
(Chile), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/72/601)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution entitled
“Credentials of representatives to the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly”, recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report.
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee, Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason, Permanent
Representative of Ireland, to introduce the report of the
Credentials Committee.
Mrs. Byrne Nason (Ireland): On behalf of the
Credentials Committee, I have the honour to introduce
the report of the Committee concerning the credentials
of the representatives of Member States to the seventysecond session of the General Assembly, contained in
document A/72/601.
Having considered the credentials of the
representatives at its meeting on 4 December, the
Credentials Committee adopted without a vote a draft
resolution accepting the credentials. The Committee
also recommended to the plenary of the General
Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution concerning

credentials of representatives to the current session of
the General Assembly, contained in paragraph 12 of the
report of the Committee.
The General Assembly is therefore requested
to adopt the draft resolution approving the report of
the Credentials Committee. I would like to note that
after the meeting of the Credentials Committee, the
Secretary-General received formal credentials in the
form required by rule 27 of the rules of procedure
from Turkey.
Finally, I would like to express my own gratitude to
the members of the Committee and the Secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Credentials of representatives to
the seventy-second session of the General Assembly”,
recommended by the Credentials Committee in
paragraph 12 of its report. The Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/135).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to delegations that wish to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-43600 (E)

*1743600*

A/72/PV.71

Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My delegation
joined the consensus on resolution 72/135, just adopted.
However, I would like to express my delegation’s
reservations about the parts of the report contained in
document A/72/601 and in the resolution that could be
construed as recognizing the Israeli regime.
Mr. Habib (Indonesia): The Republic of Indonesia,
as a State Member of the United Nations, has contributed
to multilateral activities in complete harmony with the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and pursuant to the relevant resolutions
and guidelines of its principal bodies. We hold dear all
the norms and standards of international law and all
their ramifications, while greatly revering the sanctity
of the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
on which the Organization rests.
To that end, the Republic of Indonesia would like
to draw the attention of the full membership of the
United Nation and the entire United Nation system to
the unfriendly action of Vanuatu during the high-level
segment of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly, when it included in its delegation non-citizens
of Vanuatu who have supported or been active in
the separatist movement in West Papua, Indonesia.
Those people have malicious intentions. They have
spread vicious rumours and hatred and should not be
granted credentials in the Assembly. Vanuatu’s action,
as reflected in its credentials, has violated common
decency and shown ill intentions towards a friendly
Member of the United Nations by supporting separatist
movements and their intentions, which runs contrary to
the principle of friendly relations among States.
Indonesia categorically objects to that act and
roundly rejects whatever message it was intended to
convey. We underline that among other things it violates
the norms of multilateral conduct, as well as the rights
of a fellow Member State. We are confident and believe
that it is evident that the Charter of the United Nation
and the relevant resolutions of its principal bodies
advocate firmly and affirmatively friendly relations
and cooperation among States and the inviolability of
their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Against that backdrop, it is the position of Indonesia
that the accreditation of separatists by Vanuatu, while
knowing full well the mindset of those individuals, is
a hostile act directed against Indonesia and aimed at
dividing or destabilizing Indonesia’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We believe that Member States
2/9

11/12/2017

should not play into the hands of separatists or provide
opportunities and grant privileges that could be misused
by those interest groups with separatist intentions.
To that end, my delegation asks the Assembly and
Vanuatu whether such an action is in line with the spirit
and the letter of the Charter of the United Nations,
which is based on respect and good neighbourly
peaceful coexistence. We request an explanation from
the Permanent Mission of Vanuatu to the United Nations
concerning its accredited list of delegates.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 3 and of agenda item 3 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of Peace
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.29 and A/72/L.30)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of the Philippines to
introduce draft resolution A/72/L.29.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): It is my honour and
privilege to join the Permanent Representative of
Pakistan in introducing the draft resolution entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, contained in
document A/72/L.29.
This draft resolution is sponsored by a number of
friends and partners from across the regions of Asia and
the Pacific, Africa, the Americas and Europe. We thank
all Member States for their active participation and
constructive input during the five informal consultations
and intensive bilateral negotiations conducted over the
past two weeks. Both the Philippines and Pakistan have
endeavoured to accommodate the views, concerns,
contributions, suggestions and inputs provided by
many delegations in consultations conducted in an
open, inclusive and transparent manner.
Since 2004, Pakistan and the Philippines have
co-sponsored such resolutions under the agenda item
“Culture of peace”. This year, the draft resolution’s
objectives are twofold: first, to promote interreligious
and intercultural dialogue to achieve peace and
17-43600

11/12/2017

stability and as the most promising course for realizing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
and, secondly, to strengthen mechanisms and take
appropriate action to promote sincere and constructive
dialogue across cultural and religious divides. The first
reduces the material causes of conflict arising from the
frustration of basic human needs. The second reduces
the intellectual obstacles to mutual understanding,
thereby fostering mutual respect and tolerance despite
continuing disagreement.
Today the world faces seemingly intractable
conflicts and complex challenges that not only cause
immense human suffering and economic loss but
also hinder greater socioeconomic cooperation and
the pursuit of inclusive societies. We also continue to
witness a growing trend of xenophobia and religious
intolerance, underpinned by identity politics, as well
as the emergence of extremist ideologies in different
parts of the world. Suspicion and ignorance among
various religions and civilizations are being exploited
by extremist and terrorist groups to propagate their
agenda, of which carnage is no small part.
We States Members of the United Nations share
the aspiration and responsibility to achieve a world at
peace through mutual respect, tolerance, acceptance,
reconciliation and respect for the rule of law, whereby
conflict is avoided and injustice corrected, by means
conducive to peace rather than war. We therefore
need to continue to build on our shared values and
shared aspirations by strengthening mechanisms
and actions through constructive dialogue, better
understanding, moderation and a global culture of
peace. In this context, we underline the important role
and invaluable contributions of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in promoting interreligious
and intercultural dialogue at the national, regional and
international levels.
The Philippines walks and works with the
community of nations, committed to securing just and
enduring peace, shared prosperity and partnerships
conducive to those aims. There should be no doubt
in our solidarity at the United Nations to embrace a
culture of peace, a culture of partnerships and a culture
of inclusive societies.
On behalf of the Permanent Missions of Pakistan
and the Philippines, I now humbly request all Member
States to adopt by consensus draft resolution A/71/L.29,

A/72/PV.71

entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”.
At this point, I wish to make two oral revisions to
the text of the draft resolution, which are the result of
last-minute negotiations with important stakeholders.
First, in the twenty-third preambular paragraph, we
wish to replace the word “acknowledging” with the
phrase “referring to”; and, secondly, also in the twentythird preambular paragraph, we wish to add the symbol
“A/72/488” as a technical revision to footnote number
4, referencing the Secretary-General’s report on
“Promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace”.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh to introduce
draft resolution A/72/L.30.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour
to introduce the draft resolution entitled “Follow-up to
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace” (A/72/L.30).
A culture of peace is an aspiration of all
humankind. Promoting and inculcating a mindset
of a culture of peace is at the core of the creative
management of differences and divisions. Over the past
18 years, Bangladesh has been facilitating this seminal
resolution, having introduced the text on this agenda
item to the Assembly since 2000. Our Prime Minister,
Sheikh Hasina, remains personally attached to the
issue and underscores the importance of a whole-ofsociety approach in our national context for promoting
a culture of peace.
We thank delegations for their active participation
in informal consultations on the draft resolution once
again this year, and for their valuable inputs and
cooperation, which have enriched the draft resolution.
This year, the draft resolution has four new elements
worth highlighting.
First, the draft resolution acknowledges the
President of the General Assembly’s high-level event
on a culture of peace, held on 7 September, and its focus
on early childhood development. In a separate operative
paragraph, Member States and relevant United Nations
entities have been urged to enhance their focus on
early childhood development, in recognition of its
importance and relevance for nurturing the mindset of
a culture of peace.

17-436003/9

A/72/PV.71

Secondly, the draft resolution recalls resolution
70/262, on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, which introduced the notion
of sustaining peace, and also recognizes that efforts
towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace should
take into account the promotion of a culture of peace. It
builds on last year’s paragraph 7, in which the General
Assembly acknowledged the potential contribution of
the peacebuilding architecture to promoting a culture
of peace.
Thirdly, in the context of recalling resolution
70/291, on the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
review, the resolution notes the establishment of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism pursuant
to resolution 71/291.
Fourthly, the resolution further recognizes the work
done by the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in
promoting a culture of peace, and refers to the event
“Youth engagement: the nexus to building inclusive
societies and sustaining peace”, held on 22 September.
The resolution encourages the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations to increase its activities focusing on
peace education and global citizenship education in
order to enhance an understanding among young people
of values, such as peace, tolerance, openness, inclusion
and mutual respect, which are essential in developing a
culture of peace.
The draft resolution reiterates the request to the
President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third
session to consider convening a high-level forum devoted
to the implementation of the Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace in the first half of September 2018.
We look forward to working together with the Office
of the President of the General Assembly to make the
event a success, and encourage all delegations to offer
suggestions for a relevant theme for the event.
We sincerely thank those delegations that have
already sponsored the draft resolution, and look forward
to registering more sponsors ahead of its adoption by
consensus, which will take place shortly. We must
collectively uphold our commitment to this seminal
resolution on a culture of peace and to our ownership
of it, to reinforce our efforts to foster peace diplomacy.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/72/L.29, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, as orally revised.
4/9

11/12/2017

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
A/72/L.29: Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Equatorial
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Morocco, Oman, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Poland, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Samoa,
Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/72/L.29, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/72/L.29, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 72/136).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/72/L.30, entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document, the
following countries have become sponsors of A/72/L.30:
Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Malaysia, the Maldives, Malta, Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
the Philippines, Poland, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
the Russian Federation, Singapore, Spain, the Sudan,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Togo, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
17-43600

11/12/2017

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/72/L.30?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
72/137).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers wishing to explain their
position on the resolutions just adopted, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia recognizes,
supports and fully shares the basic premises and
purposes of resolution 72/136, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”.
We commend the sponsors of the resolution for
their tireless efforts in bringing it to a consensual
outcome. Our objections to some of the resolution’s
paragraphs were based on the fact that a certain country,
Azerbaijan, has developed a tradition of abusing
various international forums, in particular those held in
their country, by way of disseminating hate propaganda
against Armenia and its people, and distorting the
basic principles and the content of negotiations for the
peaceful resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
In particular, we refer to the twenty-third preambular
paragraph, which concerns the World Forum on
Intercultural Dialogue as a key global platform for
promoting intercultural dialogue. The event is a glaring
example of manipulating an international gathering
into an instrument of propaganda against Armenia, as
is evident from the statements of the leadership of the
host country.
Due regard should also be given to Azerbaijan’s
dismal record of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, intentional destruction
of the cultural heritage of historical and religious
significance, as was the case, for example, with the
obliteration of thousands of Armenian cross stones in
the medieval cemetery of Julfa, Nakhichevan. Armenia
dissociates itself from this paragraph and does not
consider the language contained therein to be a basis
for future negotiations. Furthermore, we reiterate our
position with regard to the event held in Baku in April
2016, in the aftermath of large-scale aggression against
Nagorno Karabakh, in flagrant violation of trilateral
ceasefire agreements and accompanied by acts of

A/72/PV.71

barbarity and total disregard for international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. We refer
in particular to the text of a letter of 26 April 2016 from
the Permanent Representative of Armenia addressed to
the Secretary-General (A/70/846).
Mr. Brown (United States of America): The United
States of America is strongly committed to encouraging
a culture of peace through the promotion of justice,
democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms,
as well as by rejecting violence and addressing the
root causes of conflict. Furthermore, the United States
firmly supports efforts to promote interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and cooperation. However, while
we joined the consensus on the resolutions adopted
today, we would like to take this opportunity to clarify
some important points.
With regard to the reaffirmation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the United
States recognizes the Agenda as a global framework
for sustainable development that can help countries
work towards global peace and prosperity. However,
each country has its own development priorities,
and we emphasize that countries must work towards
implementation in accordance with their own national
policies and priorities.
With regard to resolution 72/136, we note that the
word “moderation” remains undefined in international
law and in our discussions. We are concerned that the
implementation of moderation-focused programmes
and policies will be subject to abuse. We are concerned
that States can construe moderation to justify undue
restrictions of expression or religion, both of which
would contradict internationally recognized rights.
Programmes and policies implemented in the name
of moderation must respect all human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
Furthermore, with regard to language asserting that
all religions are committed to peace, the United States
takes no position on that statement and does not support
the involvement of member States in interpreting what
commitments religions may or may not make.
Finally, language in the resolution welcoming the
Inter-Parliamentary Union’s Declaration on Promoting
Cultural Pluralism and Peace through interfaith and
inter-ethnic dialogue should not be understood as
acceptance of all statements made in the Declaration,
in particular for those States that are not members of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

17-436005/9

A/72/PV.71

Ms. Galarneau (Canada): I take the floor to
explain our position on resolution 72/136, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
First, with regard to paragraph 10, Canada would
like to thank Pakistan and the Philippines for their
close facilitation of the negotiations and their sustained
efforts to achieve a consensus text. We are deeply
committed to promoting pluralism, inclusion, respect
for diversity and all human rights. That is why we have
decided to support this draft resolution.
Regarding paragraph 10, Canada would like to
emphasize that we understand that interventions
aimed at preventing and countering violent extremism,
including those that fall under the term “moderation”,
are locally relevant and context-specific. We believe
that in doing so, we must guarantee respect for human
rights, diversity and inclusion, with a view to helping
individuals and communities become more resilient to
radicalization to violence. To that end, we recognize
the importance of intercultural and interreligious
dialogue with the aim of creating mutual respect and
understanding, which are essential for fostering a
culture of peace. It is a difficult balance but one we are
committed to continuing to work to preserve with all
our partners.
Our position is that a rules-based and an open,
pluralistic society, characterized by a wide diversity of
talk and belief, is a precondition for a culture of peace.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I am delivering
this statement as a general statement after the adoption
of resolution 72/137.
We welcome the adoption of this long-standing
resolution on a culture of peace and thank Bangladesh
for presenting it to the General Assembly. Bearing in
mind that this is the first time the resolution on a culture
of peace addresses the issue of sustaining peace, we
would like to make some comments.
Brazil has fully endorsed the twin resolutions of the
Security Council and General Assembly — resolutions
2282 (2016) and 70/262, respectively — on the review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, in which
the concept of sustaining peace was first mentioned
within negotiated documents of the United Nations. We
continue to support it as an important advance for the
peace and security pillar. However, the Declaration on
the Culture of Peace, adopted in 1999, does not have
6/9

11/12/2017

a focus on peace and security. It proposes a holistic
approach to fostering an environment conducive
to peace, which includes support for the right of
development, sustainable development, gender equality
and freedom of expression. While we support both the
concepts of a culture of peace and sustaining peace, we
believe that they should run on parallel tracks in order
to avoid conflating concepts and mandates, and we
caution against overemphasizing the role of sustaining
peace on this agenda item.
On a more general note, we believe that the General
Assembly could do more on the human rights and
development elements of the culture of peace.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote.
I give the floor to the representative of El Salvador
to make a statement.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): This is a general statement under agenda item
15, particularly on resolution 72/137. My delegation
welcomes the adoption of the resolution, which
highlights the important inclusion of the promotion of
a culture of peace in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We thank the Permanent Mission of
Bangladesh for its efforts in facilitating its adoption.
El Salvador acknowledges that building a culture
of peace in the framework of the 2030 Agenda requires
that institutions be strengthened, and therefore that
various public policies designed to contribute to
building a more inclusive and equitable society also
be strengthened.
For El Salvador, the recovery and promotion of
historic memory and a culture of peace are crucial
elements in fostering a society that is tolerant and
conducive to harmonious coexistence. It also offers a
wide range of possibilities and capacities to promote the
comprehensive transformation of an inclusive society,
especially for population groups that have historically
been excluded.
We believe it important that the resolution
underscores the contribution of early childhood
development to the development of more peaceful
societies. In that connection, my Government believes
it crucial to ensure that all girls and boys complete
primary and secondary education, but also that this be
achieved with relevant and effective school curriculums
17-43600

11/12/2017

A/72/PV.71

that include the promotion of coexistence and the
culture of peace.

promote initiatives aimed at reducing corruption and
bribery in all its forms.

We also underscore the important role that women
play in preventing and resolving conflicts and in
peacebuilding. In that regard, we highlight the creation
in El Salvador of instruments such as the National
Policy for Women and the Five-Year Development
Plan 2014-2019, whose strategies include working to
guarantee the rights of priority population groups.

El Salvador, as this year’s President of the
UNESCO Group of 77 and China chapter in Paris,
highlights UNESCO’s efforts to mobilize stakeholders
and synergies in support of a culture of peace. We deem
it important for all Member States to support UNESCO
in its endeavours to actively implement a culture of
peace and its links to the various Goals and targets of
the 2030 Agenda, as well as to the associated events
taking place here in New York.

We greatly appreciate the call in resolution 72/137
for the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
to continue to promote post-conflict peacebuilding
activities at the country level. El Salvador, as a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission and an active
participant in the General Assembly’s discussions on
the Secretary-General’s proposed reform of the peace
and security pillar, hopes to actively promote a culture
of peace as a cross-cutting issue in those discussions.
The resolution is a framework of reference for
the implementation of actions and decision-making
in countries, such as El Salvador, that have overcome
internal conflict to enjoy peace. El Salvador reached
an agreement on reform, particularly in the political
sphere, that was able to overcome armed conflict, but
25 years later we are aware that a political agreement
is not enough and that we must seek a national
socioeconomic agreement that includes all sectors of
the population.
Our Government acknowledges the importance of
building a culture of peace in the process of implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In that
regard and taking into account SDG 16, El Salvador
is already part of a global working alliance that saw
a 21.39 per cent national decline in the homicide rate
between 2015 and 2016, thanks to policies, plans and
institutions dedicated to security and civic coexistence,
which assigned leading roles to women, focused on
broad alliances with non-State actors and increased
statistical capabilities.
As part of the establishment of an inclusive
and participatory society, we value the creation and
establishment of strong institutions with the purpose of
disseminating and promoting the culture of access to
information and the accountability of the Governments.
El Salvador has established a secretariat for civic
participation, transparency and corruption in order to

In that regard, we underscore paragraph 15 of the
resolution that we have just adopted, and reiterate our
call to the President of the General Assembly to convene
a high-level forum devoted to the implementation of
the Programme of Action in September 2018, in the
context of its follow-up and links with the sustainable
development frameworks that have been in force
since 2015.
In conclusion, we believe that peace cannot be
reductively considered as the mere absence of war and
violence. That is why peacebuilding cannot be seen as
a unilateral responsibility; rather, it must be seen as a
shared responsibility that we must take on and build
together at the domestic and international levels.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker under this agenda item.
The representative of Azerbaijan has asked to speak
in exercise of the right of reply. I would like to remind
him that statements in exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
5 minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan attaches
primary importance to the promotion of intercultural
and interreligious dialogue at the national and
international levels. Multiculturalism and tolerance
are a long-standing tradition in my country that help to
consolidate our multiethnic and multicultural society.
We welcome the adoption by consensus of resolution
72/136, entitled “Promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace.” We thank the delegations of Pakistan and the
Philippines and the co-facilitators for their efforts and
for skilfully leading the negotiations on the resolution.

17-436007/9

A/72/PV.71

The resolution welcomes the declarations adopted
by the Global Forums of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations, among them the Baku Declaration
of the seventh Global Forum. The resolution also
refers to the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue,
organized biennially by Azerbaijan, in cooperation
with UNESCO, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, the World Tourism Organization, the
Council of Europe and the Islamic Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, as a key global
platform for promoting intercultural dialogue. We
welcome this acknowledgement of the Global Forum
by the General Assembly and by the Secretary-General
in his latest report on the promotion of a culture of
peace and intereligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace (A/72/488).
The forum is part of the broader Baku process which,
as the Secretary-General notes in his report, has been at
the forefront of advocating for dialogue among cultures
since 2008.
There is nothing surprising in the inadequate and
irrelevant attempts of Armenia to once again politicize
the process of negotiations on the resolution and its
adoption at today’s plenary meeting. The fact is that
the objectives of the resolution on the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace are alien to Armenia, or it
would not have become a uniquely monoethnic State
pursuing a policy based on exclusion, discrimination
and incompatibility on ethnic and religious grounds.
In his statement of 16 October, the SecretaryGeneral encouraged the sides to build on the positive
momentum created by the summit held earlier the
same day in Geneva between the Presidents of
Azerbaijan and Armenia to reach a peaceful negotiated
settlement of the conflict. However, by obstructing
the efforts to promote intercultural and interreligious
dialogue and challenging the various global initiatives
to that end — solely because of their relation to
Azerbaijan — immediately after the Geneva summit
and the meeting between the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs of our countries last week in Vienna, Armenia
has shown that the prospects for its engagement in good
faith in ongoing efforts towards the earliest resolution
of the conflict are faint.
The comments made by the representative of
Armenia about human rights and international
humanitarian law, as well as about so-called hate
propaganda against Armenia, are not worthy of
8/9

11/12/2017

comment. Suffice it to say that unlike Armenia, which
has implemented a policy of total ethnic cleansing in
both its own territory and in the Nagorno Karabakh
region and other occupied territories of Azerbaijan,
Azerbaijan has preserved its ethnic and cultural
diversity to the present day.
The relevant United Nations bodies and other
international organizations have more than once
expressed their serious concern about the spirit of
intolerance prevailing in Armenia. Thus, for example,
in its latest report on Armenia, adopted on 28 June
2016, the European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance particularly noted intolerant statements
against the Azerbaijanis. The list of such examples is
obviously not exhaustive and can be continued. I am
confident that the international community would
be more interested in hearing from the delegation of
Armenia about the real problems that its country and
people are facing in political, economic, social and
humanitarian spheres, rather than its comments on
human rights in other countries.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration
of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of twenty members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Pursuant
to General Assembly decision 42/450, of 17 December
1987, and upon the nomination by the Economic and
Social Council, the Assembly elects the members of the
Committee for Programme and Coordination.
In this connection, the Assembly has before it
document A/72/612, containing the nomination of the
Economic and Social Council to fill the outstanding
vacancies on the Committee for Programme and
Coordination for a term beginning on 31 December
2017, as the terms expire for Saudi Arabia, Armenia,
Belarus, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cuba, the
United States of America, Equatorial Guinea, Iraq,
Italy, Namibia, Pakistan, Portugal, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Ukraine and Uruguay.
17-43600

11/12/2017

Those States can be re-elected immediately. I
wish to remind members that after 1 January 2018,
the following States will continue to be members of
the Committee: Argentina, Bangladesh, China, Egypt,
Eritrea, the Russian Federation, France, Haiti, Peru, the
Republic of Korea, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Senegal and Zimbabwe. Consequently, those 13 States
will not be eligible for the election.
I wish to inform the members that the following
States have been nominated by the Economic and
Social Council: Botswana, Burkina Faso and Cameroon
to fill three of the four seats for African States; India,
Japan, Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran to fill
the four seats for Asia-Pacific States; Belarus, Bulgaria
and the Republic of Moldova to fill the three seats for
the Eastern European States; Brazil, Chile and Cuba
to fill three of the four seats for the Latin America and
the Caribbean States; and Germany, the United States
of America, Portugal and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to fill four of the five seats
for Western European and other States.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, all elections should be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations. However, I should
like to recall paragraph 16 of decision 34/401, whereby
the practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for
elections to subsidiary organs when the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
number of nominated States among African, AsiaPacific, Eastern Europe, Latin America and the
Caribbean, Western European and other States
corresponds to or is less than the number of seats to be
filled in each of those groups.
May I therefore take it that the Assembly wishes
to declare those States nominated by the Economic
and Social Council — Germany, Belarus, Botswana,

A/72/PV.71

Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile,
Cuba, the United States of America, India, Japan,
Pakistan, Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the Republic of Moldova
and the Islamic Republic of Iran — elected as members
of the Committee for Programme and Coordination for
a three-year term, beginning on 1 January 2018?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate those States that have just been elected
members of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination. Members are reminded that the Economic
and Social Council decided to further postpone the
nomination of one member from the African States,
one member from the Latin America and the Caribbean
States and one member from the Western European
and other States for a three-year term, beginning on
1 January 2018.
Members are also reminded that two vacancies
remain for Western European and other States for
two terms, beginning on election day and expiring
on 31 December 2017 and on 31 December 2018,
respectively. The General Assembly will adopt
measures to fill those vacancies once the Economic and
Social Council presents its nominations.
We have thus concluded the current stage of
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 114.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): It is
my understanding that the President of the General
Assembly is continuing to consult with the Presidents
of the regional groups. Therefore, the consideration
of sub-item (f), “Appointment of members of the
Committee on Conferences”, of agenda item 115 has
been postponed to a later date.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

17-436009/9
