General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

190

bodies, agencies and institutions involved in the advancement of women,
Also recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/27 of 4 May 1982, in which the Council, inter alia,
took note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on developments relating to the organizational aspects of the Institute 53 and the report of the Board of Trustees
of the Institute on its second session54 and expressed its
satisfaction with the approved programme and activities of
the Institute for 1982-83,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the progress made in
the implementation of the programme of work of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Endorses the network concept to be developed in
stages with the organizations of the United Nations system
and regional and national institutions as a mode of operation
for the implementation of the programme of the Institute;
3. Reiterates the need for the Institute to carry out research and training which lead particularly to a better understanding of the role of women in development, more
effective methods for enhancing the role of women in development and an increase in activities for the fuller participation of women in development, especially in the field
of technical co-operation;
4. Reaffirms that the research and trammg activities of
the Institute should aim at strengthening the links between
issues affecting women and mainstream development activities at all levels;
5. Calls upon the regional commissions, the specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to continue to co-operate with the Institute
and to ensure its participation in the activities relevant to
women in development;
6. Stresses the need for all Member States to consider
contributing financially to the United Nations Trust Fund
for the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women or co-operating in other ways with
the Institute in order to assure its regular and effective
financing so as to facilitate the implementation of its
programme;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the programme activities of the Institute;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women".

90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/57.

Integration of women in development55

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraphs 190 to 196 of the World Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 56 in which the relevant agencies
of the United Nations and intergovernmental, interregional
and regional bodies were called upon to scrutinize all ex isting plans and projects with a view to extending their
53 E/1982/33.
54 E/1982/11.

"See also sect. X.B.4, decision 47/449.
56
Repon of the World Conference of the International Women's Year.
Mexico City, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV. I), chap. II, sect. A.

sphere of activities to include women and to develop new
and innovative projects to include women,
Bearing in mind that development is one of the themes
of the United Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling paragraphs 233 and 234 of the Programme of
Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women, 57 in which it was recommended that numerous
actions should be taken in the areas of technical co-operation, training and advisory services,
Also recalling paragraph 51 of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Natio~s Dev~l«?pm~nt
Decade, 58 which stated that full and effective part1c1pattot1
by the entire population at all stages of the development
process should be ensured,
Looking ahead to the world conference on women t~ be
held in 1985, at which the achievements of the Umted
Nations Decade for Women and the need to continue such
achievements beyond the end of the Decade will be reviewed
and appraised,
Convinced of the importance of integrating women fully
into all areas of development, both as participants and as
beneficiaries,
A ware that greater co-ordination and knowledge of activities in this area within the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and the regional commissions and by Member States and non-governmental organizations would facilitate an exchange of experiences and concepts and be
beneficial to all,
Expressing its appreciation to those organizations which
have made regular reports on the implementation of the
objectives of the World Plan of Action and the Programme
of Action,
l. Calls upon the Secretary-General to encourage specialized agencies and regional commissions which have not
yet done so to develop a comprehensive policy regarding
the concerns of women, both as participants and as beneficiaries, in technical co-operation and development activities and to develop a strategy to ensure that women are an
integral part of these activities;
2. Urges those organizations to take every appropriate
action within existing resources to monitor the implementation of the above-mentioned policies and strategies and to
help disseminate this information upon request to Member
States and other interested parties;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out all the
activities called for in the present resolution within existing
resources and to submit a progress report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session for its consideration,
bearin_g in mind Assembly resolution 36/127 of 14 Decem6er 1981 entiffed-''Consideration within the United Nations
of questions concerning the role of women in development".
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/58.

United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New In" Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, I 4-30 July 1980
(United Nations puhlication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap.
I. sect. A.
'"Resolution 35156. annex.
